THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR 
SPECTROSCOPY 
M .. KASHA, H. R. RAwLs and M. AsHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
Institute of Molecu/ar Biophysics and Department of Chemistry, Florida State 
University, Tallahassee, Florida 
INTRODUCTION 
The molecular exciton model has received its mostextensive development 
and application in the field ofmolecular crystals1•2• More recently, numerous 
applications to non-crystalline molecular composite systems have been 
made, including van der Waals and hydrogen-bonded dimers, trimers, and 
higher order aggregates. Another type of composite system has also been 
investigated, namely the composite molecule consisting of covalently 
bonded molecular units, with intrinsic individual unsaturated electronic 
systems so isolated by single bonds that but little or insignificant electronic 
overlap between units may occur. 
It is now weil established that in molecular aggregates and in composite 
molecules, exciton effects may be observed if sufficiently strong electronic 
transitions exist in the component sub-units. The result of exciton splitting of 
excited states in the composite molecule may be the appearance of strong 
spectral shifts or splittings (which may be of the order of 2000 cm-1) of the 
absorption bands for the component molecules. At the same time, as a 
consequence ofthe exciton splitting ofthe excited state manifold, an enhance-
ment of triplet state excitation may result. 
The purpose of this paper is to present a summary of the various type cases 
for molecular dimers, trimers and double and triple molecules in the des-
cription of the molecular exciton strong-coupling model. Then it will be 
shown by new experimental examples that, even in those cases where no 
significant exciton effect is observable in the singlet-singlet absorption 
spectrum for the composite molecule (intermediate and weak coupling 
cases), the enhancement of lowest triplet state excitation may still be con-
spicuous and significant. 
The ideas which are summarized in this paper have a curious history. 
Long ago, Kautsky and MerkeP demonstrated experimentally that aggrega-
tion of dyes facilitated their action as photophysical sensitizers in photo-
chemical reactions, at the sametime diminishing their fluorescence efficiency. 
Kautsky attributed these easily demonstrated effects to enhancement of 
metastable state excitation in the aggregate dye. There is no doubt today 
that the metastable state he described is the lowest triplet state of the 
molecules studied. However, he did not distinguish between intrinsic and 
enhanced metastable (triplet) state excitation, so his interpretations were 
largely overlooked. Förster in 19464 used the quasi-classical vector model to 
371 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
explain the excited state splitting in dye molecule dimers, tentatively 
suggesting that the metastable lowest singlet state resulting for parallel 
(transition dipole) dimers was the origin of metastable state emission 
(phosphorescence) in organic molecules. However, after learning of the 
Lewis and Kasha triplet state studies 5, Förster in 19496 withdrew entirely 
his suggestion on the nature of the metastable state and replaced it by the 
intrinsic molecular (triplet) interpretation instead of the intermolecular 
( exciton) interpretation. Curiously, both aspects were later recognized as 
being involved in the enhanced emission properties of dimers. Thus, 
Levinson, Simpson and Curtis 7 showed that in a pyridocyanine dimer, 
fluorescence was quenched, and greatly enhanced triplet-singlet emission 
was observed, conforming to the excitation paths predicted by a simple 
exciton splitting for the singlet excited states. McRae and Kasha8 •9 arrived 
at the same conclusion as an explanation of some luminescence observations 
made by Szent-Györgyi on dyes frozen in water-ice10, and showed that, in 
general, molecular aggregation could Iead to triplet state excitation enhance-
ment by the exciton model. Hoijtink11 has applied the molecular exciton 
model to the excimer (excited-state stabilized dimer) problem. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
The physical basis of the molecular exciton model12, the classification of 
exciton types13, and the detailed origin of the theoretical treatment9, have 
been covered in previous papers from this laboratory, in addition to those 
works cited earlier1 •2• 7 •11• In this section we shall present the simplest 
skeletal outline of the molecular exciton theory for the case of molecular 
dimers as a complementary paper to those listed above, omitting (electron 
exchange) anti-symmetrization2• The strong coupling case of Simpson and 
Peterson will be assumed14• 
The molecular exciton model is a state interaction theory. If the inter-
molecular (interchromophore) electron overlap is small, so that the molecular 
(chromophore) units preserve their individuality in the composite molecule 
or aggregate, the molecular exciton model will satisfy the requirements of a 
perturbation theory. We may then seek solutions (wave-functions and 
energies) for the aggregate in terms of the wave-functions and energies for 
the (in our case, electronic) states of the components. The wave-function 
formalism is rather parallel to molecular orbital theory, but the physical 
basis and the interpretations are entirely different. 
The ground state wave-function of the dimer has the unique description: 
'YG = 1/Jui/Jv 
(1) 
where iflu represents the ground state wave-function of molecule u and 1/Jv the 
corresponding one for molecule v (all wave-functions assumed real). 
The Hamiltonian operator for the dimer is 
H = Hu + Hv + Vuv 
(2) 
where Hu and Hv are the Hamiltonian operators for the isolated molecules, 
u and v, and Vuv is the intermolecular perturbation potential. The latter is a 
372 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-ßAYOUMI 
coulombic potential, approximated by the point-dipole point-dipole terms of 
the point-multipole expansionD. 
The energy of the ground state of the dimer is derivable from the Schrö-
dinger equation as: 
(3) 
which factors into 
(4) 
The last term represents the van' der Waals interaction energy (an energy 
lowering) between the ground states ofmolecules u and v, and Eu and Ev are 
the ground state energies of the isolated molecules. 
The excited state dimer wave-functions (exciton wave-functions) may be 
written 
(5) 
where ,P~ and ,P~ represent excited state wave-functions for a particular 
excited state (with energy E!, E~) under study (u and v assumed identical) 
of molecules u and v; and r and s are coefficients to be determined. The 
Schrödinger equation for the excited state in question is: 
(6) 
Multiplying both sides of this equation by tfo~tfov, and integrating over 
coordinates for molecules u and v, and repeating this process for tfoutfo~, Ieads 
to two simultaneous equations, containing terms symmetrical in (identical 
molecule coordinates) u and v: 
Huu( =Hvv) =I I tfottfovHt/Jttfov dTu dTv 
Huv(=Hvu) = f I t/Jtf/JvHtfout/Jt dTu dTv 
(7) 
The determinant of the coefficients r and s in these equations is set equal to 
zero for non-trivial solutions: 
=Ü 
Hvu 
Hvv- EE 
The roots EE are, in view of the equivalence of terms in (7): 
E:E = Huu + Huv with 'Y E = v'~Z) (tfottfov + tPutfot) 
Ei= Huu -
Huv with 'Yi = v'(~) (tfotf/Jv -
1/Juf/J~) 
(8) 
(9) 
Evaluating E:E and E'E by the results in equation (7), we have, owing to the 
373 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
intrinsic orthonorma1ity conditions for the wave functions for each molecu1e: 
E~ = E~ + Ev +I I tfottfov(Vuv)tfottfov dru drv + 
+I I tfottfov(Vuv)tfoutfot dru drv 
Ei = E~ + Ev +I I tfottfov(Vuv)tfottfov dru drv --I I tfottfov(Vuv)tfoutfot dru drv 
(10) 
The last term in the equations (10) is the exciton splitting term: 
rff =I I tfottfov(Vuv)tfoutfot dru drv 
(11) 
which in the point-dipo1e point-dipo1e approximation becomes9 
rff = Mu.Mv _ 3(Mu.r) (Mv.r) 
r3 
r5 
(11a) 
and represents an interaction energy due to exchange of excitation energy 
between mo1ecu1e u and mo1ecu1e v. The third term in equations (10) is 
ana1ogous to the corresponding term in equation (4), and represents the van 
der Waa1s interaction (energy lowering) between an excited mo1ecu1e u and 
the ground state mo1ecu1e v. 
Mu is the transition moment in mo1ecule u, and r is the position vector of 
the v dipo1e referred to the u dipo1e as origin. 
If we take the difference ofthe van der W aals terms of eq ua tions (l 0) and 
(4) as t:.D, we may give the transition energy for the composite mo1ecule as 
the differences between equations (10) and equation (4): 
6.Ecomposite = 6.Eunit + t:.D ± rff 
(12) 
This is the characteristic form of the transition energy between states of an 
aggregate by mo1ecular exciton theory. 
As will be evident from equation (12) and from the exciton state energy 
level diagrams which follow in this paper, the exciton model describes a 
resonance splitting of the excited state composite molecule energy Ievels 
which were non-degenerate in the individual molecule or light-absorbing 
unit. The ground state is merely displaced by van der Waals interaction 
compared with the initial molecule ground states. 
The molecular exciton wave-functions have the same form as molecular 
orbital wave-functions, but the dagger represents excitation in the individul 
molecule, so the nodes are not related to charge distribution as they would be 
in molecular orbital theory. The nodes in molecular exciton wave-functions 
correspond to a change in the phase relation of transition dipole. Since 
mutual phase relations between molecules may be arbitrari1y chosen, the 
interpretation of the nodes in the wave-functions (9) depends on the phase 
relation convention9• 
In the following section, a graphical presentation is made of equations ( 1 0) 
for type cases of various composite systems. In the diagram, t:.D is shown 
relative to a fixed ground state, and the exciton sp1itting rff is shown as a 
function of a geometrica1 parameter for the composite mo1ecu1e. 
374 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
EXCITON ENERGY DIAGRAMS FOR COMPOSITE MOLECULES 
In this section we shall review some typical simple cases involving smaU 
groupings of molecules or light absorbing units. The results will apply 
equally well to molecular aggregates such as loosely bonded dimers and 
trimers, or covalently bonded double molecules15 and triple molecules; to 
satisfy the application of the exciton model, electron overlap between the light 
absorbing units must be small. 
The cases we are dealing with could be described by a detailed quantum 
mechanical treatment9• However, the molecular exciton modellends itself 
to the applicant of the quasi-classical vector model, since we may approximate 
the excited state resonance interaction by considering the interaction of 
transition moment dipoles electrostatically. Weshall use this description in 
this section, which is an elaboration of a previous paper16• 
Parallel transition dipoles in a composite double molecule lead to the exciton 
energy level diagram shown in Figure I. The ovals correspond to the 
molecular profile, and the double arrow indicates the polarization axis for 
the molecular electronic transition considered (the long molecular axes need 
not be parallel to the transition polarization axis). To the right ofthe exciton 
states E' and E" are indicated the vector diagrams which permit (separately) 
the evaluation qualitatively of (i) the energy of the exciton splitting rf, and 
(ii) the transition moments M measuring the transition probability between the 
ground state and the exciton states E' and E" of the composite molecule. 
Parallel transition dipoles 
CDCD 
G--~----------~ 
Monomer 
Dimer 
Ievels 
Ievels 
Blue- shift case 
2f 
f 
t i t 
t l 
Dipole 
c 
phase 
relation 
Figure 1. Exciton band energy diagram for a molecular dimer, or a double molecule, with 
parallel transition dipoles 
The out-of-phase dipole arrangement corresponds electrostatically to a 
lowering of energy ( rf negative), so E' lies lower than the van der Waals 
displaced states of the component molecules; and the in-phase dipole 
interaction gives repulsion, so rf is positive, and E" is displaced upwards 
from the displaced origin. The transition moment is given by the vector sum 
375 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
of the individual transition dipole moments in the component molecule. 
Thus, transitions from the ground state to exciton state E' are forbidden, 
while transitions from the ground state to exciton state E" are allowed 
(oscillator strength 2j/dimer, or no change in oscillator strength predicted 
per monomer concentration, in the present approximation; actually hypo-
and hyperchromic effects are found and predicted in a higher order approxi-
mation17·18). As mentioned earlier, Förster used this type of discussion for 
In-line transition dipoles 
ee 
E 
G~~--------~--
Monomer 
Dimer 
levels 
levels 
Red-shift case 
--
--
--2;-· 
Dipole 
phase 
relation 
Figure 2. Exciton band energy diagram for a molecular dimer, or a double molecule, with 
in-line transition dipoles 
dye-dimer excited states in a tentative explanation of metastable state 
formation in molecules. 
There are two physical consequences ofthe exciton splitting which may be 
observed spectroscopically. The first is immediately obvious from the 
diagram (Figure 1), namely, that the singlet-singlet electronic transition in 
the dimer will be blue-shifted with respect tothat in the monomer; the blue 
shifts are calculated tobe quite large for strongly absorbing monomer units, 
such as dye molecules7•9• The second consequence of the exciton band 
formation is not quite as apparent: that enhancement oflowest triplet state 
excitation will occur in the dimer, accompanied by a quenching of the 
fluorescence. Weshallreturn to this problern at the end ofthis section since 
it involves the triplet electronic states of the molecules which have been 
omitted from the diagram in Figure 1. 
Figure 1 corresponds to one ofthe most frequently occurring van der Waals 
dimers, the London-force dimer between planar conjugated molecules. 
Dimers of this type have been widely studied and invariably exhibit a blue 
shift in the range 1000-2500 cm-1, accompanied by a characteristic 
fluorescence quenching. It is interesting that as one studies theoretically 
the further aggregation of the dye into the long thread-like polymers, the 
exciton model predicts that the band splitting will be about 2·4 times 
the splitting observed for the dimer9. Extensive experimental studies19 in 
376 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
the field of spectra of dyes absorbed on polymers, as weil as spectra of 
dyes absorbed on cellular surfaces (in cytological staining), conform to this 
description ofthe dye molecule adsorbed as dimer or as polymer. Thus, the 
phenomena of metachromatia of adsorbed dye are understandable in terms 
of the exciton model. 
ln-line transition dipoles in a composite double molecule Iead to the exciton 
energy Ievel diagram shown in Figure 2. As before, the polarization axis for 
the electronic transition under study in the unit molecule is shown aligned 
with the long axis of the molecule represented in oval profile; however, a 
more frequent case of in-line transition dipoles would occur for the long 
geometrical axes of the molecule parallel, but with transition dipoles 
polarized along the short axis of a unit molecule (in-line in the dimer). 
Oblique transition dipoles 
G--~----------~~ 
Monomer 
Dimer 
Ievels 
Ievels 
Band-splitting case 
Dipole 
phase 
relation 
Figure 3. Exciton band energy diagram for a molecular dimer, or a double molecule, with 
oblique transition dipoles 
Again we may use the quasi-classical vector model to analyse the energy of 
the exciton states produced in the dimer, as weil as the transition moment for 
transitions from the ground state to the resultant exciton states. From the 
diagram it is readily seen that the in-phase arrangement oftransition dipoles 
Ieads to an electrostatic attraction, producing the excited state E' of Figure 2, 
whereas the out-of-phase arrangement of transition dipoles causes repulsion, 
producing the state E". On the other hand, the transition moments are 
finite for electric dipole transitions from the ground state to E', and 0 to the 
state E" from the ground state. 
Thus, it will be apparent that the in-line transition dipole case will Iead 
to the observation of a strong spectral red shift for the transition in the dimer 
377 
M.S.-9 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
or double-molecule compared with that for a monomer. A number of 
experimental examples of this type of dimer are known.18,D 
Oblique transition dipoles in a composite double molecule Iead to the exciton 
energy diagram shown in Figure 3. In this case, the in-phase arrangement of 
transition dipoles for the monomer is attractive and Ieads to a lowering of 
energy, and the out-of-phase arrangement of transition dipoles is repulsive 
and causes a raising of the excited state energy for the composite molecule. 
The transition moments for electric dipole transitions from the ground state 
to the exciton states of the dimer are in this case both non-vanishing. 
Characteristic of the exciton model, we find that the oscillator strengths 
f' and J" for transitions to the two exciton states are polarized mutually 
perpendicularly. 
The exciton 
splitting 
energy, 
corresponding to 
the 
separation 
ß. tff = E" - E', is given by: 
2IMI2 
ß. ß = -
3-
(cos cx + 3 cos2 0) 
(13) 
Yuv 
where M is the transition moment for the' singlet-singlet transition in the 
monomer, ruv is the:teiltre to centre distance between molecules u and v, cx is 
the angle between-polariiation axes for the component absorbing units and 8 is 
the angle made by the polarization axes of the unitrnplecule with the line of 
molecular centres. The transition moments to the exciton · states E' and E" 
are given by: 
M' = V (2M cos 0) 
Mn = V (2M sin 0) 
where the symbols are as defined for equation (13). 
(14) 
A characteristic feature of exciton theory is illustrated by cquation (13). 
It is seen that the exciton splitting energy is directly related to the square of 
the transition moment for the component molecules. Thus, the greater the 
intensity of light al?s9!'Ption in the unit molecule, the greater is the exciton 
band splitting. Tb"e)quare of the transition moment M is a measure of the 
oscillator strengthffm: the transition. 
· · 
Another characteristic feature of exciton theory is the dependence of the 
exciton splitting on the inverse cube of the intermolecular distance ruv· 
Finally, the geometrical parameters enter in the manner characteristic ofthe 
structure of the composite molecule. 
Equations (13) and (14) apply equally well to Figures 1, 2, and 3 with a 
selection of suitable parameters. It may be mentioned that to apply Figure 3 
tö an experimental case, one would generally speaking, have to consider a 
hydrogen-bonded dimer which could fix the transition moment axes in an 
oblique orientation. To date no experimental examples ofsuch a hydrogen-
bonded dimer have been studied, although there are numerous possibilities. 
Coplanar inclined transition dipoles in a composite molecule Iead to the exciton 
energy diagram shown in Figure 4. This case covers continuously the 
variation of angle 0 between polarization axes and the line of molecule 
centres. Thus, 0 degrees corresponds to Figure 2 and 90 degrees corresponds 
to Figure 1, covering our previous cases. 
378 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
Co-planar inclined transition dipoles 
~ 
e 
' ' 
E" 
, .... ..., 
I 
I -----tE' 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
G~~------~a~o~~o~~~5~~~~~o----srloo 
Monomer 
Ievels 
Dimer 
Ievels 
Figure 4. Exciton band energy diagram für a molecular dimer, or a double-molecule, with 
coplanar transition dipoles inclined to interconnected axis by angle 8 
The exciton band splitting in this case is given by the formula8•9 : 
ß.C= 21MJ 2 (1-3cos2 8) 
(15) 
r~v 
with the symbols as previously defined. It is evident that for the value of 
8 = arc cos lfy3 = (54·7°), the exciton splitting is zero, i.e., the dipole-
dipole interaction is zcro for this orientation of transition moments in the 
component molecules, irrespective of intermolecular distance ruv· 
Non - planar transition dipotes 
21 
-----rE". tlt 
I I 
I 
_______ , E' 't 
I 
I ! 
I 
I 
I I 
G~------~90~----~------~oo 
0 
{)( 
Monomer 
Ievels 
Dimer 
Ievels 
Blue- shift case 
Dipole 
phase 
relation 
Figure 5. Exciton band energy diagram for a molecular dimer, or a double molecule, with 
non-coplanar transition dipoles with angle a bctween molecular planes 
379 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
The transition moments for this case are given9 by M' = 0 and M" = 2 M, 
where M is the electric dipole transition moment for the transition under 
study in the component molecule, M' and M" correspond to the out-of-phase 
and in-phase arrangement of transition dipoles corresponding to the labelling 
of exciton states E' and E" of Figure 4. Equation (15) and the discussion of 
transition moments in this paragraph, apply equally well to Figures 1 and 2, 
with a selection of~uitable parameters. 
Figure 4 illustrates a common type of exciton band energy diagram wherein 
an exciton state forbidden for excitation by electric dipole radiation inter-
changes position on 'the energy Ievel diagram with an allowed exciton state, 
as a function of geometry of the aggregate. 
Non-planar transition dipoles in the composite double molecules Iead to the 
exciton energy diagram showp in Figure 5. This case may be considered as 
another geometrical variation of the parallel transition dipole case of 
Figure I. The exciton splitting energy in this case is given by: 
2IMI2 
lltff = -·-- (cos cx -
3 cos2 8) 
~V 
( 16) 
where cx is the · angle between the two molecular planes defined by the 
diagram in Figure 5 and () is the angle between the polarization axes and 
the line of molecular centres. The transition moments for electric dipole 
transitions from the ground state to the two exciton states E' and En vary 
continüously with angle cx. The vector diagrams show the phase relationship 
between transition dipoles for the two extreme values of angle cx. 
In particular, the case of the out-of-phase dipole array Ieads to a pro-
gressively more allowed exciton state as the angle cx approaches 90 degrees 
Cyclic trimer transition dipole arrays 
~
I: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
. 
I 
I 
~ 
Dipolephase relations for in-plane arrays 
(Angle 8 indicates rotation convention 
for out:of-plane correlation) 
?·~·? 
~ 
. 
I 
,...,.., 
~ 
': 
I 
. 
,. ""'.,. ... 
J 
: 
""' 
~."., ... • 
.. 
~ 
t 
.,. 
I 
. 
. 
I 
0 
Dipolephase relations fbr out-of-plane arrays 
Figu~ 6. Transition dipole vector diagrams for exciton model of cyclic trimer or cyclic 
triple molecule 
380 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
{for electric dipole transitions from the ground state). lf the diagram were 
continued to 180 degrees in cx, it would of course be symmetrical and would 
feature a lowest exciton state which always has some forbidden character. 
This is a feature we shall meet again for composite triple molecules. 
Cyclic trimer transition dipole arrays in a composite triple molecule are 
diagrammed by the vector model in Figure 6. Each apex of the triangle 
corresponds to a component molecule or light-absorbing unit, with transition 
dipoles designated by an arrow. The lowest exciton wave-function (for in-
plane arrays, upper half of Figure 6) is taken as nodeless, with transition 
dipoles in phase. For a figure with a threefold axis of symmetry, the next 
exciton wave-functions are doubly degenerate. Thus, Figure 6 shows a 
similar pair of one-noded vector diagrams corresponding to single-noded 
exciton wave-functions. The node corresponds to a change of phase relation 
in the transition dipole as one goes around the triangle. For convenience, the 
node has been chosen through the apex in both cases. It is clear that for the 
in-plane array the nodeless wave-function corresponds to the lowest energy 
exciton state, while the single-noded degenerate wave-functions correspond 
to repulsive exciton states. On the other hand, the nodeless wave-function 
correspondi to an exciton state which is forbidden with respect to electric 
dipole transitions from the ground state, while the doubly degenerate arrays 
correspond to allowed exciton states for electric dipole transitions. 
Cyclic trimer transition dipoles 
~-;.---;' E' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
----··' .. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
··~E' 
I 
~~~~~======~==~==~L~~~G 
Monomer 
90o 
9 
oo 
Ievels~ -
Trimer Ievels 
Figure 7. Schematic exciton band energy diagram for a cyclic trimer or a cyclic triple mole-
cule (if. Figure 6 for phase relations and angle of rotation) 
. 
Out-of-plane arrays can be considered analogously, corresponding to the 
lower half of Figure 6. Angle 6 measures the angle between the component 
transition dipoles and the normal to the plane of the trimer array at the 
triangle apex. By variation of the angle 6, one may correlate the vector 
diagrams for the in-plane dipole arrays with those out-of-plane dipole 
arrays. This correlation Ieads to the exciton energy Ievel diagram depicted 
in Figure 7. 
In the monomer the excited states under study are triply degenerate by 
definition. In the_ 90 degree trimer array the upper exciton state is doubly 
381 

THE EXCITON. MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
degenerate and allowed (for electric dipole transitions from the ground 
state) and the lower exciton state is non-degenerate and forbidden (cor-
respondingly). In the 0 degree trimer array, the upper exciton state is nori-
degenerate and allowed (for electric dipole transitions from the ground 
state), while the lower exciton states are doubly degenerate and forbidden 
( correspondingly). 
Thus we see in Figure 7 that the triple degeneracy of the three monomer 
units is only partially split in the exciton diagram of the trimer and, more-
over, the lower exciton state always has some forbidden character and at the 
extreme Iimits of () = 0 and 90 degrees, the lower exciton states are com-
pletely forbidden for excitation by electric dipole radiation. This forbidden 
character of the lower exciton state will have a profound effect on the 
excitation pathways in trimeric composite molecules. 
Excitation pathwaysfor exciton diagrams in composite molecules are typified by 
the diagram shown in Figure 8 for the parallel transition dipole dimer 
case 7- 9• In the monomer, absorption is taken as strongly allowed for electric 
dipole radiation. Fluorescence will then be commonly observed under 
favourable conditions. On the other hand, phosphorescence in such cases 
will be of limited intrinsic quantum efficiency. Such excitation properties 
are commonly found in many dye molecules and other polyatomic molecules 
with 7T -
1r* electron transitions. 
s'l" M 
I 
I 
I 
I : 
_j_., ___ _ 
T 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--..1-,.-----·--+-----'- -
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
(O)f: 
2f 
I 
I 
A 
F:P 
:A 
P 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
! 
: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
l 
: 
Monomer 
Dimer 
s' 
'f"o; II 
s 'f"o;I 
T-r D;I,ll 
Figure 8. Paths of excitation between singlet and triplet states without and with exciton 
splitting (parallel transition dipole dimer case) 
In the composite molecule, considering the most favourable case for our 
discussion, in which the lower exciton state is forbidden, we have the 
probable pathways as shown on the right side of Figure 8. Here absorption 
to the lower exciton state is forbidden, whereas absorption to the upper 
exciton state is still strongly allowed. 
Since the exciton splitting depends on the oscillator strength of the 
transition, only the singlet states of the composite molecules are split in a 
gross fashion. 
The triplet states of the monomer will remain nearly 
degenerate in thecomposite molecule and are shown as unsplit in the diagram. 
382 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
Mter excitation to the allowed upper exciton singlet state of Figure 8, the 
rapid intemal conversion between singlet states may be expected to completely 
prevent the fluorescence from the allowed exciton state (back to the ground 
state), so that the forbidden exciton state will not be excited with high 
efficiency. Radiative transitions from the lower exciton state to the ground 
state are formally forbidden (distortions in the aggregate geometry may Iead 
to a small probability of transition, corresponding to lifetimes in the milli-
second range). Consequently, the radiationless intersystem crossing process, 
which has rate constants on the order of 107 sec-1, may be expected tobe the 
important next step, leading to highly efficient triplet excitation in this 
dimer. Finally, phosphorescence or triplet state emission in the composite 
molecule may be expected to proceed with relatively high efficiency. 
The pathways of excitationdescribed above were proposed by Levinson, 
Simpson and Curtis 7 in their sturlies of pyridocyanine dimers and by McRae 
and Kasha8•9 in their sturlies of luminescence in molecular aggregates. The 
descriptions given correspond to the common observation that London-force 
parallel dimers of dye molecules exhibit a complete quenching offluorescence 
of the monomer, and a corresponding great increase in the phosphorescence 
quantum efficiency. 
We may thus expect enhanced lowest triplet state excitation in composite 
molecules which exhibit exciton splitting of lowest singlet excited states, 
especially when the lowest exciton state assumes a forbidden character with 
respect to radiative transitions. 
TRIPLET EXCITATION ENHANCEMENT IN COMPOSITE 
MOLECULES 
In this section we shall present an experimental study of triplet state 
excitation enhancement as a consequence of exciton splitting phenomena. 
The cases considered here will be covalently bonded composite molecules 
such as the aryl methanes and aryl amines. It will be shown that even in 
cases where the exciton splitting is quite small, so that the weak or inter-
mediate coupling exciton model14•16 applies, triplet state excitation enhance-
ment is nevertheless demonstrable. 
In such cases the exciton splitting will 
hardly be observable in low resolution solution spectra, but owing to the 
greater sensitivity of luminescence methods, a gross effect on the phos-
phorescence fluorescence quantum yield ratio may be observed. Although 
some previous sturlies have been made on the exciton effect in some of these 
molecules in high resolution 20°K absorption spectra of crystals20•21, no 
luminescence sturlies related to the exciton splitting phenomenon have been 
previously reported for these molecüles. Our discussion will be qualitative 
and will relate to the exciton energy Ievel diagrams of the previous section. 
Diphenylmethap.e and triphenylmethane offer a clear-cut example of the 
triplet state enhancement through exciton splitting. Diphenylmethane is 
pictured in Figure 9 in a two-fold axis geometry. Diphenylmethane may be 
considered20 as a covalent dimer of toluene, for which the lowest absorption 
band has molar absorption coefficient of approximately ~: = 200. The lowest 
singlet excited state of toluene is of Lb type and is pölarized along the short 
axis ofthe molecule by a factor of2 over long axis polarization21 (long axis is 
the CHn-phenyl axis). McClure assumed20 that the C-CH 2-C angle in 
383 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
Figure 9. Diphenylmethanc as a double molecule, showing vertical two-fold axis and sym-
metric phase relation of transition dipoles for two-fold rotation 
diphenylmethane is about 112 degrees, close to the tetrahedral angle. He 
then calculated the exciton splitting as a function of the angle of rotation 
rf. of the phenyl groups about the C-C bond, measured from the perpen-
dicular position. McClure also calculated the transition moment to each of 
the two exciton states, and concluded that the higher state always has the 
higher transition moment. McClure's formula (corrected) for the exciton 
splitting in diphenylmethane is: 
2IMI2 
l:!.tff = -
3-
(2·308 sin2 rf. -
1) 
1uv 
i i i 
H I 
c 
(17) 
Figure 10. Triphenylmethane as a triple molecule, showing vertical three-fold axis and 
symmetric phase relation of transition dipoles for three-fold rotation 
384 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
where the cfo is taken to be 0 for the phenyl rings perpendicular to the 
C-CH 2-C plane, and the rotation of the two rings is taken in-phase; 
the C-CH2-C apexangle was assumed tobe 112°. The spectral results in the 
crystal indicated that cfo is approximately 30° in diphenylmethane. An angle 
Totuene 
14 
Figure 11. Total luminescence spectrum of toluene in EPA rigid glass solution at 77°K. 
Singlet-singlet emission (fluorescence) on right. Triplet-singlet emission (phosphorescence) 
on left. 
Corrected emissivity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; abscissa: wave-
numbers X IO-• 
ofOo would correspond in principle to an exciton band energy diagram ofthe 
type shown in Figure 1, with excitation paths described in Figure 8. McClure's 
exciton band energy diagram for diphenylmethane is of a type analogaus to 
our Figure 5, except that his two exciton states cross at cfo = 41°. 
Thus, in diphenylmethane, the lower exciton component has some 
forbidden character, and an enhancement of lowest triplet excitation would 
be expected. 
Triphenylmethane is pictured in Figure 10 in a three-fold axis geometry. 
We may anticipate that qualitatively the exciton band energy diagram for 
Oiphenylmethane 
15 
39 
Figure 12. Total luminescence spectrum of diphenylmethane in EPA rigid glass solution 
at 77°K. Singlet-singlet emission (fluorescence) on right. Triplet-singlet emission (phos-
phorescence) on left. Corrected emissivity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; abscissa: 
wavenumbers x J0-3 
385 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
this molecule may conform to the diagrams of Figures 6 and 7, although the 
apex angle correction would alter the quantitative results to a degree. Thus, 
in this case also, an enhancement of triplet state excitation would be antici-
pated from the diagrams, in reference to the excitation paths of Figure 8, for a 
lowest singlet-exciton Ievel of forbidden character.- -
Triphenylmethane 
15 
39 
Figure 13. Total luminescence spectrum of triphenylmethane in EPA rigid glass solution 
at 77°K. Singlet-singlet emission (fluorescence) Oll right. Triplet-singlet emission (phos-
phorence) on Iift. Corrected emissivity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; abscissa: 
wavenumbers X J0-3 
The experimental results for toluene, diphenylmethane, and triphenylmethane are 
shown in Figures 11, 12, and 13, and are numerically summarized in Table I. 
It is seen that the phosphorescence-ftuorescence ratio increases conspicuously 
in this series, while at the same time the phosphorescence mean lifetime 
remains relatively constant. 
. 
Table 1. Intersystem crossing enhancement in composite 
molecules (hydrocarbons) 
Moleeule 
Toluene 
Diphenylmethane 
Triphenylmethane 
Intersystem 
crossing 
ratio, iPpfiPF 
0·94 
1-46 
4·12 
Mean 
lifteime, -rp (sec) 
8·8 
9·4 
7·9 
It is interesting that a decrease in ftuorescence to the advantage of pho~­
phorescence would not be predictable from the kinetic analysis22 of excitation 
paths if exciton interaction were neglected. Thus, the lowest singlet-singlet 
absorption band in toluene (log 
€ = 2·3), in diphenylmethane23 (log 
€ = 2·7), and in triphenylmethane24 (log € = 2·9) becomes progressively 
stronger; this would suggest that the ftuorescence lifetime should decrease, 
and that ftuorescence should compete progressively more favourably in this 
series. The fact that the opposite is the case requires a novel explanation, 
which is provided by the exciton model. 
An alternative explanation might have been possible if a spin-orbital 
386 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
perturbation enhancement from some upper state interaction in the com-
posite molecule bad occured. But the near constancy of the triplet state 
lifetimes ( Table 1) clearly indicates that the spin-orbital perturbation is 
nearly unaffected by the formation of the composite molecule. 
Figure 14. Tröger's base as a double molecule, showing vertical twofold axis and sym-
metric phase relation of transition dipoles for two-fold rotation 
The aromatic amines are more complex to deal with than are the correspond-
ing aromatic hydrocarbons because another phenomenon complicates the 
luminescence behaviour of these molecules. In a separate study25 it is 
shown that the presence of intramolecular charge transfer transitions 
(t- arr type26) in these molecules leads to enhancement of triplet state 
excitation in comparison with a related hydrocarbon. Nevertheless, as an over-
lay there is also dernonstrahle an additional triplet state excitation enhance-
ment in composite molecules made of aromatic amine component molecules. 
Tröger's base is depicted in Figure 14 as a double molecule, with two 
covalently bonded N,N-dimethylanilines held in a C 2 geometry. In Figure 15 
Figure 15. Triphenylamine as a triple molecule, showing planar conformation with sym-
metric phase relation of transition dipoles for rotation about normal three-fold axis 
387 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
N,N- dimethylaniline 
14 
Figure 16. Totalluminescence spectrum of N,N-dimethylaniline in EPA rigid glass solution 
at 77°K. Singlet-singlet emission (fluorescence) on right. Triplet-singlet emission (phos-
phorescence) on left. Corrected emissivitity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; 
abscissa: wavenumbers X 10-a 
triphenylamine is depicted as a triple molecule, with three phenyls arranged 
about the N atom in a D3h geometry. 
The luminescence spectra of N,N-dimethylaniline, Tröger's base, and o-N,N-
dimethyltoluidine are presented in Figures 16, 17 and 18, with corresponding 
numerical data in Table 2. 
The luminescence spectra of diphenylamine and triphenylamine are presented 
in Figures 19 and 20, with data again summarized in Table 2. 
Tröger's base isarather rigid structure, with the angle between transition 
moments being approximately 18 degrees for short axis polarization (Figure 
14). Qualitatively, the exciton band energy diagram will approximate 
Tr8ger's base 
1·0 
14 
Figure 17. Totalluminescence spectrum ofTröger's base in EPA rigid glass solution at 77°K· 
Singlet-singlet emission (fluorescence) on right. Triplet-singlet emission (phosphorescence) 
on left. Corrected emissivity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; abscissa: wave-
numbers X 10-a 
388 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
Figure 1, and a very considerable enhancement oftriplet state excitation may 
be expected. The data of Table 2 confirm this expectation. 
Table 2. Intersystem crossing enhancement in composite 
molecules (aromatic amines) 
Moleeule 
N,N-dimethylaniline 
Tröger's base 
o-N,N-dimethyltoluidine 
Diphenylamine 
Triphenylamine 
Intersystem 
crossing 
ratio, (f)pf(f)F 
2·01 
18·8 
2·38 
3·26 
8·31 
Mean 
lifetime, Tp (sec) 
2·8 
1·9 
2·3 
2·1 
0·74 
Comparing N,N-dimethylaniline, diphenylamine, and triphenylamine, 
the data of Table 2 and the corresponding figures indicate a pronounced 
enhancement of triplet state excitation in this series. A comparison of the 
data of Table 2 with that of Table 1 shows the enhancement effect for triplet 
excitation ofthe aromatic aminesrelative to the corresponding hydrocarbon, 
owing to the intramolecular charge transfer state interaction25 (the small 
phosphorescence lifetime variations reftect this). However, the composite 
molecule effect is still clearly evident for the aromatic amine series. 
The oscillator strengths for the lowest singlet-singlet absorption are 0·027 
for aniline, 0·19 for diphenylamine, and 0·25 for triphenylamine (methyl-
cyclohexane solvent, 20°C). As in the case of the corresponding aromatic 
hydrocarbon series, these data would require a decrease of ftuorescence 
lifetime, with a corresponding decrease in the phosphorescence{ftuorescence 
quantum yield ratio for the series. The composite molecule effect through 
the exciton model seems tobe a necessary explanation in this case also. 
o-N, N- dimethytoluidine 
14 
Figure 18. Total luminescence spectrum of o-N,N-dimethyltoluidine in EPA rigid glass 
solution at 77°K. Singlet-singlet emission (fluorescence) on right. Triplet-singlet emission 
(phosphorescence) on Lift. Corrected emissivity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; 
abscissa: wavenumbers x 10-a 
389 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
Diphenylamine 
14 
Figure 19. Total luminescence spectrum of diphenylamine in EPA rigid glass solution 
at 77°K. Singlet-singlet emission (ßuorescence) on right. Triplet-singlet emission (phos-
phorescence) on left. 
Corrected emissivity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; 
abscissa: wavenumbers X 10-a 
In all ofthe experimental cases studied low temperature (77°K) rigid glass 
spectroscopy was used. An important point to emphasize is the temperature-
dependent nature of the phenomenon we have described. If these had been 
strong-coupling cases, the absorption spectral effects would have been very 
conspicuous, and the excitation behaviour would have been relatively 
temperature independent8• However, here the absorption spectral effects are 
virtually unnoticeable. Thus, the two exciton levels (the more strongly 
allowed upper one, and the relatively forbidden lower one, whose existence 
facilitates the phosphorescence enhancement) must be relatively close 
Triphenylamine 
14 
Figure 20. Total luminescence spectrum of triphenylamine in EPA rigid glass solution at 
77°K. Singlet-singlet emission (ßuorescence) on right. Triplet-singlet emission (phos-
phorcscencP-) on left. 
Corrected emissivity curves, ordinate: arbitrary intensity units; 
abscissa: wavcnumbers X 10-a 
390 

M. KASHA, H. R. RAWLS AND M. ASHRAF EL-BAYOUMI 
together. Probably, in most of the molecules we have studied, the exciton 
splitting is of the order of k Tat room temperature. Under these conditions, 
the triplet state enhancement would become progressively more prominent 
as one lowered the temperature. A study of such temperature dependence triplet 
state enhancement in composite molecules could serve to give data on exciton splitting in_ 
weak coupling cases, a datum otherwise difficult to obtain. 
As an experimental note, we indicate a few essential points on the data 
handling for Figures 11-13 and 16--20. The emission spectra were recorded 
with a Perkin-Elmer Model99 recording double-pass monochromator using 
fused quartz optics and an RCA lP-28 photomultiplier. A Bauschand Lomb 
grating monochromator (0·5 m F.L.) with a G.E. AH-6 high-pressure 
inercury arc or a Hanovia high-pressure mercury-xenon arc were used for 
excitation. The spectrometer-photomultiplier correction was determined by 
recording the emissivity from a standard lamp provided by the National 
Bureau of Standards, with conversion of data to quanta per wavenumber 
interval. The correction factor so determined was applied to all of the 
emission curves presented. The data of Tables 1 and 2 were then obtained by 
graphical integration of the corrected curves. 
Summarizing our presentation, we emphasize that molecular luminescence 
studies, by their greater selectivity and sensitivity, may be used to detect 
weak interactions in molecular composite systems, even when such interactions 
are not detectable in low-resolution absorption studies. Our demonstration of 
triplet state enhancement in composite molecules suggests important photo-
chemical applications. Instead of using perturbation methods (e.g., heavy 
atom substituents, or heavy atom environmental effects), triplet state 
excitation may be increased significantly by building up a composite 
molecule whose individual units are of interest for photochemical investiga-
tion. The expected temperature dependence for weak coupling cases adds a 
new experimental parameter. 
CONCLUSION 
The molecular exciton model, which deals with the excited state resonance 
interaction in weakly coupled electronic systems, has been described as an 
interpretative tool for the study of the spectra and photochemistry of 
composite molecules. 
U nder composite molecules are grouped loosely 
bound groups oflight-absorbing units, held together by hydrogen bonds or by 
van der Waals forces. Another group of composite molecules included in the 
study consists of covalently bound light-absorbing units. 
A skeletal outline of the simplest quantum mechanical framework for the 
description of the model has been presented. A series of explicit exciton 
splitting formulae has been given for various geometrical arrangements of 
double molecules, accompanied by the characteristic exciton splitting 
diagrams and vector model analogues. 
As an example of composite molecule effects on molecular excitation, a 
comparison has been made between the spectral properties of toluene, 
diphenylmethane and triphenylmethane, with an analogous comparison for 
aniline, diphenylamine and triphenylamine. 
It has been shown that in composite molecules a significant triplet state 
391 

THE EXCITON MODEL IN MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY 
excitation enhancement results from the exciton interaction among excited 
states of the component molecules. Applications to photochemical inter-
pretations have been discussed. 
We are pleased to acknowledge with thanks a gift qf some aromatic amines by 
Professor B. M. Wepster qf the University qf Deljt, Holland, which made the com-
pletion qf our study possible. 
References 
1 A. S. Davydov. Theory rif lvlolecular Excitons ( tl'anslated by M. Kasha and M. Oppenheimer, 
Jr.). McGraw-Hill, New York (1962). 
2 D. S. McC!ure. Electronic Spectra rif Molecules and Ions in Crystals. Academic Press, New 
York (1959). 
3 H. Kautsky and H. Merke!. Naturwissenschaften 27, 195 (1939). 
4 Th. Förster. Naturwissenschaften 33, 166 (1964). 
5 G. N. Lewis and M. Kasha. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 66, 2100 (1944). 
6 Th. Förster. Naturwissenschaften 36, 240 (1949). 
7 G. t. Levinson, W. T. Simpson, and W. Curtis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 79, 4314 (1957). 
8 E. G. McRae and M. Kasha. J. Chem. Pkys. 28, 721 (1958). 
9 E. G. McRae and M. Kasha. In Physical Processes in Radiation Biology, p. 23. Academic 
Press, New York (1964). 
10 A. Szent-Györgyi. Science 124, 873 (1956). 
11 G. J. Hoijtink. Z. Elektrochem. 64, 156 (1960). 
12 M. Kasha. Rev. Mod. Phys. 31, 162 (1959). 
13 M. Kasha. 
In PkYsical Processes in Radiation Biylogy, p. 17. 
Academic Press, New York 
(1964). 
14 W. T. Simpson and D. L. Peterson. J. Chem. Phys. 26, 588 (1957). 
15 D. S. McC!ure. Can. J. Chem. 36, 59 (1958). 
16 M. Kasha. Radiation Res. 20, 55 (1963). 
17 W. Rhodes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 83, 3609 (1961). 
18 M. Kasha, M. A. El-Bayoumi, and W. Rhodes. J. Chim. Phys. 58, 916 (1961). 
19 D. F. Bradley and M. K. Wolf. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sei. U.S. 45, 944 (1959). 
20 D. S. McClure. Can. J. Chem. 36, 59 (1958). 
21 R. Coffman and D. S. McClure. Can. J. Chem. 36, 48 (1958). 
22 M. Kasha. Discussions Faraday Soc. No. 9, 14 (1950). 
23 P. Ramart-Lucas. In Traite de Chimie Organique (Ed. V. Grignard), Vol. II, p. 72. Masson 
et Cie, Paris (1936). 
· 
24 G. Kortüm and G. Dreesen. Chem. Ber. 84, 182 (1951). 
26 H. R. Rawls and M. Kasha. To be pub1ished. 
26 M. Kasha. Light and Life (Ed. W. D. McE1roy and B. Glass), p. 31. Johns Hopkins Press, 
Baltimore (1961). 
Note added in proof 
All of the !uminescence curves were determined at comparable settings of the spectro-
meter thus excluding simple queuehing as an explanation of the phenomenon described in 
this paper. 
S92 
