Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 76, No. 10, pp. 1825–1845, 2004.
© 2004 IUPAC
1825
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin
research*
József Szejtli
CYCLOLAB Cyclodextrin R&D Laboratory, Ltd., Budapest, Hungary
Abstract: The macrocyclic cyclodextrins (enzymic conversion products of starch) were dis-
covered in 1891, and the structures were elucidated in the mid-1930s. Their industrial sig-
nificance become obvious in the 1970s, and by now thousand of tons of the three cyclo-
dextrins (α-, β-, and γCD) and of their chemical derivatives and inclusion complexes are
produced industrially. 
The outer surface of these doughnut-shaped molecules is hydrophilic, but they possess
an axial open cavity, which is of hydrophobic character and capable of including other apo-
lar molecules (or their moiety) in case of geometric compatibility. This is the essence of mo-
lecular encapsulation by inclusion complex formation.
INTRODUCTION
The properties of cyclodextrins (CDs)—their complexes and derivatives—is a very challenging field for
solution chemistry: at first glance, it seems to be surprising that the 7-membered βCD is the less solu-
ble (at 25 °C in water 18 mg/cm3), the 6-membered αCD is better soluble (140 mg/cm3), and the
8-membered γCD attains the highest solubility (220 mg/cm3). A freshly prepared γCD solution—even
far below the saturation level—always becomes turbid after a few hours or days. Attaching a few hydro-
phobic substituents to the poorly soluble βCD, the solubility increases unlimitedly. Attaching methyl
groups symmetrically—e.g., in heptakis (2,6-di-O-methyl)βCD—this derivative is well soluble in cold
water, but with increasing temperature its solubility rapidly decreases, and over 60 °C the substance can
be isolated as an nonhygroscopic crystalline substance. 
Considering that one, and probably the largest, field of practical utilization of CDs is based on
their solubilizing capacity (mainly in the pharmaceutical industry) due attention should be paid to the
above-mentioned, and many other CD-related, apparent anomalies by solution chemistry. 
HISTORY OF CYCLODEXTRINS
The history or development of an applied research field can be visualized on two levels:
•
by the number of publications (including scientific papers, conference abstracts, patents/applica-
tions, books) or
•
by utilization of the research results in the form of products and technologies, expressed by the
amount of products (pieces or tons), the impact of the results on the earlier technologies, and
value of the developed technologies—all of these can be expressed by an unambiguous para-
meter: money.
*Plenary lecture presented at the 28th International Conference on Solution Chemistry, Debrecen, Hungary, 23–28 August 2003.
Other presentations are published in this issue, pp. 1809–1919.

While in the case of publications, the measure of their value is expressed by impact factors of the
journal, such as where it has been published and/or the number of citations of the given paper, the exact-
ness of both of these factors is ambiguous—only the decision of the market is unambiguous. Is the
newly developed product or technology useful or necessary? Does it represent real development? If yes,
the value of the invested work can be expressed in measurable parameters (mainly by money), if not it
will be forgotten. 
A patent application (or a granted patent) (its text will be published and available at any rate) ei-
ther will be really utilized, or will not be utilized (this last case is true for the majority of the patents),
but its essence will be available in most cases also as a scientific full paper or at least as a conference
abstract.
Because the publication of a result and its utilization are separated in time frequently by decades
(earlier by centuries, but this gap nowadays decreases rapidly), and the utilization depends on the data
delivered by the research, the first approach to illustrate the history (or development) of a research field
is to analyze the number of relevant publications.
The data for the number of publications are always available and up-to-date, but the only meas-
ure for the value of the singular papers (from the last two decades) is the impact factor, which is deter-
mined exclusively by the forum of the publication. It is not true, that the high-impact-factor journals
publish only high-value, original results. Everybody can find painful explanations by highly reputed
professors because their coworkers and Ph.D. students published fully unfounded, phantasm-products.
On the other hand, if a scientist from a rarely mentioned Pacific Ocean island held a lecture at a Pacific
Region Annual Meeting, and it is really interesting and new, it will be refereed by Chemical Abstracts,
or if it is a CD-related paper, by CD News. In our electronic age, anything that is interesting is avail-
able, either electronically or as a photocopy. A paper is available electronically only if it is relatively
new, e.g., not older than five years. Earlier voluminous literature is regrettably not available in devel-
oping countries, e.g., for the majority of Chinese universities from where nowadays the largest number
of new manuscripts are submitted for publication. The majority of these papers contain nothing else as
rediscoveries of data, facts, observations, which had been published 20 or 30 years earlier. 
The discovery period
The first paper [1] that reported the observation on the formation of some unidentified crystalline sub-
stance at fermentation of starch was published in 1891. Villiers, the French author, assumed that this
substance is some sort of cellulose, and named it “cellulosine”. About 15 years later, an Austrian micro-
biologist, Franz Schardinger [2], studying those microorganisms which play a role in the deterioration
of foods, isolated a microorganism (named Bacillus macerans) which produced reproducibly two dis-
tinct crystalline substances when cultivated on starch-containing medium. Because most of their prop-
erties were similar to the already known partial degradation products of starch, the dextrins, he named
them α-, and β-dextrin [3,4]. Of course, their chemical structure was not known, but at that time it was
not clear that starch (or cellulose) is a macromolecule, consisting of thousands of glucopyranose units.
Freudenberg and his coworkers elucidated the cyclic structure of these two dextrins only in the
second half of the 1930s. These 45 years, from 1891–1936, can be considered the “discovery stage” in
the history of CDs (see Fig. 1).
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1826

The “exploratory” period from 1936–1970
At the beginning of the second period, in the 1930s, Freudenberg and his coworkers [5–7], based partly
on their own experiments and partly on observations published by Karrer [8], Miekeley [9], and others,
came to the conclusion that the crystalline Schardinger-dextrins are built from maltose units and con-
tain only α,1,4-glycosidic linkages. They described the first scheme for the isolation of homogeneous
and pure fractions, and in 1936 postulated the cyclic structure of these crystalline dextrins [10]. In
1948–1950, the γ-CD had been discovered and its structure elucidated [11]. 
With the beginning of the 1950s, two groups led by French [12] and Cramer [13] began to work
intensively on the enzymic production of CDs, on fractionating them to pure components, and on char-
acterizing their true chemical and physical properties. French [12] discovered that there are even larger
CDs, while Cramer’s group mainly directed their attention toward the inclusion complex-forming prop-
erties of the cyclic dextrins.
Freudenberg, Cramer, and Plieninger [14] obtained a patent in 1953. In this one-and-a-half page
patent, they covered practically the most important aspects of the application of CDs in drug formula-
tions. Using several examples, they demonstrated the protection of easily oxidizable substances against
atmospheric oxidation, the enhancement of solubility of poorly soluble drugs, the reduction of the loss
of highly volatile substances, etc., by cyclodextrin complexation.
The first fundamental review on cyclodextrins was published in 1957 by French [15]. It was fol-
lowed in 1965 by a monograph by Thoma and Stewart [16] and in 1968 by Caesar [17]. 
French’s otherwise excellent monograph contained the first misinformation on the toxicity of
CDs: 
“In unpublished attempts to investigate the ability of animals to utilize Schardinger dex-
trins, B. H. Thomas and D. French fed rats a diet in which a part of the carbohydrate was
supplied by highly purified β-dextrin. The animals refused to eat the test diet except in very
small quantities and within a week all animals on the ration were dead. Post-mortem ex-
amination did not reveal the cause of death.”
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1827
Fig. 1 Number of CD-related publication since 1891.

Nothing has been published about the analysis of the cyclodextrin, which was fed to the rats: or-
ganic solvent content, other impurities, or percentage of cyclodextrin in the diet? Such fundamental data
as the number of rats that were treated, the existence of a control group or information on dosing have
never been published. It is well known that rats have an extremely sensitive sense of smell. They detect
toxic substances by smell and refuse to eat such substances. Since then, thousands of rats have been fed
CDs in rather large doses. Refusal of a CD-containing diet has never been observed. This fact allows
one to conclude that there was a rather high level of toxic organic solvent impurity in French’s CD.
During the following 25 years, until encouraging results of adequate toxicological studies became
available, these few lines, cited above, deterred many scientists from developing CD-containing prod-
ucts for human use. 
By the end of the 1960s, the methods for the laboratory-scale preparation of CDs, their structure,
physical, and chemical properties, as well as their inclusion complex-forming properties had been elu-
cidated. Summarizing the literature available at that time, the conclusions could be condensed into three
points: 
•
Cyclodextrins are very interesting, promising molecules, worthy of further study, particularly be-
cause of their apparently industrial possibilities.
•
Cyclodextrins are very expensive substances, available only in small amounts as fine chemicals.
•
Cyclodextrins are apparently highly toxic, therefore, their utilization for human consumption
seems to be questionable.
The “utilization” period: From 1970–onward 
After adequate toxicological studies proved that any toxicity attributed to CDs originated from com-
plexed impurities, an inadequate form of administration, or extreme dosing (i.e., there is no inherent
toxicity of CDs to inhibit their widespread utilization), the number of CD-related publications displayed
an explosion-like increase. 
The first International Symposium on Cyclodextrins was organized in 1981 [18]. From 1984 on-
ward, an International CD Symposium has been held every second year (the 12th one in 2004 in
Montpellier) with 120 to 170 lectures and posters summarizing recent results [19–27]. According to CD
News, the total number of CD-related publications was over 26 000 by the end of 2003 [28] (Fig. 2).
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1828
Fig. 2 Number of CD-related publications/year since 1985.

While in 1973 the price of 1 kg of βCD was around 2000 USD, and it was available only as a rare fine
chemical, 30 years later, world-wide more than half a dozen companies are producing CDs. Their total
output is in excess of 10 000 t/yr, and the price of the key-product, βCD, is only several dollars/kg, de-
pending on quality and delivered quantity (Fig. 3). The α- and γCDs, as well as several derivatives
(hydroxypropyl- βCD and γCD, randomly methylated α- and βCD, maltosyl-βCD, acetylated CDs,
sulfobutyl βCD, etc.) are produced industrially in 1–100 t amounts. More than 100 other derivatives are
available as fine chemicals and used in various chromatographic methods, in diagnostics, or are studied
as potential drug carriers, stabilizers, catalysts, etc.
CYCLODEXTRINS AND THEIR INCLUSION COMPLEXES
Structural features
Cyclodextrins comprise a family of three well-known industrially produced major, and several rare,
minor cyclic oligosaccharides. The three major CDs are crystalline, homogeneous, nonhygroscopic
substances, which are torus-like macro-rings built up from glucopyranose units. The α-cyclodextrin
(Schardinger’s α-dextrin, cyclomaltohexaose, cyclohexaglucan, cyclohexaamylose, αCD, ACD, C6A)
comprises six glucopyranose units, βCD (Schardinger’s β-dextrin, cyclomaltoheptaose, cycloheptaglu-
can, cycloheptaamylose, βCD, BCD, C7A) comprises seven such units and γCD (Schardinger’s γ-dex-
trin, cyclomaltooctaose, cyclooctaglucan, cyclooctaamylose, γCD, GCD, C8A) comprises eight such
units (Fig. 4). 
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1829
Fig. 3 Correlation between the price (in USD) and produced amount of βCD since 1970.
Fig. 4 Chemical structure of α-, β-, γCDs.

As a consequence of the 4C1 conformation of the glucopyranose units, all secondary hydroxyl
groups are situated on one of the two edges of the ring, whereas all the primary ones are placed on the
other edge. The ring, in reality, is a cylinder, or better said a conical cylinder, which is frequently char-
acterized as a doughnut or wreath-shaped truncated cone. The cavity is lined by the hydrogen atoms and
the glycosidic oxygen bridges, respectively. The nonbonding electron pairs of the glycosidic-oxygen
bridges are directed toward the inside of the cavity, producing a high electron density there and lending
to it some Lewis-base character.
The C-2-OH group of one glucopyranoside unit can form a hydrogen bond with the C-3-OH
group of the adjacent glucopyranose unit. In the βCD molecule, a complete secondary belt is formed
by these H bonds, therefore, the βCD is a rather rigid structure. This intramolecular H-bond formation
is probably the explanation for the observation that βCD has the lowest water solubility of all CDs. 
The H-bond belt is incomplete in the αCD molecule, because one glucopyranose unit is in a dis-
torted position. Consequently, instead of the six possible H bonds, only four can be established simul-
taneously. The γCD is a non-coplanar, more flexible structure; therefore, it is the more soluble of the
three CDs. 
Figure 5 shows a sketch of the characteristic structural features of CDs. On the side where the sec-
ondary hydroxyl groups are situated, the cavity is wider than on the other side where free rotation of
the primary hydroxyls reduces the effective diameter of the cavity. 
Cyclodextrins are the most widely used molecules that form host/guest-type inclusion complexes.
Although as recently as the 1970s these long-known molecules were merely scientific curiosities, avail-
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1830
Fig. 5 Dimensions and hydrophilic/hydrophobic regions of the CD molecules.

able only as expensive fine chemicals, by the end of the 20th century they were produced and used in-
dustrially in 1000-t amounts.
The spectacular development of CD technology relies on a series of reasons such as: 
•
they are semi-natural products, produced from a renewable natural material (starch) by a rela-
tively simple enzymic conversion;
•
they are produced in 1000 t/yr amounts by environment-friendly technologies;
•
their initially high prices have dropped to levels where they become acceptable for most indus-
trial purposes;
•
through their inclusion complex-forming ability, important properties of the complexed sub-
stances can be modified significantly. This unprecedented “molecular encapsulation” is already
widely utilized in many industrial products, technologies, and analytical methods;
•
any of their toxic effects is of secondary character and can be eliminated by selecting the appro-
priate CD type or derivative, or mode of application; and 
•
consequently, CDs can be consumed by humans as ingredients of drugs, foods, or cosmetics.
Cyclodextrin derivatives
In the CDs, every glucopyranose unit has three free hydroxyl groups which differ both in their functions
and reactivity. The relative reactivities of C(2) and C(3) secondary, and the C(6) primary hydroxyls de-
pend on the reaction conditions (pH, temperature, reagents). In βCD, 21 hydroxyl groups can be mod-
ified substituting the hydrogen atom or the hydroxyl group by a large variety of substituting groups like
alkyl-, hydroxyalkyl-, carboxyalkyl-, amino-, thio-, tosyl-, glucosyl-, maltosyl-, etc. groups, thousands
of ethers, esters, anhydro- deoxy-, acidic, basic, etc. derivatives can be prepared by chemical or enzy-
matic reactions. The aim of such derivatizations may be:
•
to improve the solubility of the CD derivative (and its complexes);
•
to improve the fitting and/or the association between the CD and its guest, with concomitant sta-
bilization of the guest, reducing its reactivity and mobility;
•
to attach specific (catalytic) groups to the binding site (e.g., in enzyme modeling); or
•
to form insoluble, immobilized CD-containing structures, polymers (e.g., for chromatographic
purposes).
From the thousands of CD derivatives described in hundreds of scientific papers and patents, only
a few can be taken into consideration for industrial-scale synthesis and utilization. Complicated multi-
step reactions (using expensive, toxic, environment-polluting reagents) and purification of the products
by chromatography are feasible to prepare derivatives only on a laboratory scale. To produce tons, at an
acceptable price only about a dozen of the known CD derivatives can be taken into consideration.
Among industrially produced, standardized, and available (even in ton amounts) βCD-derivatives,
the most important ones are the heterogeneous, amorphous, highly water-soluble methylated βCDs and
2-hydroxypropylated βCDs (Fig. 6). Due to their heterogeneity, these products cannot be crystallized,
which is an important advantage (e.g., at producing liquid drug formulations). It is much more impor-
tant, however, that these derivatives cannot form crystalline cholesterol complexes, because the un-
modified βCD has a particularly high affinity to cholesterol. If administered parenterally, it is not me-
tabolized in the organism, but forms insoluble cholesterol complex crystals in the kidneys, resulting in
nephrotoxicity.
A methylated βCD is more hydrophobic than the βCD itself, therefore, it forms a more stable (but
soluble) complex with cholesterol. Its affinity to cholesterol is so strong that it extracts cholesterol from
the blood cell membranes, resulting in hemolysis already in around 1 mg/cm3 concentration [32,34].
A particular methylated βCD, the heptakis (2,6-di-O-methyl-βCD, called DIMEB) is a crystalline
product. It is extremely soluble in cold water, but insoluble in hot water; therefore, its purification, and
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1831

also the isolation of its complexes, is technically very simple. Up to now, no better solubilizer has been
found among the CDs. It is available in more than 95 % isomeric purity for injectable drug formulation,
but for widespread industrial application the cheaper randomly methylated βCD (called RAMEB) is
produced and marketed.
The heptakis-(sulfobutyl)-βCD is very soluble in water, noncrystallizable, and even at extremely
high doses seems to be free from any toxic side-effects. It can be used as chiral separating agent in cap-
illary zone electrophoresis, but the aim of the intensive research is to develop it as a parenteral drug car-
rier, for preparation of aqueous injectable solutions of poorly soluble drugs. 
The CD-sulfates possess many similar properties to heparin without its anticoagulating effect.
Apparently, they can reduce the blood supply of tumor tissues through inhibiting the formation of new
arteries. 
Cyclodextrin inclusion complexes
In an aqueous solution, the slightly apolar cyclodextrin cavity is occupied by water molecules that are
energetically unfavored (polar–apolar interaction), and therefore can be readily substituted by appro-
priate “guest molecules”, which are less polar than water (Fig. 7). The dissolved cyclodextrin is the
“host” molecule, and part of the “driving force” of the complex formation is the substitution of the
high-enthalpy water molecules by an appropriate “guest” molecule. One, two, or three CD molecules
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1832
Fig. 6 Structure of the heptakis (2,6-O-dimethyl)-β-cyclodextrin and of a hydroxypropyl βCD of DS~4.
Fig. 7 Schematic representation of the association–dissolation of the host (cyclodextrin) and guest (p-xylene). The
formed guest/host inclusion complex can be isolated as a microcrystalline powder.

contain one or more entrapped “guest” molecules. Most frequently, the host:guest ratio is 1:1. This is
the essence of “molecular encapsulation” (Fig. 7).
This is the simplest and most frequent case. However, 2:1, 1:2, 2:2, or even more complicated as-
sociations, and higher-order equilibria exist, almost always simultaneously.
The inclusion complexes formed can be isolated as stable amorphous, or microcrystalline sub-
stances. Upon dissolving these complexes, an equilibrium is established very rapidly between dissoci-
ated and associated species, and this is expressed by the complex stability constant Ka. The association
of the CD and guest molecules, and the dissociation of the CD/guest complex formed is governed by a
thermodynamic equilibrium.
The most important primary consequences of stirring a poorly soluble guest with an aqueous CD
solution are as follows:
•
The concentration of the guest in the dissolved phase increases significantly, while the concentra-
tion of the dissolved free CD decreases. This latter point is not always true, because ionized guests
or hydrogen-bond establishing (e.g., phenolic) compounds may enhance the solubility of the CD.
•
The spectral properties of the guest are modified. For example, the chemical shifts of the
anisotropically shielded atoms are modified in the NMR spectra. Also, when achiral guests are
inserted into the chiral CD cavity, they become optically active, and show strong induced Cotton
effects on the circular dichroism spectra. Sometimes, the maximum of the UV spectra are shifted
by several nm and fluorescence is very strongly improved, because the fluorescing molecule is
transferred from the aqueous milieu into an apolar surrounding.
•
The reactivity of the included molecule is modified. In most cases, the reactivity decreases (i.e.,
the guest is stabilized), but in many cases the CD behaves as an artificial enzyme, accelerating
various reactions and modifying the reaction pathway.
•
The diffusion and volatility (in case of volatile substances) of the included guest decrease
strongly.
•
The formerly hydrophobic guest, upon complexation, becomes hydrophilic, therefore, its chro-
matographic mobility is also modified.
And in the solid state:
•
The complexed substance is molecularly dispersed in a carbohydrate matrix forming a micro-
crystalline or amorphous powder, even with gaseous guest molecules.
•
The complexed substance is effectively protected against any type of reaction, except that with
the CD hydroxyls, or reactions catalyzed by them.
•
Sublimation and volatility are reduced to a very low level.
•
The complex is hydrophilic, easily wettable, and rapidly soluble.
When, in an aqueous system, the formation of the CD-inclusion complex can be detected (e.g.,
by NMR or circular dichroism, or through a catalytic effect), this does not mean necessarily that a
well-defined crystalline inclusion complex can be isolated. The two main components of the driving
force of the inclusion process are the repulsive forces between the included water molecules and the ap-
olar CD cavity on the one hand, and between the bulk water and the apolar guest, on the other hand.
This second factor does not exist in the crystalline (dry) state. Therefore, it is not uncommon that the
complex formation is convincingly proven in solution, but the isolated product is nothing other than a
very fine dispersion of the CD and the guest. 
UTILIZATION OF CYCLODEXTRINS
The most thoroughly studied field of application of CDs is the pharmaceutical industry, more exactly,
the use of CDs in drug formulations [29] (Table 1).
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1833

Table 1 Approved and marketed drug/CD formulations (2003).
Drug/cyclodextrin
Trade name
Indication
Formulation
Company/country
PGE2/βCD
Prostarmon E
Induction of labor
Sublingual tablet
Ono, Japan
PGE1/αCD
Prostavasin
Chronic arterial
Intraarterial inj.
Ono, Japan
20 µg/amp.
Edex
occlusive disease,
Schwarz, Germany
erectile disfunction
Intracavern inj.
PGE1/αCD
Prostandin 500
Controlled
Infusion
Ono, Japan
500 µg/amp.
hypotension
during surgery
OP-1206/γCD
Opalmon
Buerger’s disease
Tablet
Ono, Japan
Piroxicam/βCD
Cicladol,
Anti-inflammatory,
Tablet, sachet,
Masterpharma,
Brexin
analgesic
and suppository
Chiesi, Italy
Garlic oil/βCD
Xund, Tegra,
Antiartherosclerotic
Dragees
Bipharm, Hermes,
Allidex, 
Germany
Garlessence
Pharmafontana,
H, CTD, USA
Benexate/βCD
Ulgut, Lonmiel
Antiulcerant
Capsules
Teikoku, Japan
Shionogi, Japan
Iodine/βCD
Mena-Gargle
Throat disinfectant
Gargling
Kyushin, Japan
Dexamethasone,
Glymesason
Analgesic,
Ointment
Fujinaga, Japan
Glyteer/βCD
anti-inflammatory
Nitroglycerin/βCD
Nitropen
Coronary dilator
Sublingual tablet
Nippon Kayaku, Japan
Cefotiam-hexetil/αCD
Pansporin T
Antibiotics
Tablet
Takeda, Japan
Cephalosporin
Meiact
Antibiotics
Tablet
Meiji Seika, Japan
(ME 1207)/βCD 
Tiaprofenic acid/βCD
Surgamyl
Analgesic
Tablet
Roussel-Maestrelli, Italy
Diphenhydramine.HCl
Stada-Travel
Travel sickness
Chewing tablet
Stada, Germany
chlortheophylline+βCD 
Chlordiazepoxide/βCD
Transillium
Tranquilizer
Tablet
Gador, Argentina
Piroxicam/βCD
Flogene
Anti-inflammatory,
Liquid
Aché, Brasil
analgesic for
pediatric use 
Hydrocortisone/HPβCD
Dexacort
Mouth wash
Liquid
Island
against aphta,
gingivitis, etc. 
Itraconazole/HPβCD
Sporanox
Esophageal candidiosis
Liquid
Janssen, Belgium
Cloramphenicol/
Clorocil
Eye drop,
Liquid
Oftalder, Portugal
methyl βCD
antibiotic agent 
Cisapride/βCD
Coordinax
Gastrointestinal
Rectal
Janssen, Belgium
Prepulsid
mobility stimulant
suppository
Nimesulide/βCD
Mesulid Fast
Nonsteroid
Oral sachet
Novartis (LPB), Italy
Nimedex
anti-inflammatory 
Nicotine/βCD
Nicorette
Sublingual tablet
Pharmacia Upjohn, Sveden,
Nicogum
chewing gum
Pierre Fabre, France
Dextromethorphan/βCD
Rynathisol
Antitussive
Synthelabo, Italy
Omeprazole/βCD
Omebeta
Proton pump
Tablet
Betapharm, Germany
inhibitor
Mitomycin/HPβCD
MitoExtra
Anti-inflammatory
Infusion
Novartis, Switzerland
Mitozytrex 
Diclofenac Na/HPγCD
Voltaren ophtha
Nonsteroid
Eye drop
Novartis, Switzerland
anti-inflammatory
Cetirizine/βCD
Cetirizin
Antiallergic
Losan Pharma, Germany
Ziprasidone mesylate/
Zeldox, Geodon
Antischizophenic
i.m. inj.
Pfizer, USA
sulphobutyl βCD
Voriconazole/
VFEND®
Antimycotic
i.v. inj.
Pfizer, USA
sulfobutyl-βCD
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1834
(continues on next page)

Tc-99
Cardiotec
Radioactive
i.v. inj.
Bracco, USA
Teboroxime/HPγCD
imaging agent 
17-β-Estradiol/MeβCD
Aerodiol
Nasal spray
Liquid
Servier, France
The primary consequences of the CD complexation of drugs are as follows:
•
The rate of dissolution and the solubility limit increase (frequently by a factor of 101 to 103),
resulting in an accelerated and significantly improved bioavailability. It means a reduction of Tmax
(time to reach the blood level peak after administration of the drug), an increase of cmax (the at-
tained highest blood level of the drug), and AUC (area under curve expressed as microgram or
nanogram multiplied by the hours and divided by the blood volume) (Fig. 8). For example, these
parameters for granulated nimesulide and granulated nimesulide/β-cyclodextrin complex (mar-
keted as Mesulide Fast) are as follows: the Tmax values are 2.17 vs. 1.00 h, the cmax values are
4.69 vs. 4.95 µg.h/cm3, and the AUC0–24 h 17.32 vs. 38.42 µg.h/cm3 [38].
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1835
Table 1 (Continued).
Drug/cyclodextrin
Trade name
Indication
Formulation
Company/country
Fig. 8 In vitro dissolution (above) and in vivo absorption of a drug or its CD complex in function of time. The CD
complexed drug attains a higher blood level peak (cmax) in a shorter time after administration (Tmax) than the
noncomplexed drug. The total bioavailability of the drug is represented by the AUC values, µg.h/cm3.

•
A similar successful product is the piroxicam/β-cyclodextrin, marketed in many countries as
Brexin, Brexidol, Cicladol, etc. [39]
•
The solubility of Itraconazol is so poor that to prepare aqueous injectable solution is hopeless.
Its formulation with hydroxypropyl βCD, both a liquid oral formulation as well as injectable so-
lutions, is produced and marketed as Sporanox.
•
The astringent, irritating effect of nicotine excludes its direct consumption (e.g., in the form of
a sublingual tablet or a chewing gum), but in the form of nicotine/βCD complex the mucous mem-
brane (the taste buds in the oral cavity) cannot get into direct contact with nicotine, because it is
enwrapped molecularly into the CD capsules. This is the essence of the sublingual tablet for
smoking cessation: Nicorette Microtab contains the nicotine in the form of β-cyclodextrin com-
plex.
•
Many compounds, like benzaldehyde, cinnamaldehyde, lipid-soluble vitamins, and aroma sub-
stances, are prone to rapid loss, mainly from solid formulations, through oxidation, volatiliza-
tion, and polymerization. Powder aroma formulations, which contain CD-complexed flavor
components, are produced and marketed (e.g., lemon peel oil is fully destroyed by atmospheric
oxygen within two days when mixed with any excipient powder, but remains fully stable without
any extra protection for years, when complexed with βCD). The flavor will be released only when
dissolved in water or saliva, etc. Such CD-based powder aromas are produced and marketed in
countries like France, Japan, Hungary, etc.
•
Such ingredients as garlic oil (the active component of a popular paramedical product in several
countries) are very bad smelling and lose their active ingredient content rapidly through dispro-
portionation of the allylsulfides to allylpolysulfides, decomposition of the ajoen to inactive com-
pounds, and by volatilization. Cyclodextrin complexation is the perfect solution of the problem.
The first cyclodextrin-containing drug that got approval form the German health authorities was
a garlic oil/βCD complex-containing tablet, marketed under the names Xund and Tegra.
•
The dextrametorphan bromide is utterly bitter (a typically pediatric drug, i.e., administrable only
as a “spoon medicine”, as a solution, or in suspension). Its very bitter taste can be reduced to a
level, which then can be covered by the usual taste-masking sweetening-flavoring compositions.
Cetirizine is a bitter anti-allergic drug. When formulated with βCD, the masking of the bitter taste
is so successful that a chewable tablet can be produced from it. Ibuprofen (also a bitter drug) in
CD-complexed form is appropriate for production of a sparkling tablet (or powder in sachet) for-
mulation, which is devoid of the bitter taste.
•
A drug that is typically difficult to formulate, for example, the very oxygen-sensitive, poorly sol-
uble unsaturated cyclic hydroxy fatty-acid derivative prostaglandin E1. Its dose is only 20 µg/vial;
after dissolving, it is injected or further diluted for infusion. One freeze-dried vial of the marketed
product (Prostavasin, Edex, Viridal) contains besides the 20 µg PGE1, also 646 µg αCD, which
stabilizes and solubilizes the prostaglandin. The sublingual Prostarmon tablet contains 0.5 mg
prostaglandin E2, complexed with βCD.
Table 1 illustrates the steadily increasing use of CDs in the drug formulation.
Less than 10 % of all produced CDs and CD derivatives are consumed by the pharmaindustry.
The largest CD consumers are the food and the cosmetic industry. In cosmetic products, CDs are used
to: solubilize and stabilize the sensitive components; stabilize emulsions; improve the absorption of ac-
tive components onto the skin; reduce or eliminate the bad smells of certain components; and reduce
the loss of the active components through volatilization, rapid oxidation, destruction by light, etc. In
household and toiletry products, the deodorizing capacity of CDs is utilized; in the food industry, the
stable flavor powders and the stabilization of water-in-oil emulsions have to be mentioned. For pro-
duction of low-cholesterol butter, βCD is used to remove the cholesterol from butter.
In the textile industry, a small revolution is expected in the near future. CDs have various possi-
bilities in this industry, but the blockbuster will be the chemical binding of CDs onto the surface of nat-
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1836

ural and synthetic fibers. The immobilized CDs can bind volatile molecules like the unpleasant com-
ponents of sweat or cigarette smoke, etc.; or, when previously charged, the slow release of fragrances,
insect repellents, or even drugs (for transdermal delivery) will be possible by wearing bonded CD-con-
taining garments.
In the chemical industry, the number of examples for application of CDs rapidly increases. For
example, for conservation of wood products, water-insoluble fungicides have to be impregnated into the
wood structures (door and window frames, etc.) Earlier, this was possible only by dissolving these
water-insoluble fungicides in organic solvents, now it is possible to use simply aqueous cyclodextrin so-
lutions for this purpose. To reduce the high viscosity of polyurethane thickening agent containing emul-
sion-type coatings (to facilitate the spraying), CDs are very appropriate, and by adding a small amount
of very stable complex-forming detergents just before the spraying, the high viscosity can be restored
within minutes.
The pernitro γCD and particularly its complex with nitramine is an excellent missile propellant.
CDs can be used in hydrocarbon-polluted soil remediation: the CD mobilizes the insoluble poly-
aromatic hydrocarbons, bringing them into the aqueous phase, where the soil microorganisms can rap-
idly metabolize them. CDs, incorporated into packaging plastic films, strongly reduce the loss of the
aroma substances by pervaporation. Incorporating CD-complexed fungicides into the packaging films,
the fungicides retain their conserving capacity, but cannot penetrate into the enwrapped food (e.g.,
cheese). This is the way to elongate the shelf-life (e.g., of hard cheeses).
Insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, etc. can be complexed with similar results as in the case of
drugs, the dose of environmental polluting synthetic agrochemicals could be significantly reduced when
complexed by cyclodextrins, and/or their effectiveness could be enhanced. CDs have wide fields of uti-
lization in sensors, in diagnostic kits, and in analytical chemistry, particularly in the chromatographic
techniques. 
The majority of biotechnology processes means an enzyme-catalyzed transformation of a sub-
strate in aqueous media. The main difficulties that used to arise are the following:
•
the substrate is hydrophobic, and sparingly (or hardly) soluble in water;
•
the enzyme or the enzyme-producing microbial cells are sensitive to the toxic effects of the sub-
strate or to inhibitors that can even be the product of the transformation;
•
the substrate or the product is unstable under the conditions of the enzymatic transformation; and
•
isolation of the product from the very heterogeneous system is difficult.
CDs and their derivatives enhance the solubility of complexed substrates in aqueous media and
reduce their toxicity, but they do not damage the microbial cells or the enzymes. The enzymatic con-
version of lipophilic substrates can be intensified (accelerated, or performed at higher substrate con-
centrations), both in industrial processes and in diagnostic reagents. The yield of product-inhibited fer-
mentation can be improved, organic toxic compounds are tolerated and metabolized by microbial cells
at higher concentrations, and compounds in small amounts can be isolated simply and economically
from complicated mixtures. 
Examples illustrate the rapidly growing and promising uses of CDs in various operations: the in-
tensification of the conversion of hydrocortisone to prednisolone; the improvement in the yield of fer-
mentation of lankacidine and podophyllotoxin; the stereoselective reduction of benzaldehyde to
L-phenylacetyl carbinol; and the reduction in toxicity of vanillin to yeast, or organic toxic substances to
detoxificating microorganisms. In the presence of an appropriate CD derivative (e.g., 2,6-dimethyl-
βCD), lipid-like inhibitor substances are complexed. The propagation of Bordatella pertussis and the
production of pertussis toxin therefore increase up to hundred fold. CDs and their fatty-acid complexes
can substitute for mammalian serum in tissue cultures.
Until recently, the leprae bacillus (Mycobacterium leprae) was considered to be uncultivable
under in vitro conditions. The most important energy source for this bacterium is palmitic (or stearic)
acid which, however, cannot penetrate through the thick strongly hydrophilic shell of the myco-
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1837

bacterium. On solubilizing the fatty acids (or fatty alcohols) with dimethyl-βCD, however, the
Mycobacterium can be cultivated in vitro, on synthetic media. This discovery will facilitate the screen-
ing of drugs against similar difficultly cultivable microorganisms.
CYCLODEXTRIN LITERATURE 
The CD literature delivers an excellent example of the problem, which at the beginning of the third mil-
lennium will represent the major difficulty for a scientist: to find, read, and correctly interpret all the lit-
erature, which is pertinent to their research project. To locate the sources is easy. The computerized
databases or reference lists of earlier reviews and monographs contain, with an acceptable probability,
all of the relevant literature. Photocopies can be acquired from the most remote libraries of the world,
but reading cannot be spared. One needs time, a lot of time, frequently requiring knowledge of various
languages, and, without having one’s own experimental experience, it is difficult to separate the really
original, important papers from the deluge of “me too” papers. With due prudence, at least 50 % of the
publications of the two last decades are redundant and unnecessary. They contain nothing new, or even
worse, very far-reaching conclusions are drawn from observed marginal, insignificant small effects,
promising unattainable industrial potentials.
Sometimes, and with increasing frequency, very interesting works are published, having only one
defect; the reported phenomena or products were published 15–25 years earlier, but the authors of the
new publication did not find, read, or cite the earlier one.
By the end of 2003, the number of CD-related publications is more than 26 000, representing
more than 170 000 printed pages. The productivity of many scientists, mainly at universities and aca-
demic laboratories, is evaluated by the number of their publications. Of course, not (only) the number
of publications is taken into account, other criteria are also important (e.g., the impact factor of the jour-
nal, citation frequency, etc.), but the first measure of an academic researcher was, and remains, the num-
ber of his/her publications. This constraint to publish is the most important driving force in the explo-
sion-like increase of the literature, which makes it practically impossible to read all of the relevant
publications, even if they are restricted to a relatively narrow section of the CD literature. The only way
to exploit the enormous potential hidden in the vast amount of literature is to summarize it in specific,
well-limited critical reviews. More than 450 reviews have been published on cyclodextrins. Less than
10 % of them can be considered to be “critical evaluations”. The majority of them are nothing but an
uncritical compilation of that literature—frequently only as abstracts—that the author was able to find
and read, mixing up significant, industrially important observations and products, with unfounded spec-
ulations and nonfeasible ideas. While 30 years ago about 4–5 CD papers were published monthly, in
2003 just that many are published daily. 
Figure 9 illustrates the classification of the CD papers, according to their subject, abstracted by
CD News in 2001 [28].
About 16 % of all CD-relevant publications are dedicated to the fundamentals of cyclodextrin
chemistry and technology, i.e., the physical and chemical properties of cyclodextrins, their enzy-
mology, toxicology, production, and derivatives. This section also includes the numerous review arti-
cles on CDs. With little effort, any microbiologist is able nowadays to discover a new CTG-ase enzyme-
producing microorganism, but considering that the industrial conversion of starch to cyclodextrins is
made by enzymes produced by highly productive mutations of selected microorganisms, or by geneti-
cally modified ones, the probability of the practical utilization of these works (at least two–three new
such publications monthly) is rather low. Papers reporting on the preparation of cyclodextrins from var-
ious starch sources like potato, sago, various food industry by-products, and tropical starch sources, are
not relevant for practical application, because cyclodextrins have to be produced on a thousand ton/year
scale. Otherwise, their price is not competitive with that of the large producers. 
Nearly 22 % of the publications are dedicated to studies of the CD-inclusion phenomena. These
works are generally not directly practice-oriented, dealing with energetics and kinetics of inclusion,
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1838

X-ray, FT-IR, liquid- and solid-phase NMR, EPR, circular dichroism, Raman spectroscopy, enhance-
ment of luminescence and phosphorescence, thermal analysis, interaction of CDs with specific
guest-types, enzyme modeling with CDs and CD derivatives, preparation, analysis of cyclodextrin com-
plexes, etc. These methods, as well as the correlation between the complexation and various structural
and external parameters, form the basis for all practical applications of CDs.
The largest group of CD papers, nearly 25 %, is dedicated to the pharmaceutical application of
CDs. The majority of drug molecules are poorly soluble in water, consequently, their biological ab-
sorption is slow and frequently far from complete. Moreover, many drug molecules are rather sensitive
to oxidation, thermodecomposition, light, ions, other ingredients of the pharmaceutical formulation, etc.
Most drug molecules are ideal complex-forming partners for cyclodextrins, because their polarity, mo-
lecular mass, and structure enables them to get included into the CD cavity. This is a very productive
field, and considering the lengthy development and strict requirements for approval of a new chemical
entity (a cyclodextrin complex of a well-known drug molecule is always considered to be a new chem-
ical entity) it must be considered as a significant achievement that more than a dozen drugs are already
approved and marketed in cyclodextrin-complexed form. In the coming years, this field will display a
slow, but steady development. Nevertheless, the large number (more than 5000) of drug/CD-related pa-
pers and patents is a little misleading, because many authors publish the same result in different jour-
nals under different titles, but with virtually identical content. Rediscoveries are published frequently,
simply because the authors did not read the earlier literature; in essence, they have discovered some-
thing that was published earlier. Not every cyclodextrin or cyclodextrin derivative can be administered
to humans, partly because some of those cyclodextrins have such a high affinity toward the cell-mem-
brane lipid components of the organism that, depending on their concentration, may result in haemoly-
sis, or else their synthesis is too expensive. For example, it makes no sense to study a drug/trimethyl
βCD complex for parenteral application. Because of the many repetitions, and the nonfeasible ideas,
only about 30 % of the published papers disclose really new and significant results. 
Actually, only 7 % of the CD-related papers are dedicated directly to the food, cosmetic, and toi-
letry applications of CDs, but at the same time about 70 % of all cyclodextrins produced are used in
this field. The approval process for CD-containing products in this field is much simpler and faster than
in the case of the drug/CD formulations. The amount of CD used in a cosmetic or toiletry product might
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1839
Fig. 9 Distribution of the publications according to the target field between 1985 and 2001 (below) and in the year
of 2001 (above).

be larger, by orders of magnitude, than the amount used in a drug. For example, a well-known drug/CD
complex is the prostaglandin E1/αCD complex, but an ampoule contains only 20 µg prostaglandin E1
and 646 µg αCD. Consequently, less that 1 kg of αCD is needed for the production of one million
prostaglandin ampoules. For the production of other successful drug/CD complexes like Brexin
(Piroxicam/βCD complex), which is marketed in many countries of the world, not more than 40–50
ton/year of βCD is needed. However, a single toiletry product, like a fragrance tissue, or a deodorant
spray for furniture, curtains, or carpets, which needs no health authority approval because it is not con-
sumed by humans and is used only in laundries, requires hundred of tons of βCD or hydroxypropyl-
βCD every year. Many tons of βCD are used, for example, for the production of low-cholesterol butter,
where the βCD is used to specifically remove the cholesterol from the milk fat.
Actually, the application of CDs in pesticide formulations is very modest. The relevant publica-
tions represent less than 1 % of the CD literature. In the pesticide formulations, practically the same ef-
fects can be attained by CDs as in the drug formulations. The pesticide industry is, however, very raw-
material price-sensitive, and until recently the price of even the cheapest technical-quality βCD was
simply too high for pesticide formulations. This situation, however, is changed by now, because the
price of technical-quality βCD, which is perfectly acceptable for the pesticide formulation industry,
dropped to less than USD 4/kg. If the pesticide-formulating industry becomes aware of this possibility,
a new several-thousand-ton section of the cyclodextrin market will be opened. 
Presently, about 11 % of the CD literature is dedicated to the application of CDs in the chemical
and biotechnological industries. This section is also expected to display a rapid increase. Particularly
in the biotechnology of poorly water-soluble substances like lipids, steroids, etc., the possibility of very
rewarding CD applications is already known.
The last section of the CD literature involves the application of cyclodextrins in analytical chem-
istry and diagnostic preparations. The analytical applications of CDs refer mainly to the application of
cyclodextrins in gas chromatography, in high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and in cap-
illary zone electrophoresis, but some papers are dedicated to thin-layer chromatography, to enhance-
ment of UV–vis absorption, luminescence/phosphorescence by CDs, and to increasing the sensitivity of
the related analytical methods. While in 1986, not a single paper had been published on the application
of CDs in capillary electrophoresis, by 1996, 150 papers have already been published in this field. For
cyclodextrin producers, this is not a very interesting field because these methods use only milligram
quantities for each measurement, but they must be highly purified, free of any UV-absorbing impuri-
ties. The number of papers on the gas chromatographic application of CDs seems to have reached a
plateau. The HPLC applications keep growing, and the capillary zone electrophoresis application is
showing an explosive increase. CDs display unprecedented potential for chiral separation, on a chro-
matographic scale, of enantiomers. Apparently, it is difficult to find a separation problem on the ana-
lytical scale which could not be solved by using the appropriate CD.
Apparently, also, the diagnostics producers have not yet discovered this field, which certainly will
open quite a lot of new possibilities, besides improving the actually available diagnostic kits. 
During the last 25 years, several detailed monographs have been published on CDs and their ac-
tual/potential applications [30–36].
FUTURE TRENDS
Research 
The steady increase of the CD literature is illustrated by Figs. 1 and 2 [28]. 
The number of publications in any scientific research area usually consists of three stages. In the
first stage, the discovery period, a few sporadic papers are published on the subject. This is followed by
a logarithmic increase (second stage) which, after passing an inflection point, turns into a plateau.
Finally, in the third stage, the number of publications begins to drop back, at which point the field be-
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1840

gins to be exhausted. For the researchers, not much remains to be discovered or published. As seen in
Fig. 9, the CD project is approaching the plateau. 
The number of publications will not decrease for a while. Twenty years ago, the number of pub-
lications from China was not worth mentioning. Nowadays, nearly half of all CD-related publications
are coming from the several hundred Chinese universities. The earlier literature is apparently not ac-
cessible for those laboratories since they report on observations and results that were published by
European, American, or Japanese laboratories 30 or even more years ago. 
The rediscovery is not a rare case, however, even in leading laboratories. For example, the com-
plexation of spironolactone with βCD results not in the spironolactone/βCD complex (except at very
low pH values) because the βCD hydrolyzes the thioacetate linkage, and the deacetylated free-SH group
containing metabolite can be isolated, as βCD complex. The UV spectrum will not change much, only
a careful chromatographic method reveals that beyond complexation a chemical reaction occurred, too.
Not reading the original publication (a patent refereed by Chemical Abstracts) or any other per-
tinent reviews during the last 15 years, 3 laboratories reported again (as an original discovery) the above
observation. (Altogether, 56 papers have been dedicated to some aspect of the spironolactone/CD in-
teraction!) 
Worldwide, the subject of hundreds of Ph.D. theses is the CD complexation of some drug mole-
cule, which will be also published, therefore, no wonder that 129 publications among them 17
patents/applications are dedicated to such a simple drug as, for example, ibuprofen. 
Production 
Notwithstanding that in the coming decade hundreds of publications will deal with new CTG-ase en-
zyme-producing microorganisms and with enzymatic conversion of starch to CDs, the actually used
CD-producing technologies are well established. They will be, of course, continuously further opti-
mized, but for a fundamentally new technology, a dramatic drop in the production cost is not expected.
The correlation between price and amount of marketed βCD is illustrated schematically by Fig.
3. By 2003, the price of βCD reached the acceptable level, even for the most raw-material price-sensi-
tive industries, like the pesticide industry. Therefore, in the coming decade, a steady increase in the cy-
clodextrin market is predicted, not only for βCD, but also for α- and γCD. The price of α- and γCD will
always remain higher than that of the βCD, partly because of their lower yield (higher solubility) and
partly because of the lower volume of their production. 
CD derivatives
Intensive research is expected in the area of chemical and enzymic modification of CDs. Considering
that CDs contain 18 (αCD), 21 (βCD), or 24 (γCD) substitutable hydroxyl groups, the number of pos-
sible derivatives is unlimited. By 2003, the syntheses of more than 1500 derivatives have been pub-
lished. The known derivatives might be classified according to their substituents, polarity, size, etc. For
practical purposes they can be classified as follows:
•
carriers (solubilizers, stabilizers) for biologically active substances
•
enzyme models
•
separating agents (for chromatography or batch processes)
•
catalysts and additives (as detergents, viscosity modifiers, etc.)
The majority of the reported CD derivatives will never have any utilization because they involve
complicated synthesis, resulting in expensive products. Even when they could be used for some of the
above-mentioned purposes, the cost/benefit ratio precludes their production and utilization. An indus-
trially produced and marketed CD derivative has to be produced by a simple, possibly “one-pot” reac-
tion and must:
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1841

•
be nontoxic, when used as recommended;
•
have an acceptable price;
•
retain its complex-forming capacity; and
•
possess particularly advantageous properties for some specific application.
Industrially, in ton amounts, the following CDs are actually produced:
•
methylated CDs (RAMEB = randomly methylated βCD)
•
hydroxyalkylated CDs: hydroxypropyl βCD and hydroxypropyl γCD
•
acetylated CDs: acetyl γCD
•
reactive CDs: chlorotriazinyl βCD
•
branched CDs: glucosyl and maltosyl βCD
This list is expected to be expanded soon by the sulfobutyl βCDs and eventually by sulphated
CDs, as well CD polymers. 
Presently (2003) about 100 different CD derivatives are commercially available as fine chemicals,
mainly for use in chromatography, in diagnostics, and as intermediates for further synthesis.
The enzyme models are generally rather complicated molecules, and their performance until now
has not shown any dramatic effect. At least for the next few years, these experiments and enzyme model
CD derivatives will remain as a part of the fundamental research in enzymology.
To elongate the actual CD cavity, substituents are attached to the primary or secondary side. This
elongation may be hydrophylic, in which case hydroxyalkyl groups are attached to the ring, or it might
be hydrophobic. For example, substituting the primary hydroxyl groups with long fatty-acid chains,
“Medusa”-like molecules can be prepared. These molecules behave as detergents while retaining their
complex forming ability. The coming years will decide the utility of these derivatives.
At present, mainly β- and γCD, their hydroxypropylated derivatives, acetyl γCD and also, in some
specific cases, αCD can be considered as drug carriers. Only hydroxypropyl βCD, sulfobutyl βCD, and
γCD are supported by satisfactory toxicological documentation as parenteral drug carriers (in 2003).
None of them is able to overcome all of the solubility and stability problems in parenteral drug formu-
lations. The development of two–three more such derivatives can be expected in the coming years. The
optimum CD derivative (to be used as parenteral drug carrier) should be
•
very soluble in water;
•
cheap;
•
available in high purity;
•
nontoxic, even in high doses, in chronic treatment;
•
characterized by high solubilizing power for various drugs;
•
stable during heat sterilization and storing in aqueous solution;
•
nonreacting with cholesterol and phospholipids (and other cell-membrane components);
•
free of any inherent pharmacological effect; and 
•
biodegradable in the circulation and eliminated as small molecular metabolites.
This ideal CD derivative has not yet been discovered. For organ- or receptor-targeting, extremely
stable CD complexes of specific affinity will be needed. The essence of photodynamic tumor therapy
is that such compounds have to be delivered to the tumor tissues, which as a result of irradiation with a
strong light become toxic through isomerization or splitting. In this case, upon irradiation, the photo-
sensitive molecules will become toxic just for the tumor cells. For such targeting of the drug, very sta-
ble (105–107 M–1) complexes are needed. The duplex homo- or heterodimers of CDs (constructed from
only one or two different CDs, Fig. 10) form complexes that are more stable by orders of magnitude
than the singular CDs. By interconnecting two CDs with appropriate bridges, such duplex CD deriva-
tives have been prepared. These can form stable complexes with photosensitive porphyrinoid structures
and transport them to the target organs. Recently, “antennae”-bearing CDs have been reported.
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1842

© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1843
Fig. 10 Structure of a homodimer and of a heterodimer CD.

Receptor-specific oligosaccharide units are attached to CDs, so they will be bonded in the living or-
ganism on certain specific receptors only. The aim of this effort is to synthesize a receptor-targeting car-
rier, that has the drug complexed with an antenna-bearing duplex-CD, which would transport the spe-
cific drug to just the target organ.
Industrial uses of CDs
The actual or potential uses of CDs in pharmaceuticals, foods, cosmetics, and chemical products and
technologies are summarized in the relevant reviews, as well as in some recent CD monographs [33–36]
and confirm unanimously, the correctness of the forecast of a steady increase of the CD market for the
coming decade. While a series of CD-containing products, or CD-using technologies is widely known
in the food, cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries, for the coming decade, significant new applications
are expected from the use of CDs in environmental protection, biotechnology, and in several industries,
like the textile industry [37]. The potential of CDs in separation technologies, with the exception of an-
alytical chromatographies and electrophoretic techniques, has not yet been exploited and only very pre-
liminary works have been published.
REFERENCES
1. A. Villiers. Compt. Rend. 112, 536 (1891).
2. F. Schardinger. Z. Untersuch. Nahr. u. Genussm. 6, 865 (1903).
3. F. Schardinger. Wien. Klin. Wochschr. 17, 207 (1904).
4. F. Schardinger. Zentr. Bakteriol. Parasitenk. Abt. II 14, 772 (1905).
5. K. Freudenberg and W. Rapp. Ber. 69, 2041 (1936).
6. K. Freudenberg, H. Boppel, M. Meyer-Delius. Naturwissenschaften 26, 123 (1938).
7. K. Freudenberg and M. Meyer-Delius. Ber. 71, 1596 (1938).
8. P. Karrer and C. Nägeli. Helv. Chim. Acta 4, 169 (1921).
9. A. Miekeley. Ber. 65, 69 (1932).
10. K. Freudenberg, G. Blomquist, L. Ewald, K. Soff. Ber. 69, 1258 (1936).
11. K. Freudenberg and F. Cramer. Z. Naturforsch. 3b, 464 (1948).
12. D. French. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. 12, 189–260 (1957).
13. F. Cramer. Einschlussverbindungen, Springer Verlag, Berlin (1954).
14. K. Freudenberg, F. Cramer, H. Plieninger. Ger. Patent 895,769 (1953).
15. D. French. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. 12, 233 (1957).
16. J. A. Thoma and L. Stewart. Starch, Chemistry and Technology I, R. L. Whistler and E. F. Paschall
(Eds.), p. 209, Academic Press, New York (1965).
17. G. V. Caesar. Starch and its Derivatives, Chap. X, J. A. Radley (Ed.), p. 290, Chapman and Hall,
London (1986).
18. J. Szejtli (Ed.). Proc. First Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, Budapest, 1981, D. Reidel, Dordrecht
(1982).
19. J. L. Atwood, J. E. D. Davies, T. Osa (Eds.) Clathrate Compounds, Molecular Inclusion
Phenomena and Cyclodextrins, Proc. of Third Int. Symp. on Clathrate Compounds and Molecular
Inclusion and the Second Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, Tokyo, 1981, D. Reidel, Dordrecht (1985).
20. J. L. Atwood and E. D. Davies (Eds.). Inclusion Phenomena in Inorganic, Organic and
Organometallic Hosts, Proc. Third Int. Symp. on Inclusion Phenomena and the Fourth Int. Sympt.
on Cyclodextrins, Lancaster, 1986, p. 455, D. Reidel, Dordrect (1987).
21. O. Huber and J. Szejtli (Eds.). Proc. Fourth Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins: Munich, 1988, Kluwer
Academic, Dordrecht (1988).
22. D. Duchene (Ed.). Minutes of the Fifth Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, Paris, 1990, Editions de
Santé, Paris (1990).
J. SZEJTLI
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
1844

23. A. R. Hedges (Ed.). Minutes of the Sixth Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, Chicago, 1992, Editions de
Santé, Paris (1992).
24. T. Osa (Ed.). Proc. Seventh Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, Tokyo, 1994, Publ. Office of Business
Center for Academic Societies of Japan (1994).
25. J. Szejtli and L. Szente (Eds.). Proc. of the Eighth Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, Budapest, 1996,
Kluwer, Dordrecht (1996).
26. J. Szejtli (Ed.). Proc. Tenth Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, 2002, Ann Arbor, Mich. Mira Digital
Publ. (2002).
27. T. Loftsson. Proc. Eleventh Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins Reykjavik (2002). A special issue of J.
Inclusion Phenomen. and Macromol. Chem. 44, 1–467 (2002).
28. Cyclodextrin News (a monthly abstracting newsletter since 1986, dedicated exclusively to the
cyclodextrin literature, production, marketing, related, conferences, etc.), edited and published by
Cyclolab Ltd., Budapest.
29. K. H. Frömming and J. Szejtli. Cyclodextrins in Pharmacy, p. 224, Kluwer, Dordrecht (1994).
30. J. 
Szejtli. 
Cyclodextrins 
and 
Their 
Inclusion 
Complexes, 
p. 
296, 
Akadémiai 
Kiadó, Budapest (1982).
31. D. Duchene (Ed.). Cyclodextrins and Their Industrial Uses, p. 448, Editions de Santé, Paris
(1987).
32. J. Szejtli. Cyclodextrin Technology, p. 450, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht (1988).
33. D. Duchene (Ed). New Trends in Cyclodextrins and Derivatives, p. 635, Editions de Santé, Paris
(1991).
34. J. Szejtli and T. Osa (Eds.). Comprehensive Supramolecular Chemistry, Vol. 3: Cyclodextrins, p.
693, Pergamon, Oxford (1996).
35. J. Szejtli. J. Mater. Chem. 7, 575 (1997).
36. J. Szejtli. Chem. Rev. 5 1743–1753 (1998).
37. J. Szejtli. Starch 55, 191–196 (2003).
38. G. Piel, I. Delneuville, L. Delattre. Proc. Eighth Int. Symp. on Cyclodextrins, J. Szejtli and L.
Szente (Eds.), pp. 487–490, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht (1996).
39. Drug Investigation, Supplement, New Strategies in the Management of Pain, Vol. 2, Supplement
4, pp. 1–88, Adis Int. Inc., Langhorn, PA, USA (1990).
© 2004 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 76, 1825–1845
Past, present, and future of cyclodextrin research
1845
