483
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010.
doi:10.1351/PAC-REP-08-04-03
© 2009 IUPAC, Publication date (Web): 18 November 2009
Terminology for reversible-deactivation radical
polymerization previously called “controlled”
radical or “living” radical polymerization
(IUPAC Recommendations 2010)*
Aubrey D. Jenkins1, Richard G. Jones2,‡, and Graeme Moad3,‡
122A North Court, Hassocks, West Sussex, BN6 8JS, UK; 2University of Kent,
Canterbury, Kent CT2 7NH, UK; 3CSIRO Molecular and Health Technologies,
Bag 10, Clayton South, VIC 3169, Australia
Abstract: This document defines terms related to modern methods of radical polymerization,
in which certain additives react reversibly with the radicals, thus enabling the reactions to
take on much of the character of living polymerizations, even though some termination in-
evitably takes place. In recent technical literature, these reactions have often been loosely re-
ferred to as, inter alia, “controlled”, “controlled/living”, or “living” polymerizations. The use
of these terms is discouraged. The use of “controlled” is permitted as long as the type of con-
trol is defined at its first occurrence, but the full name that is recommended for these poly-
merizations is “reversible-deactivation radical polymerization”.
Keywords: active-dormant equilibria; aminoxyl-mediated; AMRP; atom transfer; ATRP;
chain polymerization; degenerative transfer; DTRP; controlled; IUPAC Polymer Division;
living; nitroxide-mediated; NMRP; radical; RAFT; reversible-deactivation; reversible-addi-
tion-fragmentation chain transfer.
CONTENTS
1. 
INTRODUCTION
2. 
BASIC DEFINITIONS
3. 
DEFINITIONS OF THE TYPES OF POLYMERIZATION TO BE CONSIDERED
4. 
DEFINITIONS OF RELATED TERMS
5.
MEMBERSHIP OF SPONSORING BODIES
6.
REFERENCES
1.
INTRODUCTION
In conventional radical polymerization, the component steps in the process are chain initiation, chain
propagation, chain termination, and sometimes also chain transfer. The process is a classical chain re-
action, usually analyzed kinetically on the assumption of a stationary state with respect to the concen-
tration of chain carriers (radicals). The lifetime of an individual radical is very short and equal to the
*Sponsoring body: IUPAC Polymer Division, Subcommittee on Polymer Terminology: see more details on p. 490.
‡Corresponding authors: E-mail: kapitimana@googlemail.com (R.G.J.); graeme.moad@csiro.au (G.M.) 

period of chain growth for that chain, the termination step involves the mutual destruction of two chain
carriers, and the distribution of molecular weights (molar masses) of the resulting polymers is rather
broad.
Since the early 1980s, it has been found that certain additives are able to react reversibly with the
chain carriers. Because the reaction is reversible, the period of chain growth of an individual propagat-
ing chain may be extended to the duration of the experiment. However, for most of the time, chains are
in an inert (dormant) state, unable to participate in chain propagation or termination. Thus, polymer-
ization conditions can be chosen such that the majority of chains are living. Most of these are in a dor-
mant form, and at any given instant only a small fraction are active chains capable of chain growth. As
long as the interconversion of active and dormant forms is rapid compared to propagation, all chains are
able to grow at the same rate. As a result, with appropriate choice of reagents and reaction conditions,
the process may take on much of the character of a living polymerization, i.e., a reaction from which
chain termination and irreversible chain transfer are absent [1]. A consequence is that it becomes pos-
sible to synthesize block copolymers by the sequential addition of different monomers under conditions
that support the interconversion of active and dormant chains. If, in addition, the initiating species are
fully consumed prior to any appreciable chain growth, all chains grow at the same rate and the distri-
bution of molar masses of the products can be much narrower than in the conventional radical poly-
merization and approach a Poisson distribution.
This type of radical polymerization has attracted a great deal of interest but the various authors
have each tended to develop their own terminology, with the result that there is a confusing diversity of
terms in use, some of which conflict with accepted definitions of terms. Among the terms that have been
used are: controlled radical polymerization; living radical polymerization; controlled/living polymer-
ization; but this selection is only indicative of the range of names that need to be considered. Other
terms have been coined to describe specific types of polymerization. These include atom-transfer radi-
cal polymerization (ATRP), nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP) (aminoxyl-mediated polymer-
ization, AMP), reversible addition-fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) polymerization, and the list
seems to grow steadily year on year.
An earlier attempt to address the attendant problems resulted in a paper [2] which, in recom-
mending a revision of IUPAC terminology, rather than resolving the issue served to widen the discus-
sion. The ensuing correspondence, as evidenced by a search of the Wiley Interscience web site [3],
makes it clear that in essence there are two main schools of thought with neither willing to yield to the
other’s arguments such that parallel terminologies remain in use; this is a situation that IUPAC cannot
ignore. For this reason, the Subcommittee on Polymer Terminology of IUPAC’s Polymer Division (the
SPT) has attempted to rationalize the situation by recommending definitions of the most important
terms relating to reactions of this type. 
At the commencement of the project, at a time when no definition had been agreed upon and the
breadth of the subject was not clear, the phenomenon was coined as “radical polymerization with min-
imal termination—so-called ‘living’ and/or ‘controlled’ polymerization”. Thus, central to much of the
argument [2,3] underlying the need for this project is an understanding conveyed by two words, “liv-
ing” and “controlled”. As elaborated below, within chemistry, the use of the first of these is confined
mainly to the present context, i.e., living polymerizations, whereas the second is used in many contexts.
The IUPAC-recommended definition of living polymerization first appeared in the “Glossary of
basic terms in polymer science” in 1996 [4]. It is essentially the same as the one given below as
Definition 2.20, which is identical to that in the recently published “Glossary of terms related to kinet-
ics, thermodynamics, and mechanism of polymerization (the so-called “Kinetics document”) [5] and
predates the arguments surrounding its application to radical polymerizations. It was advanced against
the background of its long use in the field of anionic polymerization and a ready grasp of the features
of such polymerizations that confer livingness upon them. In essence, the understanding was that
though termination and transfer reactions, as defined in Section 2, are extremely difficult to eliminate
from any polymerization owing to residual impurities, at least conceptually they can be eliminated from
A. D. JENKINS et al.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
484

some anionic polymerizations. Furthermore, in the hands of the most experienced practitioners, their
elimination can to all intents and purposes be achieved. In contrast, for a radical polymerization, even
when such processes are undetectable using state-of-the-art techniques, they can never be eliminated,
even conceptually, for the reason that termination by radical-radical reactions will always occur.
Likewise, given the facility that propagating radicals have to abstract atoms, chain-transfer reactions are
also commonplace. As a consequence, IUPAC cannot undertake to relax the present definition of a liv-
ing polymerization in order to accommodate present usage in the context of radical polymerizations. By
the same token, it cannot accept the continued and ubiquitous application of the word “living” to radi-
cal polymerizations, no matter how minimal the termination might be within such systems.
The word “controlled” is not defined by IUPAC except in specified contexts. Nonetheless, its use
is frequent and is most commonly applied to the conditions for a synthesis or under which a measure-
ment is carried out, i.e., in relation to the imposition of some external influence. In polymer chemistry,
the term “diffusion-controlled termination” is used to describe a chain termination in a chain polymer-
ization in which the rate-determining step is limited only by diffusion [5]. It is also applied to the con-
sequences of following one particular methodology as opposed to another, and that is the sense in which
it is being used in the present context. Whether or not the feature that is controlled is, for example, the
near constancy of an average radical lifetime over the course of a polymerization or the quality of the
polymeric product that results (see Definition 2.13), the reactions that are the subjects of this project,
by their very nature, are exercising a control which is not offered by other reactions that yield the same
polymer. It might be argued that all polymerization reactions exercise a control of sorts, but here it is
implicit that superior product attributes are to be expected, typically, molecular weight control, a nar-
row molecular weight distribution, end-group control, or the ability to chain extend and thereby facili-
tate the synthesis of a block copolymer the block lengths of which are controlled. That is the sense in
which the word “controlled” has crept into the language of polymer synthesis in recent years, and it is
hard to fault. It is not a misnomer, and controlled polymerization has now been defined by IUPAC [5].
Furthermore, by now, anyone working as a polymer scientist understands and accepts what is implied
by its extended usage within a compound adjective that characterizes a polymerization. It remains, how-
ever, unacceptable to use the term “controlled” by itself to imply a specific form of control without
specifying what is being controlled, and the term “controlled polymerization” cannot by itself be used
as a class name for polymerizations where the outcome is controlled by reversible-deactivation.
The terminology to be adopted must be consistent with that in existing IUPAC documents, so in
Section 2 a list of definitions already included in the Kinetics document [5], and which are of particu-
lar relevance in the present context, precedes the new recommendations. For the most part, identical
wording has been adopted for these definitions. In one instance, the definition has been adapted from
the definition in the Kinetics document and is compatible with all the other definitions, and a possible
ambiguity in Note 1 of Definition 2.13 has been eliminated. In some cases, additional notes relating to
the terms will be found in the Kinetics document [5]. Throughout, cross-references to terms defined
elsewhere in the present document are denoted in italic typeface. 
2.
BASIC DEFINITIONS
2.1
active center (in a polymerization)
active site
kinetic-chain carrier
Site on a chain carrier at which reaction occurs.
2.2
active site (in a polymerization)
See active center.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
Reversible-deactivation radical polymerization
485

2.3
chain activation
See chain reactivation. 
2.4
chain carrier
Intermediate species bearing an active site for the propagation of a chain reaction.
2.5
chain deactivation
Conversion of a chain carrier into an inactive species.
2.6
chain initiation (in chain polymerization)
initiation
Chemical reaction in which initiating species add to monomer molecules to form chain carriers.
2.7
chain polymerization
Chain reaction in which the growth of a polymer chain proceeds exclusively by reaction(s) between
monomer(s) and active site(s) on the polymer chain with regeneration of the active site(s) at the end of
each growth step.
2.8
chain propagation (in a chain polymerization)
propagation
Chemical reaction between a chain carrier and a monomer molecule that results in the growth of a poly-
mer chain and the regeneration of at least one chain carrier.
2.9
chain reactivation
chain activation
Conversion of an inactive chain into a chain carrier.
2.10 chain termination (in a chain polymerization)
irreversible chain deactivation
termination
Chemical reaction in which a chain carrier is converted irreversibly into a non-propagating species,
without the formation of a new chain carrier.
2.11 chain transfer (in a chain polymerization)
Chemical reaction occurring during a chain polymerization in which an active center is transferred from
a growing macromolecule or oligomer molecule to another molecule or to another site on the same mol-
ecule.
2.12 chain-transfer agent
Substance able to react with a chain carrier by a reaction in which the original chain carrier is deacti-
vated and a new chain carrier is generated.
2.13 controlled polymerization
Term indicating control of a certain kinetic feature of a polymerization or structural aspect of the poly-
mer molecules formed, or both.
A. D. JENKINS et al.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
486

Note 1: The expression “controlled polymerization” is sometimes used to describe a radical or
ionic polymerization in which reversible-deactivation of the chain carriers is an essen-
tial component of the mechanism, interrupting the propagation to secure control of one
or more kinetic features of the polymerization or one or more structural aspects of the
macromolecules formed, or both.
Note 2: The expression “controlled radical polymerization” is sometimes used to describe a rad-
ical polymerization conducted in the presence of reagents that lead to, e.g., atom-trans-
fer radical polymerization (ATRP), nitroxide- [aminoxyl] mediated polymerization
(NMP), or reversible-addition-fragmentation chain transfer (RAFT) polymerization.
Note 3: Generally, the adjective “controlled” should not be used without specifying the partic-
ular kinetic or structural feature that is subject to control.
2.14 degenerate chain transfer
See degenerative chain transfer.
2.15 degenerative chain transfer
degenerate chain transfer
Chain-transfer reaction that generates a new chain carrier and a new chain-transfer agent with the same
reactivity as the original chain carrier and chain-transfer agent.
2.16 dormant polymer chain (adapted from the definition in [5])
Temporarily deactivated chain carrier.
2.17 initiating species
Species to which monomer adds to start chain polymerization.
Note 1: An initiating species may be formed from an initiator or be the initiator itself.
Note 2: In radical polymerization, initiating species formed directly from an initiator are called
“primary radicals”.
2.18 initiation (in a chain polymerization)
See chain initiation.
2.19 irreversible chain deactivation
See chain termination.
2.20 kinetic-chain carrier
See active center.
2.21 living polymerization
Chain polymerization from which chain termination and irreversible chain transfer are absent.
2.22 propagation (in a chain polymerization)
See chain propagation.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
Reversible-deactivation radical polymerization
487

2.23 radical polymerization
Chain polymerization in which the active centers are radicals.
2.24 reversible chain deactivation
Deactivation of a chain carrier in a chain polymerization, reversibly converting the active center into
an inactive one and then, within the lifetime of a growing macromolecule, regenerating an active cen-
ter on the same original chain carrier. 
2.25 termination (in a chain polymerization)
See chain termination.
3.
DEFINITIONS OF THE TYPES OF POLYMERIZATION TO BE CONSIDERED
3.1
reversible-deactivation radical polymerization, RDRP
controlled reversible-deactivation radical polymerization
Chain polymerization, propagated by radicals that are deactivated reversibly, bringing them into active-
dormant equilibria of which there might be more than one.
Note 1: The abbreviated term “controlled radical polymerization” shall be permitted, provided
that its context (i.e., the nature of the control) is specified at the first occurrence. 
Note 2: Names containing the word “living” are discouraged. Definition 84 in the Kinetics doc-
ument [5] stipulates that chain termination and irreversible chain transfer must be ab-
sent if a polymerization is to be regarded as living. Examples of discouraged terms in-
clude “living radical polymerization”, “controlled/living polymerization”, and
“quasi-living polymerization”.
Note 3:
Atom-transfer radical polymerization, reversible-addition-fragmentation chain-transfer
polymerization, and polymerization mediated by an aminoxyl (or similarly acting sub-
stance) all fall into this polymerization category.
Note 4:
When the equilibria are established rapidly compared to the lifetime of the majority of
the polymer chains, the process may show many of the observable characteristics asso-
ciated with living polymerization. One consequence of rapid equilibration is that it may
become possible to exert control over the shape of the chain-length distribution, prepare
polymers of low dispersity (i.e., polymers with a high degree of uniformity), and extend
chains to form block copolymers, the block lengths of which are of low dispersity, by
the sequential addition of monomers. Although some termination is inevitably taking
place, the equilibrium between the remaining propagating radicals and dormant species
is maintained.
The essential characteristics of reversible-deactivation radical polymerization are also displayed
by reactions in which the chain carriers are not radicals. Hence, a more general definition is:
3.2
reversible-deactivation polymerization, RDP
controlled reversible-deactivation polymerization
Chain polymerization, propagated by chain carriers that are deactivated reversibly, bringing them into
active-dormant equilibria of which there might be more than one.
Note:
An example of a reversible-deactivation polymerization is group-transfer polymeriza-
tion.
A. D. JENKINS et al.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
488

4.
DEFINITIONS OF RELATED TERMS
4.1
stable-radical-mediated polymerization, SRMP
stable-free-radical-mediated polymerization, SFRP
Controlled reversible-deactivation radical polymerization in which the deactivation involves reversible
coupling with stable (persistent) free radicals.
Note 1:
This term embraces aminoxyl-mediated radical polymerization and organometallic-me-
diated radical polymerization.
Note 2:
The use of the term “free radical” is discouraged in IUPAC terminology [5].
4.2
aminoxyl-mediated radical polymerization, AMRP
nitroxide-mediated (radical) polymerization, NMP, NMRP 
Stable-free-radical-mediated polymerization in which the deactivation of the radicals involves re-
versible coupling with aminoxyl radicals. 
Note: 
The term “nitroxide” is discouraged in IUPAC nomenclature, which instead uses the
term “aminoxyl” [1].
4.3
organometallic-mediated radical polymerization, OMRP
Stable-free-radical-mediated polymerization in which the deactivation of the radicals involves re-
versible cleavage of a metal-carbon bond.
Note: 
The best-known example of OMRP is cobalt-mediated radical polymerization, CMRP.
4.4
atom-transfer radical polymerization, ATRP
Controlled reversible-deactivation radical polymerization in which the deactivation of the radicals in-
volves reversible atom transfer or reversible group transfer catalyzed usually, though not exclusively, by
transition-metal complexes.
4.5
transition-metal-mediated radical polymerization
Controlled reversible-deactivation radical polymerization mediated by transition-metal complexes or
organometallic compounds.
Note:
The term “transition-metal-mediated radical polymerization” is sometimes used as a
synonym for atom-transfer radical polymerization. This use of the term is discouraged
since it also includes organometallic-mediated radical polymerization.
4.6
degenerate-transfer radical polymerization, DTRP
Controlled reversible-deactivation radical polymerization in which the deactivation of the radicals in-
volves degenerative transfer (DT) of a group (or atom). 
Note:
Examples of DT-active groups include those mentioned below under reversible-addi-
tion-fragmentation chain-transfer polymerization, iodine (iodine transfer polymeriza-
tion, ITP) and certain derivatives of Te, As, Sb, or Bi.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
Reversible-deactivation radical polymerization
489

4.7
reversible-addition-fragmentation chain-transfer polymerization, RAFT polymerization,
RAFT
Degenerate-transfer radical polymerization in which chain activation and chain deactivation involve a
degenerative chain-transfer process which occurs by a two-step addition-fragmentation mechanism.
Note 1: Examples of RAFT agents include certain dithioesters, trithiocarbonates, xanthates
(dithiocarbonates), and dithiocarbamates.
Note 2:
RAFT with xanthates is also known as MADIX (macromolecular design by interchange
of xanthate).
5.
MEMBERSHIP OF SPONSORING BODIES
Membership of the IUPAC Polymer Division Committee for the period 2008–2009 was as follows:
President: C. K. Ober (USA); Vice President: M. Buback (Germany); Secretary: M. Hess
(Germany); Past President: J.-I. Jin (Korea); Titular Members: T. Chang (Korea); R. G. Jones (UK);
S. Penczek (Poland); G. T. Russell (New Zealand); M. Sawamoto (Japan); R. F. T. Stepto (UK), J.-P.
Vairon (France); Associate Members: S. C. Kim (Korea); T. Kitayama (Japan); P. Kubisa (Poland); W.
Mormann (Germany); M. Vert (France); National Representatives: D. Berek (Slovakia); D. J. Dijkstra
(Germany); G. Galli (Italy); J. K. Kallitsis (Greece); Z.-C. Li (China); G. Moad (Australia); M. Raza
Shah (Pakistan); R. Prakesh Singh (India); J. Stejskal (Czech Republic); M. Zigon (Slovenia).
Membership of the Subcommittee on Polymer Terminology (until 2005, the Subcommittee on
Macromolecular Terminology) for the period 2008–2009 was as follows: 
Chair: R. G. Jones (UK); Secretary: M. Hess (Germany); Members: G. Allegra (Italy); M. Barón
(Argentina); T. Chang (Korea); C. dos Santos (Brazil); A. Fradet (France); J. He (China); K.-H.
Hellwich (Germany); R. C. Hiorns (France); P. Hodge (UK); K. Horie (Japan); A. D. Jenkins (UK); J.-I.
Jin (Korea); J. Kahovec (Czech Republic); T. Kitayama (Japan); P. Kratochvíl (Czech Republic);
P. Kubisa (Poland); S. V. Meille (Italy); I. Mita (Japan); G. Moad (Australia); W. Mormann (Germany);
N. Nakabayashi (Japan); C. K. Ober (USA); S. Penczek (Poland); I. Schopov (Bulgaria); F. Schué
(France); S. Slomkowski (Poland); R. F. T. Stepto (UK); D. Tabak (Brazil); J.-P. Vairon (France);
M. Vert (France); J. Vohlídal (Czech Republic); W. J. Work (USA). 
The Recommendations were prepared by a Task Group consisting of:
T. Fukuda (Japan); R. G. Gilbert (Australia); M. Hess (Germany); R. G. Jones (UK); A. D.
Jenkins (UK); B. Klumperman (South Africa); P. Kratochvíl (Czech Republic); K. Matyjaszewski
(USA); G. Moad (Australia); M. Monteiro (Australia); S. Penczek (Poland); G. T. Russell (New
Zealand); R. F. T. Stepto (UK); J.-P. Vairon (France); J. Vohlídal (Czech Republic).
6.
REFERENCES
1.
IUPAC. Compendium of Chemical Terminology, 2nd ed. (the “Gold Book”). Compiled by A. D.
McNaught and A. Wilkinson. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford (1997). XML on-line
corrected version: http://goldbook.iupac.org (2006–) created by M. Nic, J. Jirat, B. Kosata; up-
dates compiled by A. Jenkins.
2.
T. R. Darling, T. P. Davis, M. Fryd, A. A. Gridnev, D. M. Haddleton, S. D. Ittel, R. R. Matheson,
G. Moad, E. Rizzardo. J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem. 38, 1706 (2000).
3.
<http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/72000909/issue> [J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym.
Chem. 38, 1705 (2000)].
A. D. JENKINS et al.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
490

4.
A. D. Jenkins, P. Kratochvíl, R. F. T. Stepto, U. W. Suter. Pure Appl. Chem. 68, 2287 (1996).
5.
S. Penczek, G. Moad. Pure Appl. Chem. 80, 2163 (2008).
Republication or reproduction of this report or its storage and/or dissemination by electronic means is permitted without the
need for formal IUPAC permission on condition that an acknowledgment, with full reference to the source, along with use of the
copyright symbol ©, the name IUPAC, and the year of publication, are prominently visible. Publication of a translation into
another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval from the relevant IUPAC National Adhering
Organization.
© 2009, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 483–491, 2010
Reversible-deactivation radical polymerization
491
