Pure&App/. Chem., Vol. 63, No. 1, pp. 141-146, 1991. 
Printed in Great Britain. 
@ 1991 IUPAC 
206922209100015 
Biological functions and activities of animal 
carotenoids 
Vataru Yiki 
Suntory Institute for Bioorganic Research, Wakayamadai, 
Shimamoto cho, Mishima-gun, Osaka, 618 J.4PAN. Present address: 
Shimizu Laboratory, Marine Biotechnology Institute Co.,Ltd., 
1900 Sodeshi cho, Shimizu City, Shizuoka 424, JAPAN. 
Abstract- Astaxanthin, one of the dominant carotenoids in 
marine animals, showed both a strong quenching effect against 
singlet oxygen, and a strong scavenging effect against free 
radicals. These effects are considered to be defence 
mechanisms in the animals for attacking these active oxygen 
species. The activities of astaxanthin are approximately 
10 times stronger than those of other carotenoids that were 
tested, namely zeaxanth in, lutein, tunaxanthin, canthaxanth in 
and ,B carotene, and 100 times greater than those of 
a tocopherol. Astaxanthin also showed strong activity 
as an inhibitor of lipid peroxidation mediated by these 
active forms of oxygen. From these results, astaxanthin 
has the properties of a ”SUPER VITAMIN E”. 
INTRODUCTION 
Studies on biological functions and activities of carotenoids have been 
mainly performed in the fields of photosynthetic plants, algae and bacteria (ref. l), 
and two major functions have been revealed: 1) a light--harvesting 
role in the 
antenna complexes of the chloroplast in photosynthesis. 2) as protecting 
agents against the harmful photooxidative effects of bright light. 
On the other hand, the well established biological function of carotenoids 
in animals is as vitamin A precursors (refs. 2-4). 
,B -Carotene or other 
carotenoids which possess a B~~retinylidene 
or 3 dehydroretinylidene end-group 
can easily be bioconverted into retinoids through cleavage of the (‘-15.15’ 
double bond by ,B ~carotene-.l5, 
15’ -0xygenase. Carotenoids without such an 
end--group show little or no pro-vitamin A activity, and any significance of 
these carotenoids remains unknown. 
For the past ten years, our group has studied ovarian carotenoids in 
marine fish and shellfish, and astaxanthin was found to be the most widely 
distributed and major carotenoid (ref. 5). 
This carotenoid, however, possesses 
neither p -retinylidene nor 3-hydroxyretinylidene‘end group and shows little 
pro-vitamin A activity (ref.4). 
Moreover, it is not considered to be an 
effective protecting colorant because the color of astaxanthin, pink to red, 
is far different from that of the surroundings. I n  the case of the ovaries, 
astaxanthin usually exists both in the free form and bound to protein as 
astaxanthin protein complexes, but not in esterified form (ref. 5). 
These 
studies showed the possibility of another function of carotenoids, especially 
astaxanthin in the free form. 
141 

142 
W. MlKl 
I n  the case of photosynthetic plants, /3 
carotene, lutein and other 
carotenoids play roles as quenchers or scavengers against active oxygen species 
for the purpose of photoprotection against bright sunlight. Our group has 
therefore searched for a similar role for carotenoids in animals, and has 
found interesting activities of these carotenoids, especially of astaxanthin. 
I n  this article, I will describe the quenching or scavenging effects of 
animal carotenoids, especially astaxanthin, against active oxygen species, 
singlet oxygen( l o p )  and hydroxy-radical(*OH), and against organic free radicals, 
and compare the effects with those of other carotenoids and a -tocopherol(vitamin E). 
QUENCHING EFFECTS AGAINST SINGLET OXYGEN 
The strong quenching effect of /3 
carotene against singlet oxygen in 
plants has been known for over twenty years (ref. 61, but, in the case of 
animal carotenoids, such activity still remains unknown. I n  this chapter, 
the activity of astaxanthin is described, and compared with those of the 
other carotenoids and a-tocopherol as controls (ref.7). 
Singlet oxygen was produced by methylene blue under irradiation with 
white light, and the quantity of '02 was measured by determining the peroxide 
value of linoleic acid dependence on '02 by the TBA(thi0barbituric acid) 
method (ref.7). 
This in vitro model assay system was employed to check the 
inhibitory activities of astaxanthin, a tocopherol and other carotenoids by 
measuring the increase in TBA value. The increase of the value in the absence 
of any carotenoids or other compounds was determined as a reference, and the 
carotenoid activities were calculated by comparing with this reference value. 
The EDso of astaxanthin was approx. 80 nM by this calculation, and the relative 
inhibitory activities of the other samples are shown below (ref. 8). 
Astaxanthin >>> astaxanthin diester.. ................................ 
(a) 
Astaxanthin >> a tocopherol.. ....................................... 
(b) 
Astaxanthin > zeaxanthin > /3 carotene ............................... 
(c) 
Astaxanthin > canthaxanthin > p -carotene.. .......................... 
(d) 
(3S, 3's) astaxanthin : (3s. 3' R) -astaxanthin .. (3R, 3' R) astaxanthin.. . (e) 
Zeaxanthin > lutein > tunaxanthin .................................... 
(f) 
From result (a). astaxanthin diester showed no activitv, but, this compound 
can be activated to astaxanthin in the free form by esterase enzymes after 
administration to animals, so that free astaxanthin and astaxanthin diester 
show the same activity when they are used in the diet. I n  the case of 
a tocopherol, the ED5" is approx. 1 ,uM in this system, and this value is about 
one-hundredth of that of astaxanthin from result (b). 
a Tocopherol has been 
used as an antioxidant in lipids, drinks and other foods, and this result 
shows that astaxanthin has the possibility to be used for this purpose instead 
of a tocopherol. Results (c) and (d) showed that carbonyl and hydroxyl 
groups in carotenoids are important for the quenching activities, perhaps 
because of the affinities between carotenoids and free fatty acid (linoleic 
acid) or the hydrophobicities of the solvent used in the model experiments. 
From result (e), the activity is clearly independent of the steric configuration 
of the carotenoid. These results showed that the carotenoids and ' 0 2  come in 
contact directly, and the energy transfer is very rapid. This phenomenon is 
considered to be almost the same as the reaction between &carotene and lo2 in 
photosynthetic plants. Result (f) showed that the number of the conjugated 
double bonds is very important to the activities. This result also indicated 
that the magnitude of the quenching depends on the polyene chain, and the 

Biological functions and activities of animal carotenoids 
143 
effects are shown in equations (g) and (h). 
These equations are the same that 
Foote and Denny (ref.6) described in the case of P-carotene, and the quenching 
effects are suggested to be due to the vibration of the polyene C-C and C-C 
bonds. That is, the energy of the singlet state oxygen is quickly transferred 
to the carotenoid by direct contact, and the carotenoid in the triplet state 
relaxes to the singlet state very quickly by the transformation of the potential 
energy into thermal energy through the C = C  and C - C  vibration of the polyene chain. 
'02 - 'Carotenoid -- 302 3Carotenoid ....... (g) 
3Carotenoid - 'Carotenoid - Thermal energy'. . . . (h) 
Overall, from these results, astaxanthin is the best compound of the 
samples used and a role similar to that of ,8 -carotene or lutein for photoprotection 
of plant chloroplasts from bright sunlight is presumed to exist in marine fish 
and shellfish. On the basis of these structure activity relationships, 
idoxanthin, /3 carotenetetrols, mactraxanthin and astacene also have a 
possible strong protective action against lo2. 
SCAVENGER EFFECTS AGAINST FREE RADICALS 
is Carotene has been revealed to be an efficient scavenger of free radicals, 
notably under low partial pressure of oxygen (ref. 9). 
Terao's group (ref. 10) 
examined the effects of carotenoids o n  peroxyl radical mediated lipid 
peroxidation in model systems, and reported that astaxanthin and canthaxanthin 
showed more efficient scavenging effects against free radicals than did 
P carotene and zeaxanthin and they concluded that carotenoids which possess 
0x0 groups were more efficient than those without 0x0 groups. 
I have also investigated the effects of carotenoids as free radical 
scavengers using the TBA method with ferrous ion of hemeprotein as a free 
radical producer with heat and linoleic acid as an acceptor (ref. 11). 
Astaxanthin, 
,B -carotene, lutein, zeaxanthin, tunaxanthin and canthaxanthin were applied 
in this in vitro model assay system, and the most efficient scavenger was 
found to be astaxanthin, followed by zeaxanthin and canthaxanthin. The EDso 
of astaxanthin was approx. 200 nM, and those of all the carotenoid samples 
used were in the range 200 
1000 nM. 
I n  contrast, the ED5o of a-tocopherol 
was approx. 3 ,uM (Table 1). 
These results showed that the number of carbonyl 
and hydroxyl groups present was very important, and suggested that these 
groups had an affinity for free radicals, linoleic acid or the solvent 
(100 % ethanol, 50 % aqueous ethanol, or 50 % aqueous dimethylsulfoxide) used 
in this experiment. I n  these experimental conditions, idoxanthin, astacene or 
crustaxanthin could also have strong activity like astaxanthin. This 
structure activity relationship is very similar to that for the quenching 
effect against singlet oxygen. Moreover, from these results, the important 
structural feature of carotenoids is again suggested to be the polyene chain. 
Table 1. EDso value of carotenoids and a tocopherol 
as free radical scavengers 
hstaxan th i n 
Zeaxant h in 
Canthaxanth in 
Lutein 
Tunaxant h i n 
/3 -Carotene 
n Tocopherol 
200 
400 
450 
700 
780 
960 
2940 

144 
W. MlKl 
By these two model experiments, astaxanthin has been proved to be an 
efficient free radica1,scavenger. Further experiments to confirm this activity 
with red blood cells and mitochondria from rats (ref.12) are described below. 
1) Free radicals were produced by the action of dialuric acid and ferric 
ion o n  rat red blood cells with heat, and this initiated lipid peroxidation 
in the membrane of the cells through chain reaction. The inhibitory activity 
of astaxanthin on the peroxyl radical -mediated 1 ipid peroxidation were 
investigated in comparison with a control which contained neither carotenoids 
nor other antioxidants. The results are shown in Fig. 1. 
The EDs0 of astaxanthin is approx. 2 pM and this activity is very strong 
compared with that of other commercially available antioxidants. 
2) Free radicals were produced by action of ferrous ion (Mohr’s salt) 
with heat on a homogenate of rat mitochondria, and lipid peroxidation in the 
homogenate was caused by chain reactions. The inhibitory activity of astaxanthin 
on the peroxyl radical- mediated 1 ipid peroxidation was investigated, compared 
with a control which contained neither carotenoids nor other antioxidants. 
The activity of a tocopherol was also measured in the same manner. The 
results are shown in Fig. 2. 
loo 
n I 
a? 
W 8 
a t +  
.I+ 
.t+ 
-+ 
s 
c, 
Y 
Ob 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
0
1
2
3
4
5
 
Astaxanthin( y M) 
Fig. 1. The inhibitory activity of 
astaxanthin against the action of 
free radicals o n  red blood cells 
of rat. 
As taxan t h  i n 
a -Tocopherol 
10-3 
1 
103 
Concentrat ion( y M) 
Fig. 2. The inhibitory activity of astaxanthin 
and a tocopherol against the action of 
free radicals on rat mitochondria. 
The ED5,, of astaxanthin was approx. 40 nM, whereas that of a tocopherol 
was approx. 10 pM. 
Astaxanthin thus showed activity more than 100 times 
greater than a -tocopherol in this experiment. No other compound showed such 
a strong activity. 
This result suggested that the affinity between the 
scavenger and the membrane of the mitochondria was very important for the 
activity, and this affinity was assumed to be based upon both hydrophobic 
binding and hydrogen bonding. I n  the case of astaxanthin, the polyene chain 
and the 3 hydroxy, 4 keto substituents of the cyclohexene ring, respectively, 
w i l l  play these roles. 
SCAVENGER EFFECTS AGAINST HYDROXY RADICALS 
Active oxygen species are classified into two types; 1) those with long 
lives and less strong effects. 2) those of short lives and strong effects. 
I n  the first case, the scavengers are usually high molecular mass compounds, 
i.e. proteins and enzymes, and the time scale for scavenging is very long. 

Biological functions and activities of animal carotenoids 
145 
The type 1 active oxygen species are superoxide, hydrogen peroxide and others. 
I n  the second case, which includes singlet oxygen and free radicals, the 
quenchers and scavengers are almost all low molecular mass substances, and 
our group (ref.12) examined the activity of astaxanthin against hydroxy 
radicals(e0H) which are classified in group 2 )  and are very important active 
oxygen species. I will review the scavenging effect of astaxanthin in experiments 
with rat red blood cells. 
Male rats, six to seven weeks old, were divided into three groups: 
OCiven regular diet. 
@Given a vitamin E 
deficient diet supplemented with 1 mg/ 100 g astaxanthin. The rats in the three 
groups were reared for four weeks. The ghosts of the red blood cells were 
obtained by the method of Dodge et al. (ref. 131, and the hydroxy radical mediated 
1 ipid peroxidat ions were produced by superoxide (xanthine and xanthine oxidase) 
and ferric ion. Malondialdehyde produced through this procedure in each group 
was measured by the TBA method. The results are shown in Fig. 3. 
@Given a vitamin E deficient diet. 
4 
0 
- 
0 .-vitamin 
E 
*-vitamin E, 
0 control 
- 
0 
__ 
0 
100 
200 
tastaxanth i n 
Reaction time(min) 
Fig. 3. 
The inhibitory activity of astaxanthin and 
a tocopherol against the action of hydroxy 
radicals on ghosts of rat red blood cells. 
. 
As shown in Fig. 3, the ghosts of the cells obtained from the rats fed the 
control diet suffered almost n o  lipid peroxidation, whereas those from the rat 
fed a vitamin E deficient diet apparently produced a high concentration of 
malondialdehyde. I n  the case of those from the rats fed vitamin E--deficient 
diet supplemented with astaxanthin, the production of malondialdehyde was clearly 
depressed. These results indicate that astaxanthin plays a role as an inhibitor 
against lipid peroxidation, not only in in vitro model systems but also in vivo, 
and it is supposed that in this case the reaction targets that are protected 
are phospholipids in the membrane. 
CONCLUSION 
Astaxanthin is revealed to be either a quencher or a scavenger of active 
oxygen species in these studies, and the kind of the activity is very similar to 
that of vitamin E. 
Generally speaking, carotenoids showed strong activities, 
and astaxanthin was the strongest of the carotenoids examined. This suggests 
a role for astaxanthin as a ”SUPER VITAMIN E”. 
Acknowledgements I am indebted to Prof. K. Utsumi and the members of his 
laboratory in Kochi Medical School for their enjoyable collaboration. I am also 
indebted to Prof. S. Konosu, Kyoritu women’s University, Prof. K. Yamaguchi, The 

146 
W. MlKl 
University of Tokyo, and Prof. T. Matsuno, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University for 
their valuable direction over a long period. I also wish to thank Drs K. Nornoto, 
H. Komura, H. Minakata and Y. Kamatani, Suntory Institute for Biwrganic Research, 
and Dr. G. Britton, The University of Liverpool, for critical discussions. 
REFERENCES 
1. Y. Ushi jima, Proteins, Nucleic acids and Enzymes, 33 , 2987 (1988). 
2. B. 1. Davies and B. H. Davies, Biochem. Soc. Trans., 14 , 952 (1986). 
3. M. Katsuyama and T. Matsuno, Comp. Biochem. Physiol., 90B , 189 (1989). 
4. J. A. Olson, J. Nutr., 119 , 105 (1989). 
5. W. Miki, K. Yamaguchi and S. Konosu, Comp. Biochem. Physiol.. 71B , 7 (1982). 
6. C. S. Foote and R. W. Denny, J. Amer. Chem. SOC., 90 , 6233 (1968). 
7. J. A. Buege and A. T. D. Aust, Meth. Enzymol., 52 , 302 (1978). 
8. 
W. Miki, unpublished data. 
0. G. 
W. Burton and K. U. Ingold, Science, 224 , 569 (1984). 
10. J. Terao, A. Nagano, J. H. Song and D. K. Park, Abstr. 9th Int. Symp 
11. W. Miki, unpublished data. 
12. M. Kurashige, Y. Okazoe, E. Okimasu, Y. Ando, M. Mori, W. Miki, M. Inoue and 
13. J. T. Dodge, C. Mitchell and D. J. Hanaham, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 100, 
Carotenoids, p. 153 (1990). 
K. Utsumi, Cyto protection w, 7 , 383 (1989). 
1 1 9  ( 1 9 6 3 ) .  
