366
NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESIS
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
Discovery of New Multi Component Reactions with Combinatorial Methods
Lutz Weber*, Katrin Illgen, Michael Almstetter
aMorphochem AG, Am Klopferspitz 19, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany
Received 8 February 1999
Abstract: The discovery of novel chemical reactions or reaction se-
quences that are able to generate useful chemical products may be
regarded as the heart of organic chemistry. We present here con-
cepts and methods on how to find and explore new multi component
reactions, especially with automated combinatorial methods. This
"combinatorial reaction finding" provides also a powerful tool to
the understanding of the rules of organic chemistry, especially
structure-reactivity relationships.
Keywords: multi component reaction, combinatorial chemistry,
synthetic strategy, reaction design
1
Introduction
Organic chemistry is the science of the rules of how chem-
ical entities react with each other to form new molecules.
The importance of a specific reaction may be judged on its
ability to deliver interesting products with high yield,
chemo-, regio-, stereo- or enantioselectivity. Further re-
quirements may include generality over a wide range of
starting materials as well as productivity aiming at more
diverse and complex products using a rather low number
and complexity of starting materials. An “ideal” organic
reaction would fulfil at least one of these criteria.2
Most organic reactions in the textbooks of organic chem-
istry are reactions of either single or two starting materi-
als. Reactions that use more than two different starting
materials are called multi component reactions (MCRs).
In the light of chemical productivity and generation of
molecular diversity an “ideal” MCR should not only com-
prise more than two starting materials but also these start-
ing materials would be different and all or most of the
atoms of those starting materials would be incorporated
into the final product.
Thus, with respect to their productivity, yield, conver-
gence and facile execution such MCRs occupy an out-
standing position among all other reactions – making
them especially interesting for the concept of combinato-
rial chemistry.3 Therefore, the discovery and development
of novel MCRs is receiving a growing interest from indus-
trial chemistry research groups. However, we believe that
the goal to discover and design novel and useful MCRs
unravels also a new challenge for organic chemists and
the basic understanding of organic chemistry itself.
In this review we would like to present a conceptual over-
view on methods that are aiming at the discovery and de-
sign of novel MCRs. This overview is neither
comprehensive nor exhaustive – it is rather intended to ig-
nite the interest of organic chemists for the concept of
multi component reactions and to introduce the emerging
field of “rational” or systematic reaction finding.
2
The Logic of Multi Component Reactions
2.1
Defining MCRs
For our goal to discover new MCRs it is necessary to un-
derstand the specific characteristics and logic of these re-
actions. Ugi, the most productive protagonist and inventor
of MCRs, distinguishes 3 idealised types of MCRs con-
sidering the reversibility of reactions leading to interme-
diary products P1, P2… and the final product PN:
While reaction yields of type I MCRs depend on the posi-
tion of the reaction equilibria, types II and III may give
yields of up to 100% and are thus especially interesting.
However, as we will show later, type I MCRs can be con-
verted virtually into type II if the product can be with-
drawn from the equilibrium.
True multi component reactions should be distinguished
from the so-called tandem, cascade, domino or zipper
reactions4-6 where one starting material bears with several
functionalities that react in several consecutive steps, e.g.:
A + B D P1 g P2 g ... g PN.  These   one-pot,   multi
step  synthesis  procedures  rely  on a high conversion of
A + B D P1 that will allow to add a third reactant C, even-
tually under different reaction conditions whereas “pure”
MCRs are run under the same conditions by adding the
starting materials at the same time. However, MCRs may
well include reaction mechanisms that could be described
with the terms domino, tandem or zipper if e.g. some of
the starting materials contain multiple functional groups
that are involved in the reaction sequence.
Ugi has also developed the concept of unifying multi
component reactions in order to obtain new MCRs.7 Thus,
the Ugi four component reaction may be viewed as the
combination of a type I Mannich three component reac-
tion (3CR) using amine A, aldehyde or ketone B and an
acid C with the Passerini type II 3CR that uses aldehyde
or ketone B, carboxylic acid C and isonitrile D:
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESISDiscovery of New Multi Component Reactions with Combinatorial Methods
367
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
Since the Passerini reaction is of type II, one has to expect
Passerini type products P4 as side products (e.g. apparent
when using dichloromethane as solvent) of the Ugi 4CR
while the Mannich product P2 will be withdrawn through
the equilibrium. Unions of MCRs may be viewed as logi-
cal nets with – ideally – one or more outputs. Scheme 1
gives a simplified view on such a Ugi 4CR net based on
the Mannich and Passerini reactions and neglecting other
possible reactions.
Scheme 1
2.2
The Rational Design of New MCRs
Using the above logic and otherwise known reactions one
can start to design novel MCRs. Thus, ideally in a type II
reaction sequence it would be favourable if starting mate-
rial C would react only with P1 but not with A or B or, al-
ternatively, a reaction C with A or B should be reversible.
A nice example for this rational design strategy is the 3CR
of aromatic amines with aldehydes and the subsequent
aza-Diels-Alder  cycloaddition  of  the  resulting   azo-me-
thine with electron rich dienophiles (Scheme 2) giving tet-
rahydroquinolines under mild conditions.
Scheme 2
Both parts of this 3CR, the formation of azomethines from
aldehydes and amines and the hetero cycloaddition of
azomethines and dienophiles, were known as individual
reactions beforehand. The idea to carry out these two re-
actions in one step as a 3CR however required the recog-
nition that the dienophile does not react either with the
amine nor the aldehyde but only with their azomethine
product under the given reaction conditions.8
Biographical Sketches
Katrin Illgen was born in Zwickau, Germany in 1970.
After studying chemistry at the University of Leipzig she
obtained her Dr. rer. nat. under the supervision of Prof. B.
Schulze in 1996. She moved then to Hoffmann-La Roche
AG, Basel as a post-doctoral fellow until 1998 and joined
then Morphochem AG in Munich in 1998.
Katrin Illgen, Michael Almstetter and Lutz Weber
(from left to right)
Michael Almstetter was born in 1967 in Ingolstadt, Ger-
many. He studied chemistry at the Technical University
of Munich and is now completing his doctoral thesis work
under the supervision of Prof. I. Ugi.
Lutz Weber was born in Halle/Saale, Germany in 1958.
He studied chemistry at the Technical University of
Budapest, Hungary. After completing his Dr. rer. nat. un-
der supervision of Prof. Muhlstadt at the University of
Leipzig in 1986 he worked on artificial enzyme model-
systems that led to Habilitation in 1992. From 1991 until
1998 he joined the Preclinical Research Division of Hoff-
mann-La Roche AG, Basel Switzerland, lately as Vice
Director, responsible for pharmaceutical projects and
combinatorial chemistry.
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

368
L. Weber et al.
NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESIS
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
Following these ideas, the currently known MCR with the
most starting materials, the seven component reaction
published by Dömling and Ugi, was constructed as a com-
bination of a Asinger 4CR and a Ugi 5CR (Scheme 3).
Scheme 3
While the Asinger reaction yields cyclic azomethines, the
Ugi reaction is known to proceed especially well when us-
ing pre-condensed azomethines with isonitriles and carb-
oxylic acids.9,10 Considering the synthetic breadth of this
7CR only 3 components are highly variable. However, the
field of isonitrile based MCRs has been and is still the
source of many elegant novel synthetic routes to all kinds
of molecules (see reviews given by Ugi11 and Torroba12)
and is based on the unique properties of the exothermic CII
to CIV conversion of isonitriles.
In an intriguing example of a “designer” MCR reaction
Kelly13 elaborated a synthesis of highly substituted py-
ridines. Merging the concepts of the Knoevenagel route to
pyridines and enolate technologies, starting materials for
a highly complex natural product, rubrolone, were pre-
pared (Scheme 4) in a one-pot reaction.
Scheme 4
Using the existing knowledge about reactions with lower
dimensions one can construct MCRs of higher dimen-
sions. In general terms, the construction principle for “ide-
al” MCRs can be described therefore as follows:
Find a reaction that yields a product that may react with
an other starting material that does not react irreversibly
with the starting materials of the previous reaction.
By repeating this construction sequence one may obtain in
principle reactions with almost any number of starting
materials.
It is certainly possible and represents a unique challenge
to the creativity of organic chemists to design novel
MCRs by using their trained knowledge about known re-
actions. We would like to describe here methods that may
help chemists to meet this challenge of playing “chess”
with organic reactions.
3
Computational Methods
The above outlined MCR construction guidelines can be
in principle automated by using suitable computational re-
action database searching techniques. The first step in
such an implementation is to derive from the pool of avail-
able reaction data “reaction prototypes” that describe both
the reacting centres (atoms) as well as those neighbour at-
oms that have a marked influence on the reactivity of the
reacting centres. E.g. an azomethine formation using a
primary amine and an aldehyde can be described as fol-
lows in the Daylight SMIRKS15-notation: 
[C,c,#1:60][C:1](=[O:2])[C,c,#1:61].[C,c,#1:62][N:3]([#
1:11])[#1:12]>>[C,c,#1:60][C:1](=[N:3][C,c,#1:62])[C,c
,#1:61].[O:2]([#1:11])[#1:12] 
In the second step, the right part (the reaction product
[C,c,#1:60][C:1](=[N:3][C,c,#1:62])[C,c,#1:61]) of this
first equation may be used as a starting material in a reac-
tion substructure search over a reaction database. An
eventually found reaction should comprise an additional
starting material that is than checked whether it undergoes
also an irreversible reaction with one of the first starting
materials. If not, we may have found a candidate for a new
MCR. This method may be viewed as a combinatorial
search to find MCRs through our knowledge of chemical
reactions – a task that is best accomplished by a computer.
For the described strategy and using a program based on
the Daylight reaction toolkit program suite15 such a newly
proposed reaction is given in Scheme 5. This recently re-
ported hetero Diels-Alder reaction16 is catalysed by Lewis
acids and may work also when performed as a 3CR.
Scheme 5
Similarly, the reaction of alkenyl boronic acids with
azomethines can be found. The corresponding 3CR was
indeed recently used by Petasis17 for an enantioselective
synthesis of a-amino acids starting from amines, a-keto
acids and alkenyl boronic acids.
In a different implementation, one may enter a set of start-
ing materials into the program that has a list of known
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESISDiscovery of New Multi Component Reactions with Combinatorial Methods
369
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
“prototypic” reactions as a knowledge base. The program
than constructs all possible products by applying the pro-
totypes in iterative cycles. Sometimes the results are sur-
prising or unexpected as shown in Scheme 6 for a novel
synthesis of a piperazinone. The validity of such proposed
reactions however has to be verified by the experiment.
Scheme 6
The outcome and use of this approach depends on how
many and how exact the underlying reaction prototypes
are. The conversion of the abundant knowledge on reac-
tion data into such more abstract prototype reactions re-
quires immense work and can only poorly be automated.
4
Serendipity
Most of the known older multi component reactions have
been found by serendipity rather than by rational plan-
ning. It is interesting to note that many of them are con-
structed from only a few “prototypic” reactions that
include amines and carbonyl functions of different reac-
tivities like aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters
and amides – the main repertoire of chemists of those
days.
With the emerging automation of synthesis, purification
and analysis in the area of combinatorial chemistry we are
entering into a new phase of our synthetic capabilities.
New techniques like coupling liquid chromatography,
mass spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance (LC-
MS-NMR) allow to perform the fast and exhaustive inves-
tigation of rather crude reaction products that may lead to
new insights into "old" reaction mechanisms.
We have recently investigated the reaction of aromatic
amines, aromatic aldehydes and isonitriles with LC-MS-
NMR.18 The reaction of 4-nitro-benzaldehyde, 4-amino-
benzonitrile and benzylisonitrile in methanol gives a rath-
er complex mixture of products as revealed by LC (Figure
1) with a acetonitrile/D2O gradient with 0.04% trifluoro-
acetic acid as the eluent.
Through the parallel use of NMR and MS, 6 out of those
products could be identified in the reaction mixture
(Scheme 7) in a rather facile way. A typical stopped-flow
NMR is shown for the unstable intermediate 1 in Figure 2.
The expected main product in this reaction is 4, molecules
1 and 2 are known intermediates whereas 5 represents a
side product that was already observed by McFarland
when using secondary amines in the Ugi 4CR.19
Molecules 3 and 6 however have not been observed so far,
but can be explained from the postulated imino-ether in-
termediate of a Ugi 4CR (Scheme 8). Most probably, the
imino-ether is cleaved by nucleophilic attack of traces of
water to yield 3 (Scheme 8) resulting in a novel "Streck-
er"-type reaction sequence where the isonitrile provides
only one carbon atom.
Scheme 8
Obviously, by using other nucleophiles than water or
amines one can try to extend the scope of this novel 3CR
reaction. Also, the reaction may provide an alternative to
the use of the cleavable cyclohexenylisonitrile that has
been introduced by Armstrong.20 Attempts are currently
under way in our laboratory to optimise both the yield and
applicability of this reaction.
The parallel synthesis of large libraries of pure single
compounds has been established in many pharmaceutical
and agrochemical companies over the last years. Many
otherwise "known" reactions have been investigated and
used with a so far unmet wide range of starting materials,
providing both insights into the breadth of these reactions
as well as tales of the unexpected. Thus, by using amino-
pyridines as the amine component in the Ugi 4CR the fac-
ile formation of imidazo-pyridines was observed by
chance (Scheme 9):
Scheme 7
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

370
L. Weber et al.
NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESIS
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
Acetic acid, the fourth component of the Ugi 4CR, is re-
quired as a catalyst. This novel reaction was discovered
and published almost at the same time by three industrial
research groups!
The in-depth evaluation of this new finding resulted in the
extension of the 4+1 insertion reaction of isonitriles for a
broad variety of aldehydes and five- and six-membered
amines that contain an imino-amine substructure.21-25
5
Automated Combinatorial Reaction Finding
The availability of high performance and fast analytical
tools together with novel computational techniques that
analyse and abstract the large volume of raw data has an
impact on the way of how we deal with reaction data.
Thus, an alternative way to find new MCR reactions was
Figure 2  Stopped-flow HPCL-NMR of a Ugi 4CR reaction mixture – compound 1 in acetonitrile/D2O and 0.04% TFA
Figure 1  HPCL trace of a Ugi 4CR reaction mixture in acetonitrile/D2O and 0.04% TFA
Scheme 9
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESISDiscovery of New Multi Component Reactions with Combinatorial Methods
371
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
introduced by us through the concept of combinatorial re-
action finding.25 Ten different starting materials were se-
lected for this experiment as shown in Scheme 10. All
possible multi component reactions were carried out by
the combinatorial variation of two up to ten starting mate-
rials (2CR to 10CR) in parallel in methanol at room tem-
perature and using a robotic dispensing system.
Scheme 10
Overall there are 2n – n – 1 = 1013 possibilities for two-,
three-, four- up to the one ten-component mixture. With
the aid of automated liquid chromatography and data eval-
uation one can now search for products that are unique to
a specific mixture by comparing the retention times with
the starting materials and over all other mixtures that con-
tain the sub-combinations.
Using a minimal peak height requirement of 30% (com-
pared to the sum of all peaks in the respective LC chro-
matogram) for this novel and unknown reaction product,
a new MCR was found. In the reaction of cyclohexanone,
benzylisonitrile, 4-methoxy-phenylhydrazine and cataly-
sed by acetic acid a dihydro-cinnoline was formed
(Scheme 11).
Scheme 11
This reaction appears to be similar to the above imidazo-
pyridine formation (Scheme 9) probably via a 5+1 inser-
tion reaction of the isonitrile into the corresponding hy-
drazone (Scheme 12). This reaction mechanism is likely
since only electron rich aromatic hydrazines yield this
product. The Ugi 4CR reaction with phenylhydrazine has
been reported to give the expected Ugi-type 4CR product.
Scheme 12
The same procedure and principles may also be used with
conventional combinatorial libraries made by parallel
synthesis and their analysis by mass spectroscopy.
Contrary to the above example, in combinatorial libraries
the same reaction is repeatedly applied in an exhaustive
manner with starting materials of the same chemical type
but different substitution patterns. Constructing all ex-
pected products and their molecular weights in the com-
puter and the subsequent analysis of all combinatorial
products by mass spectroscopy gives us a complete pic-
ture on the substituent dependency of the respective reac-
tion.
We have used the Daylight reaction toolkit and a list of
prototypic reactions (see Section 3) to construct “struc-
ture-reactivity” relationships.
In a first example, the well-known Doebner-type synthe-
sis of quinoline from anilines, various aldehydes and
pyruvic acid derivatives were used, a three component re-
action carried out in ethanol at room temperature.26
Surprisingly, the reaction yielded not only the expected
substituted quinoline-4-carboxylic acids 7 but also 3-aryl-
amino-dihydro-pyrrol-2-ones 8 (Scheme 13) - 4 compo-
nent product.
Scheme 13
After inspection of the literature one can find a few exam-
ples of the reaction of special anilines, aldehydes and 2-
keto carboxylic acids that yield 3-arylamino-dihydro-pyr-
rol-2-ones.27-30
However, this picture is still far from being complete. A
full combinatorial library comprising anilines with elec-
tron withdrawing and donating groups, aromatic and ali-
phatic aldehydes as well as various pyruvic acid
derivatives gave further products with different struc-
tures! Most of these products precipitated from the reac-
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

372
L. Weber et al.
NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESIS
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
tion mixtures with high purity – an example of how MCR
reactions may have different “outputs” due to the with-
drawal of products from the reaction equilibrium network
by a physical effect like insolubility.
A small matrix of 4*4*4 starting materials (anilines, alde-
hydes and pyruvic acid derivatives) illustrates this behav-
ior – examining the four reaction products on diagonal
throughout this 3-dimensional combinatorial reaction
cube gave rise to four different reaction products (Scheme
14).
Scheme 14
The formation of these products depends on defined prop-
erty combinations of the respective starting materials.
Electron donating substituents R1 favor the formation of
7, while electron withdrawing substituents R1 and R2 the
formation of 9, electron withdrawing R1 and electron do-
nating R2 8 and so forth (Scheme 13 and 14).
In another example, we synthesized a library of 16'896
products in 384 well plates using the Ugi 3CR shown in
Scheme 7. To our current knowledge, about 12 different
reaction types may occur when using various structurally
different amines, aldehydes and isonitriles under the used
reaction conditions (methanol as solvent at room temper-
ature). High throughput automated mass spectroscopy of
the crude reaction mixtures together with our Daylight
based evaluation of the corresponding mass data was used
to establish large structure-reactivity relationships for all
16'896 reaction products. For example, Figure 3 shows
such a MS analysis of a representative 384-well plate. The
association of three product types out of the known 12 is
given by panels A, B and C whereby 4-amino-benzami-
dine dihydrochloride as the amine component throughout
the whole plate, 16 different isonitriles and 24 aldehydes
are distributed in the horizontal and vertical direction,  re-
spectively. Green points in Panel A correspond to wells
with a found and desired product of type 4 as revealed by
its high intensity mass peak in the ion spray spectrum.
Panel B corresponds to the azomethine type 2, whereas
panel C shows the occurrence the aminal formed from the
respective aldehyde and 2 equivalents of the 4-amino-
benzamidine.
As the side products 2 and the aminal occur preferentially
in the columns of the 384 well plate, their formation de-
pends mostly on the nature of the respective isonitriles.
Evaluating the mass spectra of all reaction products
against all known reactions and starting materials also
opens the opportunity to search for remaining and system-
atically occurring molecular masses that can not be asso-
ciated with an expected product. Such products may have
been formed by a novel, yet unknown MCR reaction.
6
Optimisation of Multi Component Reactions 
Multi component reactions are networks of various reac-
tions with individual mechanisms that for the most part
also require different reactions conditions. However, it is
not very likely that the actual experimental MCR condi-
tions will suit these reaction mechanisms. Thus, finding
the right reaction conditions for a novel MCR as e.g. sol-
vent, concentration, reaction time is likely to be more dif-
ficult than for conventional reactions and probably
represents a compromise. Recently we have introduced
the application of genetic algorithms to solve complex
multi dimensional problems in MCR chemistry.31
Based on automated parallel synthesis that assures exact-
ness and consciousness of the preparative execution and
high-throughput LC we have now performed a genetic al-
gorithm (GA) driven optimization of MCR reaction con-
ditions (Figure 4).32
The automated optimization cycle starts with the exami-
nation of the crude reaction mixture via LC-MS (or LC-
MS-NMR) whereby the target peak of the desired MCR-
product is specified. The first generation of experiments
with different reaction conditions is created randomly
based on a given set of the possible parameter space. By
this means a population of a number of N experiments is
generated containing the same starting components but
different reaction conditions. A control and set-up unit ad-
justs the amount of reagents assuring the comparability of
the LC-spectra and coordinates the automated execution
of the experiments. After a fixed reaction time the result-
ing mixtures are analyzed. The obtained results - i.e. the
yield of the desired reaction product - are evaluated and
the GA sorts the experimental parameter sets, the parent
genomes, for their fitness. After mating and mutating the
the best parent sets a new set of experiments, the children
population, is generated. This iterative feedback cycle is
stopped when a set of reaction parameters is found under
which the desired MCR-product is formed with sufficient
selectivity and yield.
The method was tested with the well-known Ugi 4CR.
The starting materials were made available in eight differ-
ent solvents, depending on their solubility. Only consider-
ing solvent mixtures, 84 = 4096 combinations are possible.
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESISDiscovery of New Multi Component Reactions with Combinatorial Methods
373
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
The time for the addition of a third and a fourth compo-
nent  was varied from 0 to eight hours, which allows the
investigation of whether the respective MCR is a "real"
MCR or a domino-type reaction. Combining, thus, all
possible ways of performing the synthesis, we got over
1’572’864 combinations. The experiment was then per-
formed with 16 parallel experiments (N = 16) in each cy-
cle as shown in Figure 5. Already after 13 feedback cycles
of synthesis and screening the yields of the desired 4CR
product was increased from 13% to nearly 78%.
The best best parameter set of reaction conditions found
by the GA for the Ugi 4CR were started with the amine
and aldehyde diluted in CH2Cl2 and adding the isonitrile
and the acid both in methanol after two hours. Thus, only
13*16 = 208 experiments out of the pool of 1’572’864
were needed to select a good yielding and selective meth-
od to perform the respective MCR.
Figure 4  Optimisation of reaction parameters with a genetic algorithm, based on the desired product yield.
panel A                           panel B                           panel C
Figure 3  MS analysis of a Ugi 3CR combinatorial library in a 384 well plate. Panel A corresponds to found products of type 4,
                 B to 2 and C to an aminal.
Figure 5  The evolution of product yield during the course of the
genetic algorithm based optimisation.
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.

374
L. Weber et al.
NEW TOOLS IN SYNTHESIS
Synlett 1999, No. 3, 366–374
ISSN 0936-5214
© Thieme Stuttgart · New York
References
  (1) This article is based on a lecture held at the XVth EFMC In-
ternational Symposium, "Discovery of New Multi Component 
Reactions by Combinatorial Approaches", Edinburgh (U.K), 
6-10 September 1998.
  (2) Wender, P.A.; Handy, S.T.; Wright, D.L. Chem. & Ind. 1997, 
765.
  (3) Bienaymé, H.; Hulme, C.; Oddon, G. Chemistry, in press.
  (4) Tietze, L.F. Chem. Rev. 1996, 96, 115.
  (5) Posner, G.H.; Chem. Rev. 1986, 86, 831. 
  (6) Tietze, L.F.; Beifuss, U. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1993, 
32, 131.
  (7) Ugi, I.; Dömling, A.; Hörl, W. Endeavour 1994, 18, 115.
  (8) Grieco, P.A.; Bahsas, A. Tetrahedron Lett. 1988, 29, 5855.
  (9) Dömling, A.; Ugi, I., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1993, 32, 
563.
(10) Ugi, I. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1962, 1, 8.
(11) Ugi, I.; Almstetter, M.; Bock, H.; Dömling, A.; Ebert, B.;
Gruber, B.; Hanusch, C.; Heck, S.; Kehagia-Drikos, K.;
Lorenz, K.; Papathoma, S.; Raditschnig, R.; Schmid, T.;
Werner, B.; Von Zychlinski, A. Croat. Chem. Acta 1998, 71, 
527.
(12) Marcaccini, S.; Torroba, T. Org. Prep. Proced. Int. 1993, 25, 
141.
(13) Kelly, T.R.; Liu, H.-T. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1985, 107, 4998-
4999.
(15) James, C.A.; Weininger, D.; Delaney, J. Daylight Theory Ma-
nual, Daylight Chemical Information Systems, Irvine, 11. 
Feb. 1997
(16) Badorrey, R.; Cativiela, C.; Diaz-de-Villegas, M.; Galvez, 
J.A. Tetrahedron Lett. 1997, 38, 2547.
(17) Petasis, N.A.; Zavialov, I.A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1997, 119, 
445.
(18) Weber, L.; Schlotterbeck, G. “LC-MS and LC-NMR in com-
binatorial chemistry”, Applica 1998, Olten (Switzerland), Fe-
bruary 1998.
(19) McFarland, J. W. J. Org. Chem. 1963, 28, 2179.
(20) Keating, T.A.; Armstrong, R.W. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1995, 117, 
7842.
(21) Groebke, K.; Weber, L.; Mehlin, F. Synlett 1998, 661.
(22) Blackburn, C.; Guan, B., Shiosaki, K., Tsai, S. Tetrahedron 
Lett. 1998, 39, 3635.
(23) Blackburn, C. Tetrahedron Lett. 1998, 39, 5469.
(24) Bienaymé, H.; Bouzid, K. Angew. Chem. 1998, 110, 2349.
(25) Lack, O.; Weber, L. Chimia 1996, 50, 445.
(26) Doebner, O. Berichte 1887, 20, 277.
(27) Dabhi, T. P.; Sahah, V. H.; Parikh, A. R. J. Indian Chem. Soc. 
70, 1993, 597-599. 
(28) Gein, V. L.; Popov, A. V.; Andreichikov, Yu. S. Zh. Obshch. 
Khim. 1992, 62, 2774. 
(29) Andreichikov, Yu. S.; Gein, V. L.; Anikina, I. N. Zh. Org. 
Khim. 1988, 24, 875. 
(30) Andreichikov, Yu. S.; Gein, V. L.; Ivanenko, O. I.; Maslivets, 
A. N. Zh. Org. Khim. 1986, 22, 2208.
(31) Weber, L.; Wallbaum, S.; Gubernator, K.; Broger, C. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1995, 34, 2280.
(32) Almstetter, M. “Optimisation of multicomponent reactions 
with genetic algorithms”, in Proceedings of the German-Po-
lish Workshop on Multicomponent reactions in combinatorial 
chemistry, Rzeszow, 28-30 September 1997, pp. 167-180.
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.
