The Role of von Willebrand Factor and Fibrinogen
in Platelet Aggregation under Varying Shear Stress
Yasuo Ikeda,* Makoto Handa,* Koichi Kawano,* Tetsuji Kamata,* Mitsuru Murata,* Yohko Araki,* Hironobu Anbo,*
Yohko Kawai,* Kiyoaki Watanabe,* Ichiro Itagaki,* Kiyotaka Sakai,' and Zaverio M. Ruggerill
*Blood Center, Departments ofInternal Medicine and Laboratory Medicine, Keio University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; *Toray Industries
Inc., Kanagawa, Japan; Department ofChemical Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan; and IlRoon Research Laboratoryfor
Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis, Department ofMolecular and Experimental Medicine and Committeefor Vascular Biology,
Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation, La Jolla, California 92037
Abstract
Exposure of platelets to shear stress leads to aggregation in the
absence of exogenous agonists. We have now found that differ-
ent adhesive proteins and platelet membrane glycoproteins are
involved in aggregation depending on the shear stress condi-
tions and the concentration of divalent cations in the medium.
When blood is collected with trisodium citrate as anticoagu-
lant, which causes a decrease in the levels of external ionized
calcium (ICa2+I), platelet aggregation can be induced under low
shear force (12 dyn/cm2) and is mediated by fibrinogen binding
to the glycoprotein Hib-Mila complex. Aggregates formed under
these conditions are not stable, and when shear force is in-
creased to 68 dyn/cm2, disaggregation results. By contrast,
platelets from blood collected with hirudin as anticoagulant,
wherein ICa2+10 is within normal plasma levels, do not undergo
low shear-induced aggregation; however, after exposure to a
shear force above 80 dyn/cm2, aggregation is observed but only
when von Willebrand factor is present and can interact with
both its platelet binding sites, glycoprotein Ib-IX and glycopro-
tein Jib-Mia. Fibrinogen is not involved in high shear-induced
aggregation which, in fact, occurs normally in patients with
severe afibrinogenemia. Thus, von Willebrand factor in the ab-
sence of exogenous agonists can mediate platelet aggregation in
experimental conditions that may mimic the hemorheological
situation ofpartially occluded arteries. This pathway of platelet
aggregation involving only one adhesive ligand and two mem-
brane adhesion receptors may play a relevant role in thrombo-
genesis. (J. Clin. Invest. 1991. 87:1234-1240.) Key words: cell
adhesion * thrombus formation * vascular occlusion
Introduction
The formation ofplatelet aggregates (thrombi) at sites ofvascu-
lar injury is a normal response in the course of hemostasis and
leads to the arrest ofbleeding (1, 2). In disease states, however,
Parts of this work were presented at the Annual Meeting ofthe Ameri-
can Society for Clinical Investigation, Washington, D.C., 4-7 May
1990, and have been published in abstract form (1990. Clin. Res.
38:462A).
Address reprint requests to Dr. Zaverio M. Ruggeri, BCR-8, Scripps
Clinic and Research Foundation, 10666 No. Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037.
Received for publication 21 August 1990 and in revised form
29 November 1990.
platelet aggregation may underlie the pathology associated
with vascular occlusion (3-7). During thrombogenesis, circu-
lating platelets become localized on altered vascular surfaces or
exposed tissues (reviewed in 8) and become activated through a
complex series ofbiochemical events (reviewed in 9). Activated
platelets, then, adhere and aggregate to one another forming
the thrombus mass, a process that has an absolute requirement
for the membrane glycoprotein (GP)' Ilb-IlIa complex (re-
viewed in 10). Different experimental models have been used
to investigate the molecular mechanisms of platelet adhesion
and aggregation. Such models, however, reproduce only par-
tially the complex series of events occurring during thrombo-
genesis in the intact organism; consequently, the results ob-
tained may be limited in their significance by the specific set of
conditions prevalent in a particular test system. Nevertheless,
findings obtained with the aggregometer (I 1), a commonly
used device for the study of platelet function based on the re-
sponse to exogenous agonists, have favored the prevalent con-
cept that fibrinogen is the essential adhesive protein mediating
platelet-to-platelet contact ( 12, 13). In the aggregometer, how-
ever, platelet-rich plasma is subjected to shear forces, due to
stirring, that differ considerably from those existing in the cir-
culation, so that the possible role of Theological parameters in
platelet aggregation cannot be properly evaluated.
Blood circulating in vessels is exposed to shear stress caused
by the force necessary to produce flow; the difference in veloc-
ity between layers situated at varying distances from the vessel
wall determines the shear rate, which is directly proportional to
the shear force and inversely proportional to the viscosity of
blood. Studies performed under controlled conditions of high
shear stress, such to mimic the Theological situation existing in
certain districts of the arterial circulation, have suggested that
adhesive ligands distinct from fibrinogen may participate in
platelet aggregation ( 14-18). With a series of key observations,
Moake et al. (14, 17) and Peterson et al. (16) introduced the
concept that von Willebrand factor (vWf) may have a crucial
role in high shear induced aggregation. Indeed, vWfbinding to
the GP Ib-IX complex was shown to be an essential step in the
process, whereas the nature ofthe adhesive protein, or proteins,
engaged in the interaction with GP IIb-IIIa, absolutely required
for aggregation, could not be determined. Fibrinogen and fibro-
nectin, in addition to vWf, were considered obvious candidates
for the role.
In view of these uncertainties, we undertook these studies
to identify the adhesive proteins involved in platelet aggrega-
1. Abbreviatiops used in this paper: [Ca2+]0, concentration of calcium
ions in the extracellular medium; GP, platelet membrane glycoprotein;
vWf, von Willebrand factor.
1234
Ikeda, Handa, Kawano, Kamata, Murata, Araki, Anbo, Kawai, Watanabe, Itagaki, Sakai, and Ruggeri
J. Clin. Invest.
© The American Society for Clinical Investigation, Inc.
0021-9738/91/04/1234/07
$2.00
Volume 87, April 1991, 1234-1240

tion occurring under controlled shear conditions. The results
obtained demonstrate that low shear forces induce formation
of reversible platelet aggregates dependent on fibrinogen inter-
action with GP IIb-I11a; however, this aggregation is detectable
only in the presence of low concentrations of ionized calcium
in the medium ([Ca2+]0). At higher shear forces, more stable
aggregates are formed that require vWf binding to both GP
Ib-IX and GP HIb-Ila, and are independent of fibrinogen; this
aggregation also occurs at physiological levels of [Ca2+]0. No
other adhesive protein appears to be involved in aggregation
induced by high shear stress in the absence ofexogenous stimu-
lation of platelets, under hemodynamic conditions that may
reflect those in stenosed vessels (19, 20). These results
underline the potential importance of vWf in acute arterial
thrombosis.
Methods
Patients and controls. All human subjects who participated in these
studies were aware ofthe experimental nature ofthe research and gave
their informed consent, in accordance with the Declaration of Hel-
sinki. Normal controls were staff members ofKeio University with no
personal or familial history of abnormal bleeding symptoms. The pa-
tients with Glanzmann's thrombasthenia, Bernard-Soulier syndrome,
afibrinogenemia, and severe von Willebrand disease fulfilled all the
accepted criteria for the diagnosis of these disorders. In particular, the
two thrombasthenic patients had no measurable platelet membrane
GP Ilb-IlIa complex; the two patients with Bernard-Soulier syndrome
had no measurable platelet membrane GP Ib; the patient with afibrino-
genemia had < 10 gg/ml of plasma fibrinogen; and the two patients
with severe von Willebrand disease had < 0.1% of normal vWfplasma
levels. All patients and controls denied consuming drugs known to
interfere with platelet function for the week preceding the studies.
Modified viscometerfor measuring shear-induced platelet aggrega-
tion. The cone and plate viscometer used to measure platelet aggrega-
tion induced by varying shear stress was similar to the one described
previously (21). It consisted essentially of a helium-neon laser light
source at 633 nm, a thermostated cone-plate streaming chamber, and a
photocounting unit, the output of which, digitized through an appro-
priate interface, was analyzed and stored in a microcomputer unit.
Shear rate (-t) was calculated according to the formula y = 6N/O, where
N is the rotational speed of the cone and 0 is the cone angle. In the
device used for these studies the cone angle was 10 and the distance
between the cone and the plate was adjusted with an electronic sensor
rather than with the mechanical micrometer screw described before
(21). This allowed for a more precise and reproducible measurement of
the shear forces applied to the samples. Shear stress was calculated
multiplying the shear rate by the viscosity of the fluid, assumed to be
1.2 centipoise for all the platelet-rich plasma samples tested. Platelet
suspensions exhibited an inverse linear relationship between the single
platelet count and the logarithm of transmitted light intensity. This is
expressed by the equation log (Ij11) = -k x 1 x c, where It and I, are the
transmitted and incident light intensity, k is the absorption coefficient,
I is the effective light path length, and c is the single platelet count.
Thus, A log I expresses the extent of platelet aggregation, namely the
decrease in single platelet count, since A log I = log ItlI - log It/I, = k
X l X (Cb- Ca), where I. and Itbare transmitted light intensities, and Ca
and Cb are single platelet counts, after (a) and before (b) application of
shear stress, respectively. Changes in the optical density ofthe platelet
suspension corresponded to the occurrence ofplatelet-to-platelet inter-
actions leading to the formation of aggregates, as shown by electron
microscopic analysis (21).
Measurement ofplatelet aggregation. The anticoagulant used for
blood collection was either trisodium citrate (0.0 I M final concentra-
tion), which acts to decrease the available concentration ofCa2" neces-
sary for several reactions that lead to clotting (2), or hirudin (Seikagaku
Kogyo, Tokyo, Japan), a potent and specific thrombin inhibitor ob-
tained from the saliva ofthe common leech, Hirudo medicinalis. Hiru-
din was used at the final concentration of 200 U/ml (1 U of hirudin
neutralizes the activity of 1 NIH unit of a-thrombin). Hirudin rapidly
and irreversibly blocks the fibrinogen clotting activity ofthrombin (re-
viewed in 22) but has no effect on the concentration of Ca2" or other
divalent cations. Platelet-rich plasma was prepared by centrifugation at
100 g for 15 min at 22-250C; the platelet count was adjusted to 3
x I054dI using homologous platelet-poor plasma, obtained by centrifu-
gation of blood at 3,000 g for 20 min. When studying patients with
Bernard-Soulier syndrome, who have thrombocytopenia, the platelet
count in the control normal platelet-rich plasma was adjusted to the
same values obtained in the thrombocytopenic patients, -1 X 103/1L.
For measuring shear-induced aggregation, 400 gl of platelet-rich
plasma was applied onto the surface of the polymethylmethacrylate
plate and exposed to varying shear stress for 5 min at 370C. Aggrega-
tion was monitored continuously by recording the intensity ofthe light
transmitted through the platelet suspension from the beginning of ap-
plication of the shear forces.
Agonist-induced platelet aggregation was measured in an aggrego-
meter (Chrono-Log Corp., Havertown, PA), as described previously
(23). In this case, aggregation was expressed as percent light transmit-
tance, after adjusting the aggregometer at 0% transmittance with plate-
let-rich plasma and 100% transmittance with platelet-poor plasma.
Monoclonal antibodies. All the monoclonal antibodies used in
these studies were obtained and characterized as described previously.
LJ-Ibl is a murine IgG, obtained by immunization with purified GP
Ib-IX complex (24). This antibody reacts with the amino terminal 45-
kD domain of GP Iba containing the vWf-binding domain (25, 26); it
inhibits completely vWf binding to platelets mediated by ristocetin
(24), but has no effect on the binding to GPIIb-IIIa induced by throm-
bin. LJ-CP8 is a murine IgG1, obtained by immunization with washed
human chymotrypsin-treated platelets; it reacts with the GP Ilb-IIIa
complex (27) and completely blocks the interaction ofvWf, fibrinogen,
fibronectin, and vitronectin with GP Ilb-IIIa. LJ-152B/6 is a murine
IgG, obtained by immunization with a synthetic peptide containing
the Arg-Gly-Asp sequence and flanking residues ofvWf (28). This anti-
body reacts specifically with the GP Ilb-Illa binding site of vWf; has no
cross-reactivity with fibrinogen, fibronectin, or vitronectin, even
though all these molecules contain at least one Arg-Gly-Asp sequence
homologous to that recognized by the antibody in vWf; and selectively
inhibits vWf binding to GP IIb-IIIa (28). All IgG were purified on
protein-A Sepharose (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) as described
(29), then dialyzed against a buffer composed of 20 mM 4-(2-hydroxy-
ethyl)-l-piperazine ethane sulfonic acid (Hepes) and 150mM NaCI, pH
7.4 (Hepes buffer), and stored at -70°C until used.
Results
Aggregation in platelet-rich plasma containing trisodium ci-
trate as anticoagulant was absent in two patients with Glanz-
mann's thrombasthenia, i.e., deficient in GP Ilb-IIla, both at
low (12 dyn/cm2) and high shear (108 dyn/cm2); in contrast, in
two patients with Bernard-Soulier syndrome, i.e., deficient in
GP Ib-IX, aggregation was normal at low but absent at high
shear (Fig.
1). As typically expected in these cases, ADP-in-
duced aggregation was absent in the thrombasthenic patients
but-normal in the Bernard-Soulier patients (not shown). Con-
trasting results were also found in one patient with afibrinogen-
emia, in whom aggregation was absent at low shear but normal
at high shear, and in two patients with a complete deficiency of
vWf, in whom aggregation was normal at low shear but absent
at high shear (Fig. 1). Again, as expected in these cases, ADP-
induced aggregation was absent in the afibrinogenemic patient
but normal in the two with severe von Willebrand disease (not
shown). Note that the extent of aggregation observed at low
Fibrinogen and von Willebrand Factor in Platelet Aggregation
1235

Low Shear
(12 dynelcm2)
a~~
~
~~~
T/rombasthenia
0.5 -2.0
WL~L..Jp
p
I1,,
High Shear
(108 dyne/cm2)
Afibrinogenemia
0.5
2.0
O/
P
FL
N
N
Seeevo
ilern Dies
Severe von Willebrand Disease
0.5
P
20
__p
24I I4
I5I,
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
2.0 r-
0
0
0
c
m
(.0"
E0
CD
(U
Time (minutes)
Figure 1. Shear-induced aggregation in patients with congenital de-
fects of platelet membrane glycoproteins or plasma adhesive proteins.
Platelet-rich plasma, obtained from blood containing 0.01 1 M triso-
dium citrate, was exposed to shear forces of 12 or 108 dyn/cm2 for 5
min at 37°C. Platelet count was adjusted to 3 X 108/ml in all samples,
except for the study of Bernard-Soulier patients, in which the count
in the control plasma was adjusted to the same value (1 X 105 plate-
lets/Ml) obtained in the thrombocytopenic patients. Shear-induced
aggregation was monitored by measuring changes in light transmit-
tance through the platelet suspension, expressed as A log I (see Meth-
ods). Note the different scale used on the ordinate for experiments
performed at the two different values of shear force. Aggregation was
evaluated in two patients with Glanzmann's thrombasthenia (lack
of platelet GP IIb-IlIa), two with Bernard-Soulier syndrome (lack of
platelet GP Ib-IX), one with afibrinogenemia (< 5 jg/ml plasma
fibrinogen concentration), and two with severe (type III) von Wille-
brand disease (vWf concentration < 0.1% of normal). N indicates
control platelet-rich plasma; P, patient platelet-rich plasma. Platelets
from the patients with Bernard-Soulier syndrome and thrombasthenia
had negligible levels ofGP Ib-IX and GP Ilb-IIla complex, respec-
tively, as measured by binding of appropriate monoclonal antibodies.
Diagnosis ofafibrinogenemia and von Willebrand disease was based
on radioimmunological assay of the pertinent plasma protein. Note
that at low shear, aggregation was absent in thrombasthenia and
afibrinogenemia, while at high shear, aggregation was present only in
afibrinogenemia.
shear forces was considerably less than at higher shear forces
(compare the scales for A log I in Fig. 1).
To explore in more detail the effect ofshear forces on plate-
let aggregation, a gradient varying between 6 and 108 dyn/cm2
was applied to citrated platelet-rich plasma over a 5-min pe-
riod. After an initial 15 s at 6 dyn/cm2, the gradient varied
between 6 and 12 dyn/cm2 in 90 s (Fig. 2); this resulted in an
increase in light transmittance, corresponding to the formation
ofplatelet aggregates asjudged by the decrease in single-platelet
1.6
-
1.2 F-
81
68
1
0.8K
0.4k-
12
6
108
(Shear Stress
Gradient
(dyne/cm2)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time (minutes)
Figure 2. Platelet aggregation induced by varying shear stress. Citrated
platelet-rich plasma was exposed to a gradient of 6-108 dyn/cm2
over a 5-min period at 370C. After an initial 15 s at 6 dyn/cm2 (not
shown in the figure), the gradient (indicated by the broken line)
varied between 6 and 12 dyn/cm2 in 90 s, between 12 and 108 dyn/
cm2 in the next 120 s, and a constant 108 dyn/cm2 in the last 90 s.
Aggregation was measured as described in Methods. The value of 68
dyn/cm2 indicates the point of the gradient at which the initial aggre-
gation was completely reversed. The value of 81 dyn/cm2 indicates the
point of the gradient at which a second wave of aggregation initiated.
count, with a peak at 11.5±1.4 dyn/cm2 (mean±SD in 30 nor-
mal samples). In the ensuing 120 s, the gradient varied between
12 and 108 dyn/cm2. This resulted initially in a decrease in
light transmittance (disaggregation), which returned essentially
to the baseline value when the shear gradient reached 68±11.4
dyn/cm2 at 160 s after the initial application of shear stress,
followed by a much more pronounced second increase in light
transmittance that started approximately when the shear gra-
dient reached 81 dyn/cm2 at 176 s (Fig. 2). After the shear force
reached 108 dyn/cm2, it was maintained at that level for 90 s,
during which a variable decrease in light transmittance was
observed. This decrease, presumably reflecting a decrease in
the size of aggregates with increase in single platelet count,
varied considerably in different individual samples, but light
transmittance at the end of 5 min and under high shear stress
was always well above baseline values (Fig. 2).
To confirm the distinct role ofdifferent platelet membrane
glycoproteins and plasma adhesive proteins in aggregation in-
duced by varying shear stress, the effect of specific monoclonal
antibodies was tested at low (12 dyn/cm2) and high shear stress
(108 dyn/cm2), as well as in the shear gradient between 6 and
108 dyn/cm2 described above. The aggregation observed when
low shear stress was applied to citrated platelet-rich plasma was
inhibited only by the anti-GP Ilb-Illa monoclonal antibody
LJ-CP8, which completely blocks the interaction of all adhe-
sive proteins with this site; no inhibition was observed either
with the anti-GP Tb antibody
J-Tb 1, which inhibits vWfbind-
ing to GP Tb, or with the anti-vWf monoclonal antibody LI-
152B/6, which selectively inhibits binding to GP IIb-IIIa by
blocking specifically the function ofthe Arg-Gly-Asp sequence
in vWf (Fig. 3). These results exclude a role for vWf in platelet
aggregation under low shear force. In contrast, the aggregation
1236
Ikeda, Handa, Kawano, Kamata, Murata, Araki, Anbo, Kawai, Watanabe, Itagaki, Sakai, and Ruggeri
Bernard-Soulier Syndrome
0.5
p
2.0
NP
p
Af
I IbrInogneIaII
Co
---
cm
C.)
E
co
cm
O L

Low Shear
High Shear
Shear Gradient
(12 dyne/cm2)
(108 dyne/cm2)
(6108 dyne/cm2)
C.E
02
co
L-
C,
I
/10
LI
I
I
Z
I-
0
2.5
5 0
2.5
5 0
2.5
5
Control
LJ-CP8
100 .g/ml
LJilb1
20 *gIml
LJ-152B16
20mjg/ml
Time (minutes)
Figure 3. Effect of monoclonal antiplatelet and anti-vWf antibodies
on aggregation induced by shear stress. Normal platelet-rich plasma
(3 x 108 platelets/ml), obtained from blood collected in the presence
of trisodium citrate, was incubated for 5 min at 22-250C with the
anti-GP Ilb-Ila antibody LJ-CP8 (100 ug/ml); or the anti-GP lb an-
tibody LJ-Ibl (20 Mg/ml); or the anti-vWf antibody LJ-152B/6 (20
Ag/ml) that inhibits selectively vWf binding to GP Ilb-Ila but not
to GP Ib; or Hepes buffer instead of antibody (control curve). Shear-
induced aggregation was measured at 370C for 5 min either at two
constant values (see Fig. 1) or at varying shear force (see Fig. 2), as
indicated (the broken line in the panels to the right indicates the
change in shear force over time). Note that only the anti-GP Ilb-Illa
antibody inhibited aggregation induced by low shear force, either
applied continuously or in the initial part of the gradient, whereas all
three antibodies inhibited high shear-induced aggregation. The con-
centration used for each antibody was known to give maximal bind-
ing to the corresponding target antigen.
induced by high shear stress was inhibited completely by each
of the three antibodies (Fig. 3), suggesting that under these
conditions vWf-binding to both its platelet receptors, and par-
ticularly binding to GP lb-IIla through the Arg-Oly-Asp se-
quence, is necessary for aggregation to occur. The results ob-
served with the shear gradient were concordant with those ob-
served at constant shear stress values, since the first wave of
aggregation was inhibited only by the nonselective anti-GP Ilb-
IlIa antibody, while the second was inhibited also by the anti-
GP lb antibody and the anti-vWF antibody specifically inhibit-
ing binding to GP Ilb-Illa (Fig. 3).
The experiments reported to this point are compatible with
the hypothesis that the binding of vWf to both GP lb and GP
Ilb-ila is necessary to support aggregation under high shear
forces and in the absence of exogenous agonists. Since the di-
rect binding of soluble vWfto GP lb may be inhibited by Ca2"
ions, as shown previously with asialo vWF (30), shear-induced
aggregation was also tested using platelet-rich plasma contain-
ing hirudin as anticoagulant, and thus at normal blood concen-
trations ofionized calcium. These experiments were performed
to rule out the possibility that the results described here, as well
as those obtained by others (14, 16, 17), might be artifacts
caused by lower than normal divalent cation concentration.
Indeed, the aggregation induced by low shear force in plasma
containing citrate (Fig. 2) was practically absent in plasma con-
taining hirudin as anticoagulant (Fig. 4). In four separate ex-
periments with normal platelet-rich plasma, the corresponding
values of A log I (±SD) were 0.5±0.1 in the presence of citrate
and 0.1±0.05 in its absence. In contrast, the aggregation in-
duced by high shear force was still prominent in the plasma
containing hirudin although reduced in extent as compared
with that seen in plasma containing citrate (compare Figs. 2
and 4); the corresponding A log I values were 0.8±0.3 and
1.5±0.4, respectively. Nevertheless, the inhibitory effect of the
anti-GP lb and anti-GP Ilb-Illa antibodies was identical under
the two different experimental conditions (compare Figs. 3 and
4). Results of parallel experiments with the same plasma sam-
ple confirmed that the anti-GP lb-Illa antibody completely
1.0
108
Shear Stress,
o
0.5
(dyne/cm2)
Control
cat ,'~1/
Anti*GPIlb-ila
Afti-GPIM-ab
*1-
6.
.
*
pl
E
100
.
Anti-GPMb
ADP
Control
.-R501-
nw_
Anti-GPllb-111a
0
2
4
6
Time (minutes)
Figure 4. Effect of monoclonal anti-OP lb and anti-OP Ilb-Illa anti-
bodies on platelet aggregation induced by shear stress or ADP in the
presence of physiologic [Ca2+J0. Normal platelet-rich plasma (3 X 108
platelets/ml), obtained from blood containing hirudin (200 U/ml),
was incubated for 5 min at 22-250C with the anti-OP Ilb-Illa anti-
body LJ-CP8 (100 Ag/ml), or the anti-OP lb antibody LJ-Ib I (20 jug/
ml), or Hepes buffer instead of antibody (control). The mixtures
were then exposed to varying shear stress (top panel; the broken line
indicates the change in shear force over time) or stimulated with 10
MM ADP in the aggregometer (bottom panel), at 370C in either case.
Note the absence ofsignificant aggregation at low shear as compared
to that seen with citrated plasma (see Figs. 2 and 3); note also that
both antibodies blocked aggregation induced by high shear force, but
that only the anti-GP Ilb-Illa antibody blocked ADP-induced aggre-
gation. Aggregation was measured as A log I, top panel, or percent
light transmittance, bottom panel (see Methods).
Fibrinogen and von Willebrand Factor in Platelet Aggregation
1237

inhibited ADP-induced aggregation as measured in the aggre-
gometer, while the anti-GP lb antibody had no inhibitory effect
(Fig. 4). Aggregation induced by high shear stress in the pres-
ence of physiologic ionized calcium concentrations was com-
pletely inhibited by the anti-vWf antibody that selectively
blocks binding to GP lIb-IlIa but not to GP Ib, while the same
antibody had no effect on ADP-induced aggregation measured
in the aggregometer (Fig. 5). Because these experiments were
performed using normal plasma containing all the circulating
adhesive proteins and normal concentrations of divalent cat-
ions, the results indicate that vWf is the only adhesive protein
in plasma necessary to support aggregation induced by high
shear force, a function requiring interaction with both GP Ilb-
IIIa, through the Arg-Gly-Asp sequence, and GP Ib-IX,
through the specific binding site for this receptor.
Discussion
Our results characterize the distinct adhesive proteins and
membrane receptors involved in platelet aggregation occurring
under varying shear stress. In the absence of exogenous ago-
nists, aggregation in platelet-rich plasma with low ionized cal-
cium levels (containing 11 mM trisodium citrate) exhibits two
distinct phases: one, of relatively small amplitude, with a peak
occurring at
12 dyn/cm2; the other, two- to fourfold greater
in magnitude, occurring maximally at above 81 dyn/cm2. The
molecular mechanisms mediating platelet-to-platelet contact
under varying shear stress are different; fibrinogen interaction
with GP Ilb-Illa appears necessary at low shear, while vWf
interaction with both GP Ib-IX and GP lIb-Illa, but indepen-
dent offibrinogen, is required at high shear. When platelet-rich
plasma contains normal levels of divalent cations, aggregation
is negligible at low shear values but conspicuous above 81 dyn/
cm2, even though its maximal extent is one-fourth to one-third
of that seen in citrated plasma. Under these conditions, plate-
let-to-platelet contact can only be maintained by vWf binding
to both GP lb and GP lIb-IIIa, as shown concordantly by the
results obtained in patients with selective congenital deficien-
cies of platelet membrane glycoproteins or plasma adhesive
proteins, and with the use of specific monoclonal antibodies
directed at GP Ib, GP Ilb-Illa, or vWf.
The aggregation induced by low shear stress (12 dyn/cm2)
in platelet suspensions with decreased [Ca2+]0 may not corre-
spond to conditions of pathophysiologic relevance, since it is
negligible or absent when divalent cation concentration is
within the normal range. This may explain why stable platelet
aggregates do not form in the normal circulation, where the
time-average range of shear stress in arterial vessels is in the
order of 15 dyn/cm2 (17). Regardless of the physiologic rele-
vance, aggregation induced by low shear stress involves the
same platelet binding site (GP lIb-IlIa) and plasma adhesive
protein (fibrinogen) supporting aggregation induced by exoge-
nous agonists. Since GP IIb-IIIa acquires binding capacity for
soluble ligands only after platelet activation (9, 10), it appears
that exposure to shear force mimics the action of exogenous
agonists. Interaction ofplatelets with the surfaces ofthe appara-
tus and/or active release or leakage of granular components
have been ruled out in previous studies (31, 32), particularly
with shear forces below 30 dyn/cm2 (17, 32). The possible role
ofthromboxane A2, however, has been suggested by the obser-
vation that a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor can block fi-
brinogen-dependent shear-induced aggregation (32). Indeed,
activation ofthe arachidonate pathway occurs in human plate-
lets brought in close proximity in media with low [Ca2+]0 (33),
and this could explain why aggregation induced by low shear
stress was negligible in plasma with normal divalent cation
concentration. The exact mechanisms by which thromboxane
A2 synthesis may be stimulated by shear stress, however, re-
main unknown at present. Another possibility is that shear
stress affects the conformation and function of GP IIb-IIIa
and/or fibrinogen, inducing binding of fibrinogen to unstimu-
lated platelets in the absence of exogenous agonists. For exam-
ple, it has been shown that fibrinogen insolubilized onto poly-
styrene beads can interact with GP Ilb-IIIa without prior acti-
vation ofplatelets (34), and it is possible that shear stress affects
the conformation of fibrinogen in a manner similar to that
caused by adsorption onto a surface.
The findings ofa previous study (32) suggested that fibrino-
gen is a necessary cofactor for aggregation induced by shear
force values between 54 and 90 dyn/cm2. Our results are in
apparent contradiction with those conclusions, since we have
now found that aggregation at shear forces above 81 dyn/cm2 is
independent of fibrinogen. In the viscometer used for the
previous set ofexperiments, however, the distance between the
cone and the plate was adjusted mechanically; thus, variations
in this distance may have led to inaccurate estimation of the
shear forces applied to the samples. In the modified viscometer
used for the experiments described here, the distance was
maintained within strict limits with an electronic sensor; thus,
the shear forces applied to the samples could be calculated with
more precision. However, both this study and the previous
study agree that shear-induced aggregation mediated by fibrin-
uL
I
I
0
2
4
100
;
50
0
__j
L
6
0
Time (minutes)
Control
Figure 5. Effect of anti-vWf antibody on platelet aggrega-
tion induced by shear stress or ADP in the presence of
ADP
physiologic [Ca2+]0. Normal platelet-rich plasma, obtained
IAn
85ti-vWF
from blood containing hirudin (200 U/ml), was incubated
I A/tivWF
/for 5 min at 22-25°C with the anti-vWf antibody LJ-
1 52B/6 (20 ,g/ml) that selectively blocks vWf binding to
GP lIb-Illa but not to GP Ib; or with Hepes buffer instead
of antibody (control curve). The mixtures were then ex-
posed to varying shear stress for 5 min (left panel; the bro-
ken line indicates the change in shear force over time) or
stimulated with 10 uM ADP in the aggregometer (right
panel), at 37°C in either case. Aggregation was measured
1
2
4
6
as described in the legend to Fig. 4. Note that this antibody
completely blocked aggregation induced by high shear
stress but not that induced by ADP.
1238
Ikeda, Handa, Kawano, Kamata, Murata, Araki, Anbo, Kawai, Watanabe, Itagaki, Sakai, and Ruggeri
1.2
w
=
co
. _ 0.8
E -
=
o
co
_
0.4
0

ogen leads to the formation of loose aggregates that are revers-
ible when shear forces increase, as shown here, or when expo-
sure to shear stress is terminated, as described previously (32).
Difficulties in maintaining a carefully measured shear stress
value may also explain the fact that others (17) have observed
vWf-dependent aggregation at shear stress values between 30
and 60 dyn/cm2, while we found that it occurs only above 81
dyn/cm2.
From the results presented here and previously by others
(16, 17), it is clear that vWf binding to GP Tb is necessary to
support platelet aggregation induced by shear forces above 81
dyn/cm2. In contrast, no conclusive evidence had been ob-
tained to date with regard to the adhesive protein, or proteins,
contributing to the process in an essential manner by interact-
ing with GP IIb-IIIa. In fact, the results obtained with congeni-
tally deficient platelets indicated the important role ofthis bind-
ing site but not the nature of the ligand involved, since GP
Ilb-Illa can interact with four distinct adhesive proteins,
namely vWf (35), fibrinogen (36, 37), fibronectin (38), and
vitronectin (39, 40). The results obtained with anti-GP Ilb-Illa
antibodies were inconclusive for similar reasons, since the one
used here (LJ-CP8), as well as those used in previous studies
(16, 17), inhibit nonselectively the binding function ofGP Ilb-
IIIa. Finally, the demonstration that shear-induced aggregation
ofwashed platelets was apparent only after addition ofvWfand
not fibrinogen (17) cannot be taken to prove that, in the pres-
ence of all plasma proteins, the process is actually mediated by
vWf binding to GP Ilb-TI1a. Indeed, as shown for agonist-in-
duced aggregation (23), vWfmight exhibit a functional role as a
GP lIb-IIIa ligand only in the absence of fibrinogen, but have
no activity of this kind when the latter is present (41-43). The
necessary presence ofvWf for the occurrence ofaggregation in
a purified system, as well as in plasma, could simply reflect the
absolute requirement for its interaction with GP Tb, a function
that cannot be substituted for by another protein the way vWf
can substitute for fibrinogen in binding to GP Ilb-IT1a.
The experiments presented here, however, demonstrate
conclusively that the interaction of vWf with GP Ilb-IIIa, as
well as with GP Tb, is the event necessary and sufficient to
support aggregation induced by high shear stress. In fact, an
antibody selectively inhibiting vWfbinding to GP Ilb-Illa (28)
blocked shear-induced aggregation but not ADP-induced ag-
gregation. Since this antibody recognizes specifically a vWfepi-
tope including the Arg-Gly-Asp sequence (28), its inhibitory
effect clearly proves the biological relevance of this adhesive
site in vWf. Moreover, in view of the fact that these experi-
ments were performed with platelet-rich plasma containing the
full complement of plasma proteins at their physiologic con-
centrations, it is clear that vWf interaction with GP Ilb-TIIa,
mediated by the Arg-Gly-Asp sequence (28), can occur in the
presence of normal plasma levels of the other GP IIb-IIIa li-
gands containing the same adhesion sequence, in particular
fibronectin and fibrinogen. This conclusion is in contrast to
previous suggestions (41-43), based essentially on a consider-
ation ofthe significantly lower concentration ofvWfrelative to
the aforementioned adhesive proteins in plasma. While it ap-
pears that vWfbinding to GP Ilb-TIIa is essential for mediating
stable interplatelet contact during shear stress, it remains to be
demonstrated whether, in high shear conditions, fibrinogen is
excluded from binding to GP HIb-IIa, or functionally ineffi-
cient even ifbound. The ability ofthe multivalent vWfprotein
to interact with several binding sites on adjacent platelets seems
ideally suited to maintain intercellular contacts under high
shear stress, a role that fibrinogen may perform under less rigor-
ous flow conditions.
Experimental studies of platelet aggregation, like those re-
ported here, are usually based on measuring the occurrence of
interplatelet contacts in suspension. On the contrary, the pro-
cess ofthrombus growth in the intact organisms involves plate-
let adhesion to exposed subendothelium followed by "aggrega-
tion" of incoming platelets to the adhering ones to form the
thrombus mass (2). Thus, during thrombogenesis in vivo, plate-
lets become immobilized onto a surface rather than aggregating
in suspension. Under high shear stress conditions, attachment
ofplatelets to surface-bound vWf through GP Ib-IX is crucial
for initial adhesion (44). Our results suggest that this interac-
tion, even in the absence ofother agonists or activation ofclot-
ting, may trigger a platelet response leading to expression ofthe
binding function of GP lb-Illa which, by binding vWf from
the surrounding medium, can strengthen the interplatelet con-
tact to sustain the opposing effect of shear forces. One can
envision a mechanism by which the interplatelet interaction
leading to thrombus growth is initially GP Tb-dependent, but
becomes progressively reinforced by expression of the binding
function of GP Ilb-Illa. This hypothesis of a self-sustaining
process involving two adhesion receptors and one adhesive li-
gand is consistent with the experimental findings, presented
here and previously by others (16, 17), that a block in vWf
binding to either GP lb-IX or GP Ilb-Illa results in obliteration
ofshear-induced aggregation. This hypothesis also implies that,
under the particular conditions of high shear stress, platelet
activation can follow the initial attachment mediated by vWf
and GP lb. Indeed, vWfinteraction with GP lb has been shown
to induce, in the absence ofany other exogenous agonists, func-
tional activity of the GP Ilb-Illa receptor which, in turn, can
support platelet aggregation (30, 45). It remains to be under-
stood how shear force above a threshold value can promote the
initial binding of vWf to GP Tb, possibly through conforma-
tional changes of components of the platelet surface (16), and
how this can affect the binding function and/or selectivity of
GP Ilb-IIIa.
With regard to acute arterial occlusion, platelets in circulat-
ing blood may become exposed to shear stress values in excess
of several hundred dyn/cm2, as in small arteries and arterioles
partially obstructed by atherosclerotic processes or as a conse-
quence of vasospasm (19, 20). If, as suggested by our findings,
vWf binding to GP lb-IX and GP lb-Illa becomes crucial in
initiating and mediating the formation ofocclusive thrombi in
stenosed atherosclerotic vessels, strategies directed at inhibiting
these interactions may be useful in preventing thrombotic vas-
cular occlusion. This approach may also provide selectivity
and result in lesser antihemostatic consequences, ifother adhe-
sive proteins, such as fibrinogen, support hemostatic plug for-
mation at lower shear stress and/or in the presence of other
platelet agonists.
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank James R. Roberts and M. Lisa Thorn for their work
in the preparation and characterization of the monoclonal antibodies;
Keiko Kawakami and Mayumi Fukuyama for their excellent technical
assistance; Eileen Bristow for her excellent secretarial assistance; and
Marina Hoffman for her help in the preparation of the manuscript.
This work was supported in part by National Institutes of Health
Fibrinogen and von Willebrand Factor in Platelet Aggregation
1239

grants HL-3 1950 and HL- 1 5491, and by grant RR0833 to the General
Clinical Research Center of Scripps Clinic. This is publication No.
6330/CVB from the Research Institute of Scripps Clinic.
References
1. Weiss, H. J. 1975. Platelet physiology and abnormalities of platelet func-
tion. N. Engl. J. Med. 293:580-588.
2. Sixma, J. J., and J. Wester. 1977. The hemostatic plug. Semin. Hematol.
14:265-299.
3. Chapmann, I. 1965. Morphogenesis ofoccluding coronary artery thrombo-
sis. Arch. Pathol. 80:256-261.
4. Falk, E. 1985. Unstable angina with fatal outcome: dynamic coronary
thrombosis leading to infarction and/or sudden death: autopsy evidence ofrecur-
rent mural thrombosis with peripheral embolization culminating in total vascular
occlusion. Circulation. 71:699-708.
5. Fuster, V., P. M. Steele, and J. H. Chesebro. 1985. Role of platelets and
thrombosis in coronary atherosclerotic disease and sudden death. J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 5:175B-84B.
6. Davies, M. J., A. C. Thomas, P. A. Knapman, and J. R. Hangartner. 1986.
Intramyocardial platelet aggregation in patients with unstable angina suffering
sudden ischemic cardiac death. Circulation. 73:418-427.
7. Fitzgerald, D. J., L. Roy, F. Catella, and G. A. Fitzgerald. 1986. Platelet
activation in unstable coronary disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 315:983-989.
8. Packham, M. A., and J. F. Mustard. 1984. Progress in Hemostasis and
Thrombosis. Vol. 7. Platelet Adhesion. T. H. Spaet, editor. Grune & Stratton,
Inc., Orlando, FL. 211-288.
9. Kroll, M. H.,\and A. I. Schafer. 1989. Biochemical mechanisms of platelet
activation. Blood. 74:1181-1 195.
10. Phillips, D. R., I. F. Charo, L. V. Parise, and L. A. Fitzgerald. 1988. The
platelet membrane glycoprotein IIb-IIIa complex. Blood. 71:831-843.
1 1. Born, G. V. R. 1962. Quantitative investigations into the aggregation of
blood platelets. J. Physiol. (Lond.). 162:67P-68P.
12. Mustard, J. F., R. L. Kinlough-Rathbone, M. A. Packham, D. W. Perry,
E. J. Harfenist, and K. R. M. Pai. 1979. Comparison of fibrinogen association
with normal and thrombasthenic platelets on exposure to ADP or chymotrypsin.
Blood. 54:987-993.
13. Marguerie, G. A., E. F. Plow, and T. S. Edgington. 1979. Human platelets
possess an inducible and saturable receptor specific for fibrinogen. J. Biol. Chem.
254:5357-5363.
14. Moake, J. L., N. A. Turner, N. A. Stathopoulos, L. H. Nolasco, and J. D.
Hellums. 1986. Involvement of large plasma von Willebrand factor (vWF) mul-
timers and unusually large vWF forms derived from endothelial cells in shear
stress-induced platelet aggregation. J. Clin. Invest. 78:1456-1461.
15. O'Brien, J. R., and G. P. Salmon. 1987. Shear stress activation of platelet
glycoprotein IIb/Illa plus von Willebrand factor causes aggregation:filter block-
age and the long bleeding time in von Willebrands disease. Blood. 70:1354-136 1.
16. Peterson, D. M., N. A. Stathopoulos, T. D. Giorgio, J. D. Hellums, and
J. L. Moake. 1987. Shear-induced platelet aggregation requires von Willebrand
factor and platelet membrane glycoproteins Ib and IIb-IIIa. Blood. 69:625-628.
17. Moake, J. L., N. A. Turner, N. A. Stathopoulos, L. Nolasco, and J. D.
Hellums. 1988. Shear-induced platelet aggregation can be mediated by vWF re-
leased from platelets, as well as by exogenous large or unusually large vWF mul-
timers, requires adenosine diphosphate, and is resistant to aspirin. Blood.
71:1366-1374.
18. Weiss, H. J., J. Hawiger, Z. M. Ruggeri, V. T. Turitto, P. Thiagarajan, and
T. Hoffmann. 1989. Fibrinogen-independent platelet adhesion and thrombus
formation on subendothelium mediated by glycoprotein IIb-IIIa complex at high
shear rate. J. Clin. Invest. 83:288-297.
19. Back, C. H., J. R. Radbill, and D. W. Crawford. 1977. Analysis ofpulsatile
viscous blood flow through diseased coronary arteries of man. J. Biomech.
10:339-353.
20. Lipowski, H. H., S. Usani, and S. Chien. 1980. In vivo measurements of
"apparent viscosity" and microvessel hematocrit in the mesentery of the cat.
Microvasc. Res. 19:297-319.
21. Fukuyama, M., K. Sakai, I. Itagaki, K. Kawano, M. Murata, Y. Kawai, K.
Watanabe, M. Handa, and Y. Ikeda. 1989. Continuous measurement ofshear-in-
duced platelet aggregation. Thromb. Res. 54:253-260.
22. Johnson, P. H., P. Sze, R. Winant, P. W. Payne, and J. B. Lazar. 1989.
Biochemistry and genetic engineering of hirudin. Semin. Thromb. Hemostasis.
15:302-315.
23. De Marco, L., A. Girolami, T. S. Zimmerman, and Z. M. Ruggeri. 1986.
von Willebrand factor interaction with the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa complex. Its role
in platelet function as demonstrated in patients with congenital afibrinogenemia.
J Clin. Invest. 77:1272-1277.
24. Handa, M., K. Titani, L. Z. Holland, J. R. Roberts, and Z. M. Ruggeri.
1986. The von Willebrand factor-binding domain of platelet membrane glyco-
protein lb. Characterization by monoclonal antibodies and partial amino acid
sequence analysis of proteolytic fragments. J. Biol. Chem. 261:12579-12585.
25. Vicente, V., P. J. Kostel, and Z. M. Ruggeri. 1988. Isolation and func-
tional characterization of the von Willebrand factor-binding domain located be-
tween residues His( l)-Arg(293) of the alpha-chain of glycoprotein lb. J. Biol.
Chem. 263:18473-18479.
26. Vicente, V., R. A. Houghten, and Z. M. Ruggeri. 1990. Identification ofa
site in the alpha chain of platelet glycoprotein lb that participates in von Wille-
brand factor binding. J. Biol. Chem. 265:274-280.
27. Niiya, K., E. Hodson, R. Bader, V. Byers-Ward, J. A. Koziol, E. F. Plow,
and Z. M. Ruggeri. 1987. Increased surface expression of the membrane glyco-
protein IIb/IIIa complex induced by platelet activation. Relationship to the bind-
ing of fibrinogen and platelet aggregation. Blood. 70:475-483.
28. Berliner, S., K. Niiya, J. R. Roberts, R. A. Houghten, and Z. M. Ruggeri.
1988. Generation and characterization of peptide-specific antibodies that inhibit
von Willebrand factorbinding to GP IIb-IIIa without interacting with other adhe-
sive molecules: selectivity is conferred by Pro 1743 and other amino acid residues
adjacent to the sequence Argl744-Glyl745-Aspl746. J. Biol. Chem. 263:7500-
7505.
29. Ey, P. L., S. J. Prowse, and C. R. Jenkin. 1978. Isolation of pure lgGI,
IgG2a and IgG2b immunoglobulins from mouse serum using protein A-Sephar-
ose. Immunochemistry. 15:429-436.
30. De Marco, L., M. Mazzuccato, M. G. Del Ben, U. Budde, A. B. Federici,
A. Girolami, and Z. M. Ruggeri. 1987. Type IIB von Willebrand factor with
normal sialic acid content induces platelet aggregation in the absence of ristoce-
tin. Role ofplatelet activation, fibrinogen, and two distinct membrane receptors.
J. Clin. Invest. 80:475-482.
31. Belval, T. K., J. D. Hellums, and R. T. Solis. 1984. The kinetics ofplatelet
aggregation induced by fluid-shearing stress. Microvasc. Res. 28:279-288.
32. Ikeda, Y., M. Murata, Y. Araki, K. Watanabe, Y. Ando, I. Itagaki, Y.
Mori, M. Ichitani, and K. Sakai. 1988. Importance of fibrinogen and platelet
membrane glycoprotein Ilb-IIIa in shear-induced platelet aggregation. Thromb.
Res. 51:157-163.
33. Guccione, M. A., M. A. Packham, R. L. Kinlough-Rathbone, D. W.
Perry, and J. F. Mustard. 1976. Reactions of polylysine with human platelets in
plasma and in suspensions of washed platelets. Thromb. Haemostasis. 36:360-
375.
34. Coller, B. S. 1980. Interaction of normal, thrombasthenic, and Bernard-
Soulier platelets with immobilized fibrinogen: defective platelet-fibrinogen inter-
action in thrombasthenia. Blood. 55:169-178.
35. Ruggeri, Z. M., L. De Marco, L. Gatti, R. Bader, and R. R. Montgomery.
1983. Platelets have more than one binding site for von Willebrand factor. J. Clin.
Invest. 72:1-12.
36. Bennett, J. S., G. Vilaire, and D. B. Cines. 1982. Identification of the
fibrinogen receptor on human platelets by photoaffinity labeling. J. Biol. Chem.
257:8049-8064.
37. Nachman, R. L., and L. L. K. Leung. 1982. Complex formation ofplatelet
membrane glycoproteins IIb and IIla with fibrinogen. J. Clin. Invest. 69:263-269.
38. Ginsberg, M. H., J. Forsyth, A. Lightsey, J. Chediak, and E. F. Plow. 1983.
Reduced surface expression and binding of fibronectin by thrombin-stimulated
thrombasthenic platelets. J. Clin. Invest. 71:619-624.
39. Thiagarajan, P., and K. L. Kelly. 1988. Exposure of binding sites for
vitronectin on platelets following stimulation. J. Biol. Chem. 263:3035-3038.
40. Asch, E., and E. Podack. 1990. Vitronectin binds to activated human
platelets and plays a role in platelet aggregation. J. Clin. Invest. 85:1372-1378.
41. Pietu, G., G. Cherel, G. Marguerie, and D. Meyer. 1984. Inhibition ofvon
Willebrand factor-platelet interaction by fibrinogen. Nature (Lond.). 308:648-
649.
42. Schullek, J., J. Jordan, and R. R. Montgomery. 1984. Interaction of von
Willebrand factor with human platelets in the plasma milieu. J. Clin. Invest.
73:421-428.
43. Gralnick, H. R., S. B. Williams, and B. S. Coller. 1984. Fibrinogen com-
petes with von Willebrand factor for binding to the glycoprotein lIb/Illa complex
when platelets are stimulated with thrombin. Blood. 64:797-800.
44. Weiss, H. J., V. T. Turitto, and H. R. Baumgartner. 1978. Effect of shear
rate on platelet interaction with subendothelium in citrated and native blood. I.
Shear rate-dependent decrease of adhesion in von Willebrand's disease and the
Bernard-Soulier syndrome. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 92:750-764.
45. De Marco, L., A. Girolami, S. Russell, and Z. M. Ruggeri. 1985. Interac-
tion of asialo von Willebrand factor with glycoprotein lb induces fibrinogen bind-
ing to the glycoprotein Ilb/lIla complex and mediates platelet aggregation. J.1
Clin. Invest. 75:1198-1203.
1240
Ikeda, Handa, Kawano, Kamata, Murata, Araki, Anbo, Kawai, Watanabe, Itagaki, Sakai, and Ruggeri
