Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
© Author(s) 2006. This work is licensed
under a Creative Commons License.
Atmospheric
Chemistry
and Physics
Atmospheric HULIS: How humic-like are they? A comprehensive
and critical review
E. R. Graber1 and Y. Rudich2
1Institute of Soil, Water and Environmental Sciences, The Volcani Center, Agricultural Research Organization, Bet Dagan
50250, Israel
2Department of Environmental Sciences and Energy Research, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel
Received: 22 August 2005 – Published in Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss.: 11 October 2005
Revised: 11 January 2006 – Accepted: 19 January 2006 – Published: 6 March 2006
Abstract. A class of organic molecules extracted from atmo-
spheric aerosol particles and isolated from fog and cloud wa-
ter has been termed HUmic-LIke Substances (HULIS) due
to a certain resemblance to terrestrial and aquatic humic and
fulvic acids. In light of the interest that this class of atmo-
spheric compounds currently attracts, we comprehensively
review HULIS properties, as well as laboratory and ﬁeld in-
vestigations concerning their formation and characterization
in atmospheric samples. While sharing some important fea-
tures such as polyacidic nature, accumulating evidence sug-
gests that atmospheric HULIS differ substantially from ter-
restrial and aquatic humic substances.
Major differences
between HULIS and humic substances, including smaller
average molecular weight, lower aromatic moiety content,
greater surface activity, better droplet activation ability, as
well as others, are highlighted. Several alternatives are pro-
posed that may explain such differences: (1) the possibil-
ity that mono- and di-carboxylic acids and mineral acids
abundant in the atmosphere prevent the formation of large
humic “supramolecular associations”; (2) that large humic
macromolecules are destroyed in the atmosphere by UV ra-
diation, O3, and OH−radicals; 3) that “HULIS” actually
consists of a complex, unresolved mixture of relatively small
molecules rather than macromolecular entities; and (4) that
HULIS formed via abiotic and short-lived oxidative reaction
pathways differ substantially from humic substances formed
over long time periods via biologically-mediated reactions.
It should also be recalled that the vast majority of studies of
HULIS relate to the water soluble fraction, which would in-
clude only the fulvic acid fraction of humic substances, and
exclude the humic acid (base-soluble) and humin (insoluble)
fractions of humic substances. A signiﬁcant effort towards
Correspondence to: E. R. Graber
(ergraber@volcani.agri.gov.il)
adopting standard extraction and characterization methods is
required to develop a better and meaningful comparison be-
tween different HULIS samples.
1
Introduction
Following reports of macromolecular organic substances in
atmospheric aerosol particles and rainwater in the 1980’s (Si-
moneit, 1980; Likens and Galloway, 1983; Mukai and Ambe,
1986), the last decade has witnessed a large increase in stud-
ies reporting the prevalence of macromolecular compounds,
termed HUmic-LIke Substances (HULIS) in aerosol, fog and
cloud water. Interest is fueled by the realization that HULIS
may affect aerosol properties, such as their ability to nu-
cleate cloud droplets, or their light absorption. In view of
the roles played by humic substances in sorption, complexa-
tion and solubilization of pollutant organic molecules in soil
and aqueous environments, it is anticipated that HULIS may
perform similar functions in atmospheric particles. The re-
alization that HULIS compounds are most likely formed in
aerosol particles exempliﬁes the fact that atmospheric reac-
tions can result in formation of new constituents of higher
molecular weight, and not just result in breakdown of parent
organic compounds.
HULIS have been so termed because of their apparent sim-
ilarity to the ubiquitous macromolecular humic substances
found in terrestrial and aquatic environments. Convention-
ally, humic substances are considered to be comprised of
naturally occurring, biogenically-derived, heterogeneous or-
ganic substances that are yellow to black in color, of high
molecular weight, and refractory in nature (Aiken et al.,
1985). The exemplifying characteristic of humic substances
is that they defy speciation and molecular deﬁnition, despite
Published by Copernicus GmbH on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.

730
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
the application of a multiplicity of characterization meth-
ods. The purpose of this paper is to review the consider-
able information that has accumulated thus far concerning
atmospheric HULIS, with an eye towards deﬁning the cur-
rent state of the art. Some of the material covered in this re-
view has been recently addressed by Gelencser (2004). Here,
however, we have made a special effort to comprehensively
and critically review the vast majority of available studies to
date, and to synthesize their ﬁndings with comparison to each
other and to topical results from the applicable literature on
humic substances from terrestrial and aquatic environments.
There is a special emphasis on methods for humic substances
and HULIS extraction and puriﬁcation, HULIS characteriza-
tion and properties, and on laboratory experiments that have
identiﬁed possible pathways for HULIS formation. Based on
the accumulated information, it is suggested that atmospheric
HULIS, while similar in some respects to humic substances
(e.g., polyacidity), also differ in certain important ways (e.g.,
surface activity, droplet activation efﬁciency) from terrestrial
and aquatic humic and fulvic acids.
2
Pioneering studies
One of the earliest reports of humic-like compounds in
aerosol particles was a study of aeolian dust by Simoneit
(1980), where H/C ratio and δ13C values were used to con-
strue a terrestrial soil origin, corresponding to the actual ori-
gin of the dust particles. In a later study of rural aerosol from
Japan, humic substances were found to represent between 1
to 6% of the total organic carbon fraction (Mukai and Ambe,
1986). By means of infrared and UV-VIS spectroscopic in-
vestigations and elemental composition ﬁngerprinting, it was
determined that the humic acid extracts were most similar to
extracts from biomass burning smoke particles (Mukai and
Ambe 1986).
These authors also suggested that aerosol-
derived humic substances consisted of polycyclic ring struc-
tures with hydrocarbon side chains, and hydroxyl, carboxyl
and carbonyl groups. This general chemical structure for at-
mospheric HULIS determined about 20 years ago still repre-
sents the current consensus, after the application of scores of
different analytical techniques.
Also in the early 1980s, dissolved phase macromolecu-
lar organic carbon in rural rainwater was fractionated by ul-
traﬁltration techniques and chemically characterized (Likens
and Galloway, 1983). The macromolecular portion (>1000
nominal molecular weight cutoff; NMWCO) accounted for
some 35–43% of the total organic carbon (TOC), with car-
bohydrates, tannins/lignins, and organic nitrogen (N) being
important constituents. Based on these chemical attributes,
degradation and dissolution of plant structural material was
hypothesized to be the source of the macromolecular frac-
tion (Likens and Galloway, 1983). Thus, even in such earlier
years of study, a multiplicity of sources for macromolecular
organic substances in aerosol was recognized: terrestrial (Si-
moneit, 1980), biomass burning (Mukai and Ambe, 1986),
and plant degradation products (Likens and Galloway, 1983).
Following these pioneering works, the study of macro-
molecular substances in the atmosphere suffered a hiatus for
more than ten years, until the work of Havers et al. (1998),
wherein the term HULIS, an abbreviation for HUmic-LIke
Substances, was coined.
Examining a standard reference
air dust as well as airborne particulate matter, Havers et
al. (1998) attributed 10% or more of aerosol organic carbon
to macromolecular substances similar to humic and fulvic
acids. The humic materials, extracted by alkaline aqueous
solution and isolated by ion exchange, were characterized
by molecular size distribution, carbon content, and UV-VIS,
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) and nuclear magnetic res-
onance (1H-NMR) spectra. Since these early efforts, many
different methods have been employed in attempts to speci-
ate HULIS and characterize their essential qualities.
3
Extraction and isolation of HULIS
One of the major differences between the pioneering studies
and those undertaken since then has been in HULIS extrac-
tion methodology. The earlier works (Simoneit 1980; Mukai
and Ambe 1986) studied base-extracted and acid-precipitated
material, the exact parallel to humic acids from soil systems.
The more recent studies have focused mainly on the water
soluble organic carbon (WSOC) fraction, which, by deﬁni-
tion will contain compounds more similar to fulvic acid than
humic acid, and which may also include many low molec-
ular weight organic and inorganic species. Because extrac-
tion and isolation methodologies can be expected to affect
substantially the chemical and physical nature of the studied
material, we review the traditional methods used for humic
substances in terrestrial and aquatic environments, and those
developed for atmospheric HULIS research.
3.1
Terrestrial/aquatic humic substances
Humic substances are subdivided into three operationally-
deﬁned fractions: fulvic acid (water soluble at all pHs); hu-
mic acid (base soluble, acid (pH 1) insoluble); and humin
(insoluble at all pHs).
In soil and aquatic sciences, non-
ionic macroporous copolymer sorbents with large surface
area such as the Amberlite XAD resin series (2, 4 and 8)
are widely employed for isolation and concentration of dif-
ferent organic matter fractions because of their high sorp-
tion capacity and ease of elution (Aiken et al., 1979; Thur-
man and Malcolm, 1979; Leenheer, 1981; Thurman and
Malcolm, 1981; Aiken et al., 1992).
XAD-2 and XAD-
4 resins are composed of a very hydrophobic polystyrene-
divinylbenzene copolymer, possess no ion-exchange capac-
ity, are neutral at all pHs and exhibit certain size exclu-
sion behavior for larger macromolecules (Aiken et al., 1979;
Aiken, 1985). XAD-8 resin is composed of a non-aromatic
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
731
polymethylmethacrylate ester which is ionized at high pHs
(Aiken et al., 1979; Aiken, 1985). XAD-8 wets more eas-
ily, absorbs more water, exhibits faster sorption kinetics, has
higher sorption capacity, and is more efﬁciently eluted than
the styrene-divinylbenzene (XAD-2,-4) resins, particularly
for fulvic acids (Aiken et al., 1979). The principal driving
force for sorption on XAD-8 resin is physical adsorption, i.e.,
van der Waals forces. At low pH, protonated weak organic
acids, including humic substances, adsorb on the resin; at
high pH, ionized weak organic acids easily desorb from the
resin (98% efﬁciency at pH 13; Aiken et al., 1979). XAD-
8 has been widely employed by the International Humics
Substances Society (IHSS) for isolation of humic and fulvic
acids from different matrices (www.ihss.gatech.edu).
Different speciﬁc protocols for separation of aqueous or-
ganic matter into fractions based on their polarity (hydropho-
bic/hydrophilic), acid/neutral/base properties, or compound
class characteristics can be found in several studies (Thur-
man and Malcolm, 1979; Leenheer, 1981; Thurman and
Malcolm, 1981; Aiken et al., 1992; Leenheer et al., 2000;
Croue, 2004). These protocols generally involve initial sepa-
ration at low pH on XAD-8, elution in NaOH, followed either
by separations on ion exchange resins (e.g., anion exchange
and/or cation exchange), or on other non-ionic macromolec-
ular resins (e.g., XAD-4; Fig. 1). The fractions separated
by these methods are operationally deﬁned. However, low
molecular weight acids can also adsorb to XAD resins, de-
pending on their acidity, resin polarity, and the ratio of resin
to aqueous sample volume (Thurman et al., 1978; Thurman
and Malcolm, 1979; Leenheer, 1981; Thurman and Malcolm,
1981; Aiken et al., 1992). With this caveat in mind, charac-
teristically, the fulvic and humic acid fractions (often termed
hydrophobic acid fraction) is considered to make up the frac-
tion sorbed at low pH on XAD-8 and eluted at high pH. This
fraction may also contain aliphatic carboxylic acids, and one
and two-ring phenols (Aiken et al., 1992).
Concentration of organic acids from water, including ful-
vic acids, may be also accomplished by adsorption onto
a weak anion exchange resin (such as diethylaminoethyl-
cellulose; DEAE-cellulose (Miles et al., 1983; Aiken, 1985;
Pettersson et al., 1994), with salts being removed separately
by puriﬁcation of the concentrate on an XAD resin (Petters-
son et al., 1994). The concentrate can be further fractionated
into hydrophilic and hydrophobic acids, for example, by tan-
dem XAD-8 and XAD-4 columns. DEAE-cellulose has a
lower adsorption capacity than XAD-8, and isolates a much
smaller fraction of total dissolved organic matter (Pettersson
and Rahm, 1996).
The IHSS (www.ihss.gatech.edu) has established a collec-
tion of standard and reference humic substances that makes
it possible for researchers to compare critically their ex-
perimental results on humic materials derived from terres-
trial and aquatic sources.
All materials originated from
carefully chosen and speciﬁed locations, samples were iso-
lated by fully documented, controlled and supervised proce-
Reverse
osmosis
Filtration 1µm
pH 2
Dialysis
3.5 KD
Concentrate 
colloids
XAD-8
Hydrophobic NOM
(humic substances)
XAD-4
Transphilic NOM
Hydrophilic
NOM
Salt removal
Fig. 1. Example of a comprehensive isolation scheme for aqueous
organic matter (NOM). After Croue (2004; with permission).
dures, all materials were thoroughly homogenized, and the
bulk solids are available to enable comparison of different
extraction methods.
The standard humic and fulvic acids
have been well-characterized in terms of elemental compo-
sition, acid functional group analysis, amino acid and car-
bohydrate content, 13C-NMR estimates of carbon distribu-
tion, and 13C-NMR, FTIR and ﬂuorescence spectra. Humic
materials available from commercial suppliers such as Fluka
and Aldrich can be more problematic, as they have high and
batch-variable ash contents (Malcolm and MacCarthy, 1986;
Chin et al., 1994; Hur and Schlautman, 2003). Compared to
soil and aquatic humic and fulvic acids, the 13C-NMR spec-
tra of commercial materials indicate lower carboxyl content,
higher saturated aliphatic carbon content, and lower aromatic
carbon content (Malcolm and MacCarthy, 1986). The com-
mercial products also have relatively high average molecular
weights; for example, MW estimates for Aldrich humic acid
vary from about 4000 to more than 14 000 Da (Beckett et al.,
1987; Chin et al., 1994; Hur and Schlautman, 2003).
3.2
Atmospheric HULIS
Several studies of atmospheric samples have employed an
aqueous alkali extraction similar to standard procedures for
extraction of humic and fulvic acids from soils (Simoneit,
1980; Mukai and Ambe, 1986; Havers et al., 1998; Subbal-
akshmi et al., 2000). The base-extract contained humic and
fulvic acids, low molecular weight organic acids, hydropho-
bic neutral compounds, and salts. The humic acid fraction
was then isolated by precipitation in acid, and separated from
salts by gel permeation chromatography (Mukai and Ambe
1986) or by dialysis (Subbalakshmi et al., 2000). In Havers
et al. (1998), the neutralized alkali extract was concentrated
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

732
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
on a DEAE-cellulose (weakly basic resin), eluted in strong
NaOH, and converted to H+-form on a cation exchange resin,
removing inorganic salts. The ﬁnal isolate thus contained
undifferentiated humic and fulvic acids, and low molecular
weight (LMW) organic acids.
Andracchio et al. (2002) developed an isolation proto-
col by which synthetic mixtures of low molecular weight
(LMW) organic compounds (mainly mono-, di-, and tri-
carboxylic acids), humic acid standards, and fulvic acid stan-
dards were separated into three fractions on an Amberlite
XAD-2 resin. The smallest acids (oxalic, acetic, and formic)
and inorganic salts were eluted by weak HCl in the 1st frac-
tion (Andracchio et al., 2002). All other LMW test com-
pounds (hydrophilic organic acids) and tannic acid were
eluted by methanol into the 2nd fraction. About 20 to 25%
of the standard humic, and 30–35% of the standard fulvic
acids, also eluted into the 2nd fraction. The remainder of the
humic substances was eluted into the 3rd fraction by a basic
NH3 solution. The portion of humic substances eluted in the
2nd fraction presumably consists of lower MW and/or more
hydrophilic components.
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) with UV-VIS de-
tection of synthetic mixtures showed differences between the
three fractions (Andracchio et al., 2002). Fractionated fog,
interstitial aerosol, and cloud samples also demonstrated a
retention time difference for the three fractions, but with
considerably more overlap between the 2nd and 3rd frac-
tions than for the synthetic mixtures. In fog samples, be-
tween 12–22% of the total WSOC eluted in the 3rd frac-
tion, which presumably represents the most hydrophobic
and largest WSOC-HULIS components. Since atmospheric-
prevalent HULIS are expected to be dominated by relatively
more hydrophilic, more acidic, and lower MW components
than the standard materials employed in development of the
method, it may be anticipated that a signiﬁcant fraction of
HULIS will elute in the 2nd fraction, and will not be differ-
entiated from other small, well-deﬁned organic and inorganic
species present in atmospheric samples. It should be noted
that NH+
4 can interact strongly with humic substances, and
may be difﬁcult to eliminate from the ﬁnal product, possibly
leading to undesired changes in physical-chemical character-
istics of the isolate (Stevenson 1982).
Varga et al. (2001) tested the isolation of water-soluble or-
ganic matter from atmospheric aerosol on various C18 solid
phase extraction (SPE) packings and on a polymer-based Oa-
sis HLB SPE packing.
Their optimized method involved
acidifying the water extract to pH 2 and applying it to an
Oasis HLB SPE cartridge (Waters Inc.), followed by elution
in methanol (MeOH). Inorganic components passed into the
efﬂuent, along with about 40% of the total WSOC in the sam-
ple. The remaining 60% of WSOC, desorbed from the SPE
cartridge in MeOH, contained more than 90% of the ﬂuores-
cence and about 70% of the UV activity of the total WSOC
fraction. Unfortunately, the method was not validated with
model LMW organic acids, fulvic acids or other humic sub-
stances, so the distribution of hydrophilic/hydrophobic acids
in the different fractions is unknown. Varga et al. (2001)
also tested a two step separation method involving sorption
of aerosol-extracted WSOC onto C18 stationary phases in
tandem at different pH values. In this method, about 25%
of the WSOC passed directly into the column efﬂuent, while
another 15% was absorbed irreversibly on the cartridges. Ac-
cording to Krivacsy et al. (2001a) who used the two cartridge
method, a standard FA was fractionated in the same propor-
tions on the two cartridges as aerosol WSOC.
Recently, Limbeck et al. (2005) developed a method for
carbon-speciﬁc determination of humic substances based on
a two-step isolation procedure involving separation on a C18
SPE phase, followed by isolation on a strong anion ex-
changer. The isolation step was followed by on-line detec-
tion of the carbon, with a minimum detection limit of about
8 µg. Like Varga et al. (2001), they reported about 25% irre-
versible sorption on the SPE cartridge.
Decesari et al. (2000) exploited the acidic nature of HULIS
compounds to separate aerosol WSOC into fractions by
preparative ion exchange chromatography, whereby depro-
tonated carboxylic acids were separated at alkaline pH using
a weak anion exchanger (DEAE) stationary phase. By grad-
ually increasing the ionic strength of the eluent buffer, inor-
ganic and organic anionic species with increasing charges per
molecule eluted sequentially and were detected at 254 nm.
In this way, the authors fractionated WSOC into (i) neutral
and/or basic compounds; (ii) compounds containing one or
two charges per molecule, usually mono- and di-carboxylic
acids; and (iii) polyacidic compounds, with at least three neg-
ative charges per molecule. Nitrate, the only inorganic an-
ionic species with signiﬁcant absorbance at 254 nm, elutes
in the second fraction.
The overall WSOC recovery was
about 77%, with the polyacidic fraction (iii) representing
about 17%, mono- and di-carboxylic acid fraction (ii) about
35%, and neutral/basic compound fraction (i) about 25% of
WSOC, respectively. The IHSS Suwannee River Fulvic Acid
(SRFA) reference material had a similar retention time and
peak shape as the third, polyacidic fraction. A drawback to
this method is that salts are not removed.
Duarte et al. (2004) applied an acidiﬁed WSOC aerosol
particle extract to tandem XAD-8 and XAD-4 resin columns,
similar to the method developed by Aiken et al. (1992),
but employing an eluant comprised of 2:3 solution of
MeOH:water instead of a basic aqueous solution which has,
in the past, been found to be the most efﬁcient eluant for ful-
vic and humic acids from XAD resins (Aiken et al. 1979).
Recoveries from XAD-8 and XAD-4 in the MeOH:water
eluant represented 60% and 9% respectively of the total
WSOC (Duarte et al. 2004). In other isolation schemes,
MeOH has been employed to elute neutral hydrophobic com-
pounds from XAD-8 after fulvic acids were eluted in a ba-
sic NaOH solution (Thurman and Malcolm 1979; Leenheer
1981). Considering this, the isolate obtained via the method
of Duarte et al. (2004) may contain neutral hydrophobic
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
733
compounds in addition to HULIS. Following more closely
the method developed by the IHSS for fulvic and humic acid
extraction from solid materials (www.ihss.gatech.edu), Di-
nar et al. (2006) extracted HULIS from aerosol particles col-
lected on glass-ﬁber ﬁlters by consecutive water and water-
base extractions. HULIS was separated from other water sol-
uble and base-soluble aerosol organic and inorganic species
by adsorption onto an intensively pre-cleaned XAD-8 resin,
followed by elution in a basic solution.
The eluant was
cation-exchanged on an H+-saturated cation-exchange resin
to produce protonated acids. XAD-8 resin separation of hy-
drophobic (HULIS) and hydrophilic components of WSOC
was also employed by Sannigrahi et al. (2005), without a sub-
sequent cation-exchange procedure.
Unfortunately, inter-comparison between these different
methods has not been conducted, and, in certain cases, the
methods have not been validated with mixtures of LMW
compounds and humic substances.
Hence it is difﬁcult
to evaluate whether the different methods actually isolate
and extract the same or comparable organic fractions, and
whether the isolated fractions can be strictly compared to hu-
mic or fulvic acids. A more rigorous approach to the extrac-
tion and isolation of atmospheric HULIS is deﬁnitely war-
ranted. The lack of a consistent approach to obtaining an
operational deﬁnition for aerosol-associated HULIS almost
certainly hampers the study of this component.
4
Spectroscopic characterization of HULIS
Extraction of useful chemical structural information from
spectroscopic methods applied to complex multicomponent
mixtures such as humic substances or WSOC from atmo-
spheric samples is a non-trivial proposition. This is because
measured spectroscopic signals represent the superposition
of signals from the individual components of the mixture. As
such, similar spectroscopic results do not necessarily imply
similar compositions or structures.
4.1
UV-VIS Spectroscopy
A number of studies have measured UV-VIS spectra for iso-
lated HULIS or bulk WSOC derived from aerosol, fog, or
cloud for the purpose of comparing results to spectra ob-
tained for humic or fulvic acids (Krivacsy et al., 1997; Havers
et al., 1998; Zappoli et al., 1999; Krivacsy et al., 2000; Kiss
et al., 2001; Krivacsy et al., 2001a; Varga et al., 2001; Kiss
et al., 2002; Duarte et al., 2005). The resultant spectra have
been featureless, with increasing absorptivity towards shorter
wavelengths. In this regard, such spectra are similar to typi-
cal UV-VIS spectra of humic substances, and thus have been
considered to provide some sort of evidence that HULIS is
similar in chemical structure to humic substances, and also
to demonstrate the presence of conjugated double bond sys-
tems (continuous absorption up to about 400 nm).
Com-
monly however, the spectra obtained for HULIS display rel-
atively more absorbance in shorter wavelength regions, and
less in the longer wavelength regions as compared with ter-
restrial and aquatic humic substances. Therefore, consider-
ing that both atmospheric samples and humic substances con-
sist of heterogeneous complex mixtures of many chemical
components, each of which may contain a variety of chro-
mophores and those possibly at differing absorptivities, con-
clusions about HULIS similarity to humic substances on the
basis of UV-VIS spectra should be made with caution. To test
the similarity between aquatic humic substances and HULIS,
it may be fruitful to study ratios of absorbances, for example,
E250/E365 (E2/E3). The E2/E3 ratio has been found to be in-
versely correlated with molecular weight and aromaticity in
aquatic humic substances (Chin et al., 1994; Peuravuori et
al., 2001). Duarte et al. (2005) reported that aerosol-derived
HULIS had a higher E2/E3 ratio in summer samples than in
autumn samples, a seasonal trend that correlated with lower
aromaticity in summer samples as compared with autumn
samples as conﬁrmed by speciﬁc ﬂuorescence intensity and
13C-NMR. UV-VIS absorbance may also be used to estimate
HULIS molecular weight and aromaticity, based on corre-
lations in the literature (Chin et al., 1994; Peuravuori and
Pihlaja, 1997; Schafer et al., 2002).
4.2
Fluorescence spectroscopy
Fluorescence spectroscopy has also been applied to HULIS
and WSOC extracts (Zappoli et al., 1999; Krivacsy et al.,
2001a; Duarte et al., 2004; Duarte et al., 2005).
Humic
and fulvic acids exhibit ﬂuorescence spectra that represent
the summation of signals from a multicomponent mixture.
Although fewer than 1% of the aromatic moieties in hu-
mic substances actually ﬂuoresce, 3-D ﬂuorescence spec-
troscopy is at least an order of magnitude more sensitive to
humic substances than UV absorbance (Leenheer and Croue,
2003).
Two distinct excitation (exc) ranges and emission
(em) ranges have been found to characterize humic sub-
stances: λexc 330–350 and λem 420–480 (fulvic-like), and
λexc 250–260 and λem 380–480 nm (humic-like) (Marhaba
and Pu, 2000; Baker, 2001; Leenheer and Croue, 2003). Flu-
orescence of humic materials is strongly affected by UV ab-
sorbance (the stronger the UV absorbance, the higher the ﬂu-
orescence emission), extent of complexation with metal ions
or other organic molecules (quenches ﬂuorescence), molec-
ular weight, and molecular conformations. Humic fractions
with lower average molecular weight (MW) have higher ex-
citation and emission intensities, and a shift in peak position
of the exc-em maximum towards lower wavelengths (Leen-
heer and Croue, 2003).
Excitation-emission ﬂuorescence spectra for HULIS iso-
lated from aerosol particles and fog water have peaks at
shorter excitation and emission wavelengths than freshwater
or terrestrial fulvic acids, suggesting a lower content of aro-
matic structures and condensed unsaturated bond systems,
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

734
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
Fig. 2. (a) FTIR spectra of HULIS isolated from aqueous extracts
of aerosol collected in summer (trace marked (a)) and autumn (trace
marked (b)) from a rural area in Portugal. From Duarte et al. (2005;
with permission). (b) FTIR spectrum for Suwannee River fulvic
acid, from www.ihss.gatech.edu.
and a higher aliphatic moiety content in aerosol-derived
HULIS (Krivacsy et al., 2000; Krivacsy et al., 2001a; Duarte
et al., 2004; Duarte et al., 2005).
The shift of ﬂuores-
cence maxima towards shorter wavelengths in comparison to
aquatic humic substances may also indicate the presence of
solutes of lower MW (Peuravuori and Pihlaja, 1997; Duarte
et al., 2004).
4.3
IR spectroscopy
IR spectra of humic substances are generally characterized
by relatively few, very broad bands, and are thus apparently
much simpler than spectra of pure substances. This apparent
simplicity results from the fact that humic substances consist
of complex multi-component mixtures of compounds, such
that the resulting IR spectrum represents the net functional
group content of all the components. Again, it should be
born in mind that similar infrared spectra of such complex
mixtures do not necessarily imply similar structures (Mac-
Carthy and Rice, 1985). With that caveat, it has been found
that IR spectra of HULIS exhibit many features common
to humic materials. For example, FTIR spectra of isolated
HULIS from aerosol particles shown in Fig. 2a exhibit a
broad band at 3400 cm−1 (assigned to OH-stretching of phe-
nol, hydroxyl, and carboxyl groups), a shoulder in the region
of 3000–2850 cm−1 (assigned to C-H stretching of methyl
and methylene groups of aliphatic chains), a strong band near
1720 cm−1 (attributed to C=O stretching), and a weak band
in the 1600–1660 cm−1 region (attributed to C=C stretching
of aromatic rings and C=O stretching of conjugated carbonyl
groups), absorption at 1384 cm−1 (attributed to symmetri-
cal C-H bending vibrations from aliphatic CH3), a band in
the 1220 cm−1 region (assigned to C-O stretching and O-
H bending vibrations, mainly of COOH groups), and C-O
stretching of polysaccharides at 1061 cm−1 (Duarte et al.,
2005). Due to varying spectral absorption coefﬁcients and
the relatively broad IR bands, these assignments suffer a cer-
tain degree of uncertainty (Havers et al., 1998). These FTIR
spectra (Fig. 2a) were similar to others reported for WSOC
from aerosol particles (Havers et al., 1998; Krivacsy et al.,
2001a; Kiss et al., 2002). The similarity between the HULIS
spectra from the study of Duarte et al. (2005) seen in Fig. 2a,
and that for the Suwannee River Fulvic Acid (SRFA) stan-
dard from the IHSS (www.ihss.gatech.edu) shown for com-
parison in Fig. 2b, is notable.
4.4
NMR spectroscopy
4.4.1
Proton-NMR (1H-NMR)
WSOC extracted from aerosol particles collected in the
Po Valley in Italy, and fractionated on the basis of acid-
ity was characterized by proton-NMR (1H-NMR) for func-
tional group analysis (Decesari et al., 2000). The 1H-NMR
spectrum of the ﬁrst fraction, consisting of neutral/basic
compounds, was interpreted to represent mainly polyhy-
droxylated or alkoxylated aliphatic compounds (polyols or
polyethers). The spectrum of the second fraction was as-
signed to aliphatic carboxylic acids and hydroxyl-carboxylic
acids. The 1H-NMR spectrum of the third polyacidic fraction
(HULIS) had a more pronounced aromatic region than the
other two fractions, and a much lower abundance of nonex-
changeable organic protons, suggesting that the polyacids of
the 3rd fraction (HULIS) had a much more unsaturated char-
acter than the acids of the 2nd fraction. A model structure
consisting of an aromatic core bearing substituted aliphatic
chains with –COOH, CH2OH, –COCH3, or –CH3 terminal
groups, was suggested to be consistent with the 1H-NMR
features (Decesari et al., 2000).
Such a structure is also
consistent with electrospray ionization mass spectra of the
acidic fraction of WSOC in fogwater (Cappiello et al., 2003),
and with the structure earlier suggested by Mukai and Ambe
(1986) on the basis of IR spectroscopy.
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
735
1H-NMR spectroscopy has certain intrinsic drawbacks for
the speciation of organic compounds. Information on the
chemical environment of protons can be obtained from 1H-
NMR, but not on the carbon structure. Therefore, alternative
interpretations of 1H-NMR spectra are possible. For exam-
ple, a lack of (or low intensity) signal characteristic of aro-
matic protons indicates that the abundance of aromatic hy-
drogen is low. However, this may indicate either that the
abundance of aromatic structures is low, or that most of the
hydrogen atoms in the aromatic structures have been sub-
stituted by other moieties such as side chains or functional
groups. These alternatives must be borne in mind when in-
terpreting 1H-NMR spectra.
Another drawback in 1H-NMR is that acidic hydrogens
(like those of -OH and –COOH groups) undergo chemi-
cal exchange with the D2O solvent and elude detection. A
solution to this problem was recently presented by Tagli-
avini et al. (2005). They developed a derivatization proce-
dure that converts carboxylic acids into their corresponding
methyl esters, making it possible to observe them by 1H-
NMR, and thus determine the carboxylic group content in
different aerosol samples. By fractionating aerosol WSOC
into neutral, mono- and di-carboxylic acids (MDA), and
polycarboxylic acids (PA) according to the method of Dece-
sari et al. (2000), Tagliavini et al. (2005) used derivatization
to determine the carboxylic group content of the different
fractions. The polyacidic fraction, HULIS, had the highest
COOH content (almost 1 carbon out of 7, or 13.25%). The
carboxylic group content of the MDA fraction was 11.76%,
and that of the neutral fraction, 2.54%. The acidic content
of the HULIS fraction was comparable to that reported for
SRFA (Dinar et al., 2006) on the basis of acid titrations.
To convert H abundances into C abundances, it was nec-
essary to guess speciﬁc H/C ratios for the different func-
tional groups (Fuzzi et al., 2001; Tagliavini et al., 2005).
On this basis, the H content was converted into C content,
bearing in mind that oxygenated carbons are detected only if
the hydrogens bound to them are present (i.e., hydroxylated
and alkoxylated aromatic carbons cannot be directly detected
by 1H NMR; (Tagliavini et al., 2005)).
The C-converted
aromatic abundance for the HULIS fraction was thus esti-
mated to be about 19%, which is a bit lower than the aro-
matic content determined by 13C-NMR for SRFA (22–24%;
www.ihss.gatech.edu) and much lower than that reported for
Nordic Lake fulvic acid (31%; www.ihss.gatech.edu). Aro-
matic contents of many humic acids are substantially greater
than the 19% reported for HULIS by Tagliavini et al. (2005),
for example, two different batches of Suwannee River Humic
Acid (SRHA) had 31% and 37% aromatic C, 3 soil samples
between 45-58% aromatic C, and a lake sample, 38% aro-
matic C (www.ihss.gatech.edu).
It may be anticipated that HULIS derived from different
sources will possess signiﬁcantly different spectral charac-
ters. For example, the 1H-NMR spectrum of a D2O extract
of ozonated n-hexane soot, while fractionated almost exclu-
Fig. 3. (a) 1H-NMR spectrum for HULIS extracted from NIST ur-
ban dust. From Havers et al. (1998; with permission); (b) 1H-NMR
spectrum for polyacidic fraction of an aerosol sample collected from
the Po Valley. From Decasari et al. (2002; with permission); (c) 1H-
NMR spectrum for polyacidic fraction of D2O extract of ozonised
soot. From Decasari et al. (2002; with permission).
sively into the polyacidic (HULIS) fraction (Decesari et al.,
2000), differed signiﬁcantly from that of the isolated poly-
acidic fraction from Po Valley ambient particles (Decesari
et al., 2002). The spectrum for ozonated-soot HULIS was
far richer in aromatic structures, with signals from rings sub-
stituted with electron-attracting groups such as carbonyl- and
carboxyl-groups, and there was a marked scarcity of aliphatic
structures (Decesari et al., 2002) (Fig. 3c).
In an earlier 1H-NMR study of HULIS extracted from
NIST 1648 dust by Havers et al. (1998), it was reported that
H atoms were present principally in polysaccharide (about
40%) and aliphatic substructures (about 50%), and only to a
small extent in aromatic structures. Yet, it must be recalled
that a low intensity of aromatic protons may either indicate
that the abundance of aromatic structures is low, or that many
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

736
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
of the hydrogen atoms in the aromatic structures have been
substituted by other moieties.
The 1H-NMR spectrum in
Havers et al. (1998) was most similar to that presented by
Decesari et al. (2000) for the mono- and di-carboxylic acid
fraction (Fig. 3b), and is rather dissimilar to the spectrum of
the polyacidic (HULIS) fraction (Fig. 3a). Considering that
the DEAE-cellulose resin used for concentration by Havers
et al. (1998) does not segregate low molecular weight organic
acids, a considerable fraction of the HULIS studied in that
work may consist of lower molecular weight organic acids.
Indeed, Havers et al. (1998) found that virtually all the ex-
tracted material passed through an ultraﬁltration membrane
with a 1000 Da nominal cutoff.
4.4.2
13C-NMR
One of the only studies to speciﬁcally concentrate on
the base-soluble, acid-insoluble humic acid fraction of or-
ganic matter in aerosol particles was by Subbalakshmi et
al. (2000). In that study, 13C-NMR characterization of the
base-extracted and dialysized humic acid (dialysis cutoff 12–
14 kDa) obtained from fresh urban particulate matter showed
a spectrum consisting of about 45% aliphatic C and a large
aromatic component (41%), similar in abundances to soil and
aquatic-derived humic acids.
Duarte et al. (2005) reported 13C-NMR spectra for HULIS
extracted from the WSOC fraction of summer and autumn
aerosol particles from a rural part of Portugal. The spectra
showed a broad range of un-substituted saturated aliphatic
components (resonance in the 10 to 50 ppm range), aliphatic
carbons singly bound to one oxygen or nitrogen atom (60–
95 ppm range), aliphatic carbons singly bound to two oxy-
gen atoms (95-110 ppm range), and ester and carboxyl car-
bons (160–190 ppm range) (Duarte et al., 2005). The au-
tumn sample was relatively richer in aromatic carbons (110–
160 ppm range) than the summer sample (Fig. 4a), which the
authors concluded reﬂected a lignin breakdown component
due to wood burning. Unfortunately, they did not provide es-
timates for percent of aromatic carbons in the WSOC-derived
HULIS samples, although in both cases (summer and au-
tumn), it was evident from the NMR spectra that the relative
abundance of aromatic C in these WSOC-derived HULIS
samples was much lower than that reported by Subbalakshmi
et al. (2000) for aerosol-derived humic acid (base-extracted),
and lower than that reported by the IHSS for SRFA (Fig. 4b)
and Nordic Lake FA.
A substantial difference in 13C-NMR spectra for HULIS
extracted from the WSOC fraction of urban aerosol and
biomass aerosol was reported by Sannigrahi et al. (2005).
Biomass burning HULIS had a signiﬁcantly higher aro-
matic carbon percentage than did urban aerosol HULIS. Both
HULIS samples were found to have a substantial aliphatic
component, and to be quite different in relative carbon distri-
bution from a humic acid standard.
5
Non-spectroscopic characterization
A variety of other characterization methods have been em-
ployed in the search for HULIS structure. These studies are
reviewed below.
5.1
Pyrolysis Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectroscopy
(GC/MS)
Gelencser et al. (2000b) employed derivitization pyrolysis
GC/MS to study the chemical structure of the bulk polymeric
matter in continental ﬁne aerosol particles. Filters contain-
ing ﬁne aerosol particles were treated by tetramethylammo-
niumhydroxide (TMAH) to achieve high temperature methy-
lation of carboxylic and hydroxyl groups during pyrolysis at
500◦C. In summer samples, the identiﬁed compounds largely
consisted of methyl esters of n-alkanoic acids (C10–C18),
α, ω-alkandioic acids (C4–C9), benzene mono-, di-, and tri-
carboxylic acids, methoxy-acetic and methoxy-benzoic acid,
and a few other N-containing compounds (glycine deriva-
tives).
The TMAH-pyrolysis products for winter samples
were very different, being comprised almost exclusively of
fatty acid methyl esters. The authors interpreted their results
in terms of a polymeric material consisting of benzenecar-
boxylic acids as building blocks with attached aliphatic moi-
eties, although indeed, there is no evidence for such a struc-
ture in the winter aerosol.
These results of Gelencser et
al. (2000b) cannot be strictly attributed to a polymeric por-
tion of the organic aerosol, as no efforts were made to sep-
arate a high molecular weight fraction from a low molecu-
lar weight fraction before pyrolysis. This study can be con-
trasted with that of Subbalakshmi et al. (2000), who com-
pared pyrograms and TMAH-derivatized pyrograms of ur-
ban aerosol and base-extracted, acid-precipitated humic acid
extracted from the urban aerosol.
The pyrolitic compo-
nents of the extracted humic acid revealed oxygen, nitrogen
and sulfur-bearing compounds, substituted benzenes, substi-
tuted naphthalenes, and aliphatic, aromatic and cyclic hy-
drocarbons, several of which could be identiﬁed as originat-
ing from four biomolecule classes: lignin, protein, carbohy-
drates, and lipids. The derivatized pyrogram (for polar group
analysis) of the whole aerosol sample revealed a number of
aliphatic acid products (mainly methyl esters of n-alkanoic
acids in the C14-C18 range), aromatic acids (like Gelencser
et al. (2000b)), and phenolic compounds.
5.2
Capillary electrophoresis
Capillary electrophoresis was applied to interstitial aerosol
and fog water samples collected in the Po Valley and a stan-
dard humic acid (Nordic River humic acid (NRHA) from
the IHSS) (Krivacsy et al., 2000). Electropherograms with
typically broad humps representing a multitude of com-
pounds of differing charge to size ratios were obtained for the
NRHA standard, with better resolution in the borate buffer as
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
737
Fig. 4. (a) 13C-NMR spectra for HULIS isolated from aqueous ex-
tracts of aerosol collected in summer (trace marked (a)) and autumn
(trace marked (b)) from a rural area in Portugal. From Duarte et
al. (2005; with permission). (b) 13C-NMR spectrum for Suwannee
River fulvic acid, from www.ihss.gatech.edu.
compared with the phosphate buffer (Fig. 5a) due to complex
formation between borate and humic acid 1,2- and 1,3-diol
groups.
In contrast, the broad hump of the electrophero-
grams of interstitial aerosol occurred over a shorter migra-
tion time range (Fig. 5b), indicating overall lower mobility
of ionic compounds, with many small peaks superimposed
over the hump. There was little difference in electrophoretic
behavior in the two buffers (Fig. 5b), demonstrating a negli-
gible amount of 1,2- and 1,3-diol groups in the aerosol sam-
ple. Electrophoretic mobility of the aerosol sample increased
continuously with increasing pH of the electrolyte, with a
sharp increase between 4.28 and 5.90, and a slower increase
in the pH range of 5.90–9.10. At pH 4.28, the interstitial
aerosol electrophoretic hump disappeared entirely, suggest-
ing that most of the acidic functional groups were protonated.
Yet, the HA sample retained substantial electrophoretic mo-
bility at pH 4.28. In this study, Krivacsy et al. (2000) used the
term HULIS to refer to the entire interstitial aerosol sample,
which is very likely not the case. The hump may represent a
Fig. 5. (a) Electropherograms of Nordic River humic acid in 6 mM
Na2B4O7·10 H2O-3 mM KH2PO4, pH=9.00 (trace marked A) and
in 5 mM NaHPO4, pH=9.10 (trace marked B); and (b) Electro-
pherograms of water extract of an interstitial aerosol sample in
6 mM Na2B4O7·10H2O-3 mM KH2PO4, pH=9.00 (trace marked
A) and in 5 mM NaHPO4, pH=9.10 (trace marked B). From Kri-
vacsy et al. (2000; with permission).
large number of LMW compounds, and certainly, there were
substantial differences in electrophoretic activity and chemi-
cal character between the standard and the tested samples.
Electrophoretic behavior of isolated WSOC from alpine
aerosol particles was also studied by Krivacsy et al. (2001a).
They found no indication of phenolic OHs, and reported that
at pH of about 4, the majority of the compounds were neu-
tralized, conﬁrming earlier results (Krivacsy et al., 2000),
and demonstrating the weakly acidic nature of the isolated
WSOC, apparently weaker than the humic acid studied for
comparison.
5.3
Elemental analysis
Average elemental composition (m/m%) of HULIS from the
WSOC fraction of rural ﬁne aerosol particles collected be-
tween Jan-Sept 2000 in Hungary was reported to be 52%
C, 6.2% H, 2.5% N, and 39% O, giving an average or-
ganic matter mass to organic carbon ratio of 1.93, an av-
erage O/C molar ratio of 0.58, and an average H/C molar
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

738
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
Fig. 6. Thermal proﬁle of lignite-derived humic acid (dotted line)
and of ﬁne mode aerosol (solid line) from rural Hungary. From
Gelescner et al. (2000a; with permission).
ratio of 1.42 (Kiss et al., 2002). The elemental composi-
tion was quite invariant throughout the whole sampling pe-
riod. These results were very similar to those obtained ear-
lier by Krivacsy et at. (2001a) for HULIS from alpine ru-
ral aerosol particles (52.3% C, 6.7% H, 2.5% N, and 38.5%
O), giving an O/C molar ratio of 0.55 and H/C molar ra-
tio of 1.58.
While reported O/C molar ratios are similar
to those for standard fulvic acids, the H/C molar ratios are
substantially higher. Compare for example, molar ratios for
Suwannee River fulvic acid (O/C 0.60; H/C 0.99) and Nordic
Lake FA (O/C 0.65; H/C 0.91; calculated from data provided
by IHSS; www.ihss.gatech.edu). Thus, the elemental analy-
sis of HULIS indicates a predominance of oxygenated func-
tional groups, and the presence of saturated systems in ex-
cess of that for aquatic fulvic acids. This corresponds to cer-
tain spectral results (UV-VIS, ﬂuorescence, 13C-NMR, 1H-
NMR) that indicate a relatively lower aromatic content for
WSOC-derived HULIS as compared with fulvic and humic
acids (Havers et al., 1998; Krivacsy et al., 2001a; Duarte et
al., 2004; Duarte et al., 2005; Tagliavini et al., 2005). Based
on elemental and spectroscopic results, Kiss et al. (2002)
concluded that HULIS isolated from water soluble organic
carbon fraction consists of polyfunctional compounds bear-
ing polyconjugated structural elements, and carrying polar
groups such as carboxyl, hydroxyl and carbonyl. This ﬁts
well with the model structure consisting of an aromatic core
bearing substituted aliphatic chains with –COOH, CH2OH,
–COCH3, or –CH3 terminals groups suggested by others
(Mukai and Ambe, 1986; Decesari et al., 2000; Cappiello
et al., 2003).
5.4
Thermal proﬁling
A few attempts have been made to apply thermal proﬁling
techniques to the study of atmospheric HULIS, with am-
biguous results.
Thermograms of ﬁne continental aerosol
revealed two distinct peaks (Fig. 6), the ﬁrst of which was
attributed to more volatile or easily oxidizable compounds,
while the second was attributed to “air polymers” (Gelencser
et al., 2000a). Yet, a comparative thermogram of lignite-
derived humic acid (Aldrich Company) demonstrated a sin-
gle peak with a maximal peak height distinctly offset to
a lower time (temperature) than that of the “air polymer”
peak of the aerosol sample (Fig. 6). Following Francioso
et al. (2005), it can be expected that a humic material which
has undergone a relatively large extent of diagenetic changes
and humiﬁcation such as the lignite-derived humic acid sam-
ple from Aldrich studied by Gelencser et al. (2000a), should
be more thermally refractive than the smaller, less condensed
and less altered HULIS, and not the reverse.
A similarly unexplainable result is seen in the study by Yu
et al. (2004), whereby the thermogram component that was
suggested to represent high molecular weight organic species
(i.e., HULIS), demonstrates more refractive behavior than a
humic acid standard. Inconsistent with the interpretation of
high MW is the thermogram for a levoglucosan standard,
where a late peak is seen to evolve at the same time as the
so-called “high MW” peak.
5.5
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC)
Size exclusion chromatography has been employed in differ-
ent attempts to characterize WSOC aerosol extracts (Mukai
and Ambe, 1986; Zappoli et al., 1999; Krivacsy et al., 2000;
Andracchio et al., 2002; Samburova et al., 2005a), but it has
proved difﬁcult to extract consistent and signiﬁcant molecu-
lar size information with this technique. SEC characteriza-
tion of complex multicomponent mixtures of polyfunctional
polyelectrolytes such as humic substances is well-known to
be difﬁcult due to the preponderance of separation mecha-
nisms other than size exclusion (e.g., electrostatic and molec-
ular interactions with the stationary phase). At this time, af-
ter years of application of SEC to humic materials, optimal
elution and detection systems, as well as molecular size in-
terpretations of chromatograms, are still quite controversial
(Chin et al., 1994; Peuravuori and Pihlaja, 1997; Perminova
et al., 1998; DeNobili and Chen 1999; Perminova 1999; Pic-
colo et al. 1999; Kudryavtsev et al. 2000; Perminova et al.,
2003; Piccolo et al., 2003; Peuravuori and Pihlaja, 2004) etc.
A recent study by Samburova et al. (2005a) of WSOC ex-
tracted from urban aerosol from Zurich exempliﬁes this dif-
ﬁculty, displaying differences in estimated molecular size by
nearly an order of magnitude as a function of the polymer
standard applied.
5.6
Ultraﬁltration
One of the more perplexing issues concerning HULIS char-
acterization is related to its ultraﬁltration behavior, whereby
virtually all organic carbon from WSOC aerosol extracts
passes through ultraﬁltration membranes of 500 or 1000 Da
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
739
0
10
20
30
40
50
>0.5 m
>100K-
0.5 m
50K-
100K
20K-
50K
5K-
20K
1K-
5K
<1K
% TOC
NMWCO (Da)
 Hubbard Brook
 Ithaca
Fig. 7. Size distribution of total organic carbon in precipitation from
two sites in rural NY. After Likens and Galloway (1983; with per-
mission).
(Havers et al., 1998; Krivacsy et al., 2001a; Kiss et al.,
2003).
Such behavior stands in sharp contrast to myriad
reports for ultraﬁltration of fulvic and humic acids, which
are routinely separated into ultraﬁltration fractions by nomi-
nal cutoffs even as high as 100 000 Da (Aiken, 1984; Mar-
ley et al., 1992; Ikeda et al., 2000; Subbalakshmi et al.,
2000; Clark et al., 2002; Francioso et al., 2002; Alberts
and Takacs, 2004; Assemi et al., 2004; Peuravuori et al.,
2005; Schwede-Thomas et al., 2005). Such fractionation,
though not considered to represent the true molecular weight
of the fractions due to complex ion repulsion and ﬁlter clog-
ging phenomenon, nevertheless are frequently found to seg-
regate humic and fulvic acids according to chemical struc-
ture. Even more confounding is that one of the earliest stud-
ies to report macromolecular organic carbon in precipitation,
Likens and Galloway (1983), partitioned dissolved organic
carbon (DOC) in rainwater collected from a rural area into
different molecular weight ranges by ultraﬁltration at nom-
inal molecular weight cut-offs (NMWCO) of 1000, 5000,
20 000, 50 000, and 100 000 Da. About 50% of the DOC
passed the 1000 Da membrane, while the rest was segregated
by NMWCO up to 100 000 Da (Fig. 7). The low molecular
weight fraction (<1000 NMWCO), representing about 37–
47% of the rainwater total organic carbon (TOC), yielded sig-
niﬁcant concentrations of carboxylic acids, aldehydes, car-
bohydrates, and tannin/lignin. These results beg the question
of whether the WSOC fraction frequently studied as HULIS
does indeed contain a substantial macromolecular portion, or
whether HULIS actually reﬂects a complex mixture of in-
separable low molecular weight compounds. This question
leads to studies of molecular weight determinations by MS
detection.
Fig. 8. (a) ESI-MS negative ion spectrum of HULIS extracted and
isolated from aerosol collected in Hungary. From Kiss et al. (2003;
with permission); (b) ESI-MS spectra in negative ion mode ob-
tained for Suwannee River Fulvic Acid. From Rostad and Leenheer
(2004; with permission).
6
Molecular weight determination by MS
To now, there have been few attempts to characterize iso-
lated HULIS by molecular weight. One of the only stud-
ies to do so was by Kiss et al. (2003), who tried to esti-
mate average molecular weight of HULIS that was isolated
from the WSOC extract of rural aerosol samples by the tech-
nique of Varga et al. (2001). The isolate had considerable
absorbance in the 200–500 nm range, indicating the presence
of polyconjugated organic compounds. Liquid chromatogra-
phy and concomitant photodiode array detection and electro-
spray ionization (ESI) tandem quadrupole mass spectrome-
ter in negative ionization mode was applied, with mass spec-
tra recorded in the range of m/z from 40 to 520 Da. The
electrospray mass spectra demonstrated a mixture of negative
ions of varying m/z ratio, with a unimodal distribution and
a tail towards higher m/z (Fig. 8a). Weight average molecu-
lar weight (MWW), determined by assuming all the ions are
singly charged, was computed to range between about 200 to
300 Da. For comparison, a negative ion mode ESI-MS spec-
tra for Suwannee River fulvic acid (SRFA) from Rostad and
Leenheer (2004) is shown in Fig. 8b. The fulvic acid spectra
displays a unimodel distribution of negative ions with a long
tail towards m/z ratios greater than 2500 Da and an aver-
age MWW of 456 Da (Fig. 8b) (Rostad and Leenheer, 2004).
Other studies have shown uni- or multi-modal negative ion
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

740
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
distributions for fulvic acids with m/z ratios extending well
beyond 1000 Da (Brown and Rice, 2000a; Persson et al.,
2000; Pfeifer et al., 2001; Stenson et al., 2002; Reemtsma
and These, 2003).
Possible sources of error in such molecular weight de-
terminations by ESI-MS in negative ion mode are mani-
fold, including fragmentation in the ESI source, formation
of multiply-charged ions, and differing ionization and de-
tection efﬁciencies for diverse components of the complex
mixture of compounds making up HULIS. These sources of
error can be difﬁcult to test or quantify. Recent studies using
high resolution mass spectrometry have shown that virtually
all ions in fulvic and humic acid spectra are singly-charged
(Stenson et al., 2002; Reemtsma and These, 2003; Rostad
and Leenheer, 2004), alleviating concerns raised by earlier
reports that formation of multiply-charged ions may be po-
tentially signiﬁcant (Brown and Rice, 2000a; Persson et al.,
2000; Leenheer et al., 2001; Pfeifer et al., 2001). Other pa-
rameters found to considerably affect molecular mass deter-
minations by ESI-MS of fulvic (and humic) acids include
solution concentration, pH, ionic strength, and complexity
(Brown and Rice, 2000a; Persson et al., 2000; Piccolo and
Spiteller, 2003; Rostad and Leenheer, 2004; These et al.,
2004). Likewise, m/z ion distribution range and intensity
may vary greatly as a function of spray solvent composition,
positive versus negative ion detection mode, and cone volt-
age (Brown and Rice, 2000a; Persson et al., 2000; These and
Reemtsma, 2003; Rostad and Leenheer, 2004). Consider-
ing that ionization and detection of higher MW components
is less efﬁcient, that solution complexity reduces the over-
all m/z distribution, and the limited stability of the higher
molecular weight humic and fulvic acid molecules in the
electrospray process, there seems to be a growing consen-
sus that ESI-MS analytical ability for fulvic and humic acids
may be limited to about 1000 Da for molecular ions (Kujaw-
inski et al., 2002; Stenson et al., 2002; Piccolo and Spiteller,
2003; Reemtsma and These, 2003; These and Reemtsma,
2003; Rostad and Leenheer, 2004).
Because of uncertainties with ESI-MS molecular weight
estimates, particularly concerns of possible negative bias due
to formation of multiply-charged ions, and lower ionization
and detection efﬁciency for high MW molecules, Kiss et
al. (2003) also estimated number average molecular weight
(MWN) by isothermal vapor pressure osmometry. Number
average estimates ranged from about 215 to 345 Da, whereas
molecular weight mass estimates (MWM) from ESI-MS were
somewhat lower, in the range of about 200 to 300 Da. Ide-
ally, MWM should be greater than or equal to MWN. The
ratio between the two, MWM/MWN, is a measure of poly-
dispersivity, with a higher ratio indicating a greater polydis-
persivity. MWN represents the total weight of the molecules
present divided by the total number of molecules. MWW is a
weighted average considering the mass of the molecules, so
that heavier molecules have relatively more importance than
lighter molecules. Possible explanations for higher MWN
than MWM include HULIS aggregation in the osmometry
experimental solution, or negative bias in the MS spectral
calculations (Kiss et al., 2003).
Other studies have employed ESI-MS for characterizing
m/z ion distributions of WSOC from aerosol particles (Kri-
vacsy et al., 2001a; Samburova et al., 2005a; Samburova et
al., 2005b), fog water (Krivacsy et al., 2000; Kiss et al., 2001;
Cappiello et al., 2003), and cloud water (Feng and Moller,
2004), without isolating the HULIS fraction from other wa-
ter soluble compounds. For un-fractionated WSOC from ru-
ral aerosol particles, an m/z ion distribution range from 53
to 303 in negative ion mode was obtained (Krivacsy et al.,
2001a). The authors speciﬁcally acknowledged that the pres-
ence of inorganic ions (which suppress the ionization of or-
ganic compounds), formation of water adducts (ions com-
bined with different number of water molecules), and lack of
information on the charge state of the ions, may all have re-
sulted in unrepresentative MW determination. As in the later
study of Kiss et al. (2003), Krivacsy et al. (2001a) found that
all WSOC passed through a 500 Da ultraﬁltration membrane.
For water extracts of urban airborne particulate matter, laser
desorption ionization mass spectra (LDI-MS) showed a uni-
modal distribution of peaks with a range between m/z 100–
600 (Samburova et al., 2005a; Samburova et al., 2005b).
Bulk fog water samples evaluated by ESI tandem
quadrupole MS in negative ionization mode demonstrated
a vast number of peaks giving an unresolved hump of ions
from m/z=100 to 600, with the most intense peaks being de-
tected around m/z=200–250 (Kiss et al., 2001). The Nordic
River fulvic acid (NRFA) standard analyzed for compari-
son likewise demonstrated an unresolved hump of ions, but
with a broader range of masses, ranging from m/z of 140
up to 1000 Da (or higher), with the most intense peaks at
around m/z=300. Krivacsy et al. (2000), also studying un-
fractionated fog water and a humic acid standard (Nordic
River HA) in negative ion mode by ESI-MS, reported an
ion mass range for fog water from 50 to 500 m/z, with the
most intense peaks in the m/z=150–200 range. The most
intense peaks of the HA standard were in the 200–250 m/z
range, with an m/z ion range greater than 600. Krivacsy et
al. (2000) were careful not to attribute these m/z ratios to
actual average molecular weight distributions. Cappiello et
al. (2003) also characterized bulk water soluble compounds
from fog water in negative ion mode, using ESI- ion trap
MS/MS (ESI-MS/MS). While they did not attempt to deter-
mine MW, it is of interest to note that both fog water samples
and Suwannee River fulvic acid (SRFA) displayed continu-
ous ion proﬁles of m/z ratios up to 1000 Da (mass distribu-
tions measured from 100 to 1000 Da). The WSOC obtained
from fog samples had slightly greater abundances of ions in
the lower part of the mass spectrum, which may reﬂect the
fact that a separate HULIS fraction was not isolated from the
LMW organics before ESI-MS/MS analysis (Cappiello et al.,
2003). Feng and Moller (2004) reported ESI-MS results for
bulk cloud water samples, observing an m/z range for nega-
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
741
tive ions from about 100 to 500 Da, with the most intensive
peaks in the 250–300 Da range.
With the exception of Kiss et al. (2003), these studies have
characterized whole samples or the entire water soluble frac-
tion. Clearly, if HULIS is not separated from LMW organic
compounds, average MW determinations will be skewed to-
wards lower average weights.
Additionally, as relatively
higher molecular weight compounds have been found to un-
dergo less effective ionization and detection (Reemtsma and
These, 2003), it is obvious that a MW determination for un-
fractionated WSOC will necessarily underestimate HULIS
average mass determination. The extreme complexity of the
unfractionated samples will also skew the m/z range to lower
values, due to spray, ionization, and detection inefﬁciencies
(Piccolo and Spiteller, 2003; Reemtsma and These, 2003;
These and Reemtsma, 2003). For these and many other rea-
sons, molecular weight determinations reported for HULIS
should be viewed with caution.
It should also be reiter-
ated that mass spectrometer studies of fulvic and humic acids
have generally shown demonstrably larger ranges of m/z ra-
tio and greater average molecular weight estimates than those
reported for atmospheric samples (Brown and Rice, 2000b;
Brown and Rice, 2000a; Persson et al., 2000; Leenheer et al.,
2001; Pfeifer et al., 2001; Plancque et al., 2001; Stenson et
al., 2002; Piccolo and Spiteller, 2003; Reemtsma and These,
2003; Stenson et al., 2003; These and Reemtsma, 2003; Ros-
tad and Leenheer, 2004; These et al., 2004).
7
Hygroscopic properties, surface activity, and colloidal
properties
7.1
Hygroscopic growth
To date, a limited number of studies have examined the hy-
groscopic growth and deliquescence behavior of atmospheric
HULIS or model HULIS material. Gysel et al. (2004) exam-
ined hygroscopic behavior of water soluble matter (WSM)
and isolated organic matter (HULIS using the method of
Varga et al. (2001)) derived from ambient continental-rural
ﬁne aerosol samples, as well as aquatic reference fulvic and
humic acids, by hygroscopic tandem differential mobility
analyzer (H-TDMA) at sub-saturation (5–95% relative hu-
midity; RH). The ideal solution model was found to de-
scribe HULIS and reference humic materials’ growth curves
well, assuming no dissociation. Growth factors at 90% RH
for HULIS and humic materials ranged from 1.06 to 1.18.
Similar growth factors for standard humic and fulvic acids
obtained from the IHSS were also observed by Brooks et
al. (2004) for particles of 50, 100 and 200 nm diameter, and
for Suwannee River Fulvic Acid (SRFA; Svenningsson et al.,
2005).
Hygroscopicity of bulk model humic materials (SRFA
and Nordic Aquatic Fulvic Acid (NAFA)) was also studied
by electrodynamic balance (Chan and Chan, 2003). They
reported that both humic materials absorbed and desorbed
water reversibly without crystallization, and retained water
at RH<10%.
This may be ascribed to the fact that hu-
mic substances are anionic in aqueous solution, and will
not dehydrate unless the charges are sufﬁciently neutralized
(Gorbunov et al., 1998; Yates and von Wandruszka, 1999).
Growth factors at RH=90% were 1.13 and 1.21 for SFRA
and NAFA, respectively, similar to growth factors measured
by H-TDMA for similar reference materials.
Gysel et al. (2004) suggested the occurrence of deliques-
cence for HULIS and humic materials based on a shrinkage
in mobility diameter at an intermediate RH, which they at-
tributed to an initial dynamic shape factor >1 that led to a
decrease in mobility diameter upon dissolution of the parti-
cles. Yet, other studies failed to identify deliquescence for
humic and fulvic acids (Chan and Chan, 2003; Brooks et al.,
2004; Svenningsson et al., 2005). No apparent relationship
between deliquescence RH (DRH) of the different samples
and their 90% RH growth factor could be discerned in the
study of Gysel et al. (2004).
Chan and Chan (2003) and Brooks et al. (2004) studied
hygroscopic growth of mixtures of humic substances with
inorganic salts such as ammonium sulfate (AS) and NaCl.
Svenningsson et al. (2005) also studied hygroscopic growth
and CCN activity of mixtures of small organic acids, ful-
vic acid, and inorganic salts. Model HULIS materials are
less hygroscopic than either NaCL or AS, such that mixtures
absorb less water than equal masses of the pure inorganic
salts. Mixtures were found to deliquesce at RHs similar to
DRHs of the pure inorganic substances. While both Brooks
et al. (2004) and Svenningsson et al. (2005) reported that ex-
perimental behavior was well predicted, for the most part, by
the Zdanovskii, Stokes, and Robinson (ZSR) relation, Chan
and Chan (2003) found that HULIS-AS and HULIS-NaCl
mixtures take up more water at a given RH than their simple
additive sum would suggest. They also found that the rela-
tive enhancement in water uptake increased as RH decreased.
For a 1:1 HULIS-AS mixture, the water uptake enhancement
factor reached as much as 2.4 at RH=0.4, while for HULIS-
NaCl mixtures, the extent of enhancement was maximally
about 1.8 at an RH of 0.5. There was also some hint of a max-
imum in water uptake enhancement at some interim RH (40–
50%). Non-additive enhanced growth behavior has been pre-
viously reported for mixtures of different organic compounds
with AS. However, the pattern of enhancement behavior as
a function of RH was very different for the small, well de-
ﬁned organic acids studied (malonic, succinic, glutaric, cit-
ric, pinonic) (Chan and Chan 2003). For those compounds in
mixtures with AS, relative enhancement decreased linearly
with decreasing RH, in contrast to increasing enhancement
with decreasing RH for HULIS. The authors did not have
an explanation for these unusual trends for HULIS:inorganic
salt mixtures.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

742
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
7.2
Droplet activation
As far as we know, only one study to date has exam-
ined droplet activation of aerosol-derived HULIS (Dinar
et al., 2006).
Activation of particles made up of at-
mospheric HULIS extracted from fresh biomass burning,
slightly aged biomass burning, and urban pollution aerosol
particles was compared to activation of size-fractionated ful-
vic acid from an aquatic source (SRFA). HULIS was ex-
tracted from aerosol particles by an isolation procedure de-
veloped on the basis of the scheme used by the IHSS for ful-
vic and humic acid extraction from solids, as discussed ear-
lier. The idea behind the size fractionation of SRFA was to
prepare fractions enriched in smaller molecular weight com-
ponents that could potentially be closer in size and character
to HULIS. A correlation was found between cloud condensa-
tion nuclei (CCN)-activation diameter of SRFA fractions and
number average molecular weight (MWN) of the fraction.
The lower molecular weight fractions activated at lower crit-
ical diameters, which was explained by the greater number
of solute species in the droplet for fractions of lower molec-
ular weight. The three aerosol-extracted HULIS samples ac-
tivated at lower diameters than any of the size-fractionated
or bulk SRFA. For example, at a supersaturation of 0.2%,
the smallest SRFA fractions (MWN=440, 520 and 600 Da)
activated at sizes between 170 to 160 nm, while aerosol
HULIS extracts (MWN=410, 500, and 610 Da) activated at
80, 100, and 135 nm, respectively. Thus these aerosol HULIS
were found to be substantially more CCN-active than even
the smallest size fractions of SRFA. HULIS extracted from
the daytime smoke sample was more CCN-active than the
HULIS extract of fresh nighttime smoke particles. This was
suggested to result from photochemical processing during
the day time, mainly by OH-radicals, ozone and possibly UV,
which led to enhanced degradation of the HULIS compounds
and a decrease of its average molecular weight (Dinar et al.,
2006).
7.3
Surface and colloidal properties
Like humic substances, HULIS have been found to be sur-
face active (Facchini et al., 2000; Kiss et al., 2005; Di-
nar et al., 2006). Therefore, HULIS could enhance cloud
droplet activation by depressing surface tension and lower-
ing the critical supersaturation for activation (Gorbunov et
al., 1998; Nenes et al., 2002), or alternatively, delay droplet
activation due to hinderance of water vapor diffusion through
a surface organic ﬁlm (Chen and Lee, 1999; Rudich, 2003;
Broekhuizen et al., 2004).
Facchini et al. (2000) observed a decrease in surface ten-
sion as a function of increasing TOC content in both aerosol
and fog water samples from the Po Valley. Surface activity
of the fog water fractionated into neutral, mono-and dicar-
boxylic acid (MDA), and polyacidic (HULIS) fractions ac-
cording to Decesari et al. (2000) was also tested. The poly-
acidic (HULIS) fraction was three times more surface active
than the MDA fraction, and ten times more active than the
neutral fraction. This was taken to be evidence for the humic-
like character of the polyacidic fraction. It also corresponds
to the general rule that higher polarity molecules (e.g., mono-
and di-carboxylic acids) have a greater afﬁnity for the bulk
solution and hence reduced surface-active properties (Negre
et al., 2002).
HULIS extracted according to the method of Varga et
al. (2001) from rural aerosol collected over different seasons
was evaluated for surface activity effects at different aque-
ous concentrations representing estimated concentrations in
droplets at the time of activation (Kiss et al., 2005). At 1 g/L,
HULIS decreased the surface tension of water by 25–42%,
with the greatest decrease in surface tension for summer
aerosol samples, and the smallest decrease for winter aerosol
samples. No difference in bulk elemental composition was
observed for the different samples. Surface tension lower-
ing was enhanced in the presence of high concentrations of
ammonium sulfate. The surface activity of HULIS samples
generally was found to exceed that of humic acid samples
and aqueous fulvic acid standards obtained from the IHSS
at the same concentration. Dinar et al. (2006) also found
that HULIS derived from biomass burning smoke aerosol
particles, slightly aged smoke particles, and daytime urban
aerosol particles lowered the surface tension of water more
than did the fulvic acid standard (SRFA) at comparable solu-
tion concentrations.
Humic substances can dissolve or precipitate in aque-
ous solution, can accumulate at interfaces, can form self-
assemblages, can solubilize organic compounds, and can ex-
ist in different colloidal states, depending on the solution
composition (Tombacz 1999). Important humic molecule pa-
rameters that affect colloidal properties include functional
group density, molecular size, and polydispersivity, all of
which dictate the amphiphilic character of the humic mate-
rial (Hayase and Tsubota, 1983; Engebretson and von Wan-
druszka, 1998; Kawahigashi and Fujitake, 1998; Yates and
von Wandruszka, 1999). The most important solution param-
eters controlling colloidal behavior are pH, ionic strength,
and the presence of divalent or polyvalent metal cations (En-
gebretson and von Wandruszka, 1998; Yates and von Wan-
druszka, 1999). Polyvalent cations have a major inﬂuence
on formation of humic micelle-like structures (“pseudomi-
celles”) via their ability both to neutralize negative charges
on the humic substances and to engage in bridging inter-
actions (Yates and von Wandruszka, 1999). The higher the
charge on the metal ion, the fewer needed to produce am-
phiphilic species that can migrate to an interface.
Yet at
higher metals concentrations, the bridging ability of the poly-
valent cations can result in formation of pseudomicelles in
solution, causing amphiphilic species to leave the interface
(Yates and von Wandruszka, 1999).
As such, curves of
humic solution surface tension versus metal concentration,
and surface tension versus pH, have been found to feature
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
743
a minimum in tension at intermediate metals concentrations
and pH values (Yates and von Wandruszka, 1999). Humic
pseudomicelles formed in solution have been reported to se-
quester hydrophobic organic species (Engebretson and Von
Wandruszka, 1994; Engebretson et al., 1996).
Beyond the surface tension measurements reviewed above,
and indirect evidence for metals complexing (Spokes et al.,
1996; Gelencser et al., 2000c), there is little data in the liter-
ature about such colloidal qualities HULIS. Analytical inter-
ferences in anodic stripping voltammetry were exploited in a
study of complexation of Cu with fog water by Gelencser et
al. (2000c) to infer something about the presence of metal-
complexing HULIS in fog water. Humic substances inter-
fere with anodic stripping voltammetry because the metal-
humic complexes are electrochemically labile, meaning they
undergo dissociation reactions during measurements and/or
adsorb at the electrode surface. These interferences are man-
ifested as shifts in peak current potential and peak width,
as well as elevated baselines. In the study by Gelencser et
al. (2000c), the voltammogram of fog water, with a certain
natural Cu content, had a shifted and broader Cu peak and
steeper baseline than a pure Cu solution. Upon Cu addi-
tion to the fog water, the Cu peak did not increase in size,
but experienced an additional slight anodic shift and peak
broadening. A second addition of Cu resulted in a split peak,
with a reduction in the principal Cu peak and establishment
of a very broad low intensity peak, more cathodic than the
ﬁrst, indicative of formation of a range of electroactive Cu-
organic complexes, similar to those observed for natural or-
ganic complexes like fulvic and humic acid. Though not suit-
able for quantitative characterization of natural complexants,
the observed interferences were suggested to provide indirect
evidence that natural complexants similar to fulvic and hu-
mic acid are present in the fog water in signiﬁcant amounts.
An earlier study (Spokes et al., 1996) used cathode strip-
ping voltammetry in a similar manner to demonstrate Cu-
complexation by organic ligands in rain water. There, the
concentration of organic ligands was found to be about twice
the concentration in seawater.
If HULIS have similar colloidal and metals binding prop-
erties as humic substances, it could have important implica-
tions for the atmospheric chemistry of aerosols. This was
discussed in a recent paper by Tabazadeh (2005). For ex-
ample, at solution concentrations above the critical micelle
concentration (CMC), humic pseudomicelles could poten-
tially increase light scattering by aerosol particles due to in-
creased solution turbidity. Micelle formation could also af-
fect water uptake by the aerosol particle since the ionic com-
position will change when aggregates are formed in solu-
tion. The effect of amphiphilic substances on surface ten-
sion lowering will terminate at the CMC, as surface active
species form micelles in the bulk solution rather than migrate
to the air-solution interface. HULIS pseudomicelles could,
in theory, solubilize hydrophobic organic pollutants, which
could potentially protect organic pollutants from oxidation
(Tabazadeh 2005). Considering its possible importance to at-
mospheric chemistry, the colloidal nature of HULIS deserves
more study. Based on data for humic substances (von Wan-
druszka, 1998; Yates and von Wandruszka, 1999; Negre et
al., 2002), it can be suggested that at relevant atmospheric
pH values (3–6 pH units; Facchini et al., 1999), the surface
tension lowering capacity of HULIS may be at its greatest.
8
Suggested origins of HULIS
Potential origins of HULIS in the atmosphere are diverse,
including primary terrestrial (Simoneit, 1980) and marine
sources (Cini et al., 1994; Cini et al., 1996; Calace et al.,
2001; Cavalli et al., 2004), biomass burning (Mukai and
Ambe, 1986; Facchini et al., 1999; Zappoli et al., 1999; Gra-
ham et al., 2002; Mayol-Bracero et al., 2002), and secondary
organic aerosol formation (condensation, reaction, oligomer-
ization, etc.) (Gelencser et al., 2002; Jang et al., 2002; Jang
et al., 2003; Tolocka et al., 2004; Hung et al., 2005). Dif-
ferent suggested mechanisms for HULIS generation during
biomass burning include: (i) soil-derived humic matter lofted
into the air as a result of combustion; (ii) HULIS gener-
ation via chemical transformations during combustion and
thermal breakdown of plant lignins and cellulose; and (iii)
recombination and condensation reactions between volatile,
low molecular weight combustion products (Mayol-Bracero
et al., 2002).
For the most part, terrestrial sources are not considered to
be the origin of the bulk of HULIS in atmospheric aerosol.
This is because most studies in the last decade have focused
on HULIS derived from the WSOC fraction, which is preva-
lent mainly in ﬁne mode aerosol (Cavalli et al., 2004; Yu et
al., 2004). A primary marine source for HULIS has been
championed by Cavalli et al. (2004) in a study of marine
aerosol collected on the west coast of Ireland, and by Cini
et al. (1994, 1996) for the origin of fulvic acids in Antarc-
tic snow. For aerosol particles from Mace Head, Ireland, ﬁne
mode WSOC, including a HULIS fraction of about 27%, was
suggested to be derived from bubble-bursting at the ocean
surface, which transfers organic matter into marine aerosol
particles (Cavalli et al., 2004). The fulvic acid-like surface
active ﬂuorescent organic matter found in Antarctic snow
was likewise enriched in the ﬁne fraction, and was explained
in terms of transport of aerosolized marine water (Cini et al.,
1996).
Most other studies have proposed various secondary for-
mation pathways for HULIS. For example, Gelencser et
al. (2002) suggested that atmospheric HULIS is formed by
evaporation, condensation, and aerosol-phase polymeriza-
tion of polar, low molecular weight degradation products of
organic debris in soil and other anthropogenic and natural
sources. Their theory was based on a comparative study of
the chemical structure of bulk organic matter in ﬁne aerosol
and natural humic and fulvic acids and involved simpliﬁed
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

744
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
mass ﬂux calculations with estimated air-water equilibrium
data.
Soot oxidation as a source of HULIS was put forward
by Decesari et al. (2002). They found that ozonolysis of
soot creates a polyacidic WSOC fraction which they likened
to HULIS reported in atmospheric aerosol particles. Since
the 1H-NMR spectra of the oxidized soot-derived polyacidic
fraction did not resemble the 1H-NMR spectra reported for
aerosol and fog-water derived polyacidic fraction (Fig. 3),
this mechanism cannot account for the whole variety of
HULIS reported in atmospheric samples.
Based on analogy to formation of humic substances in soil,
whereby polymerization reactions of small phenolic com-
pounds released during metabolic processes are among the
major chemical processes involved in synthesis of soil hu-
mic substances, Gelencser et al. (2003) suggested that atmo-
spheric HULIS may be formed by in-cloud processing via
similar reactions. They claimed that such liquid phase re-
actions could take place between a multiplicity of different
polar aromatic compound precursors with hydroxyl radicals,
yielding humic-like substances as secondary aerosol con-
stituents. Such a mechanism implies that most aerosol parti-
cles are entrained at some point in their lifetime in clouds.
A number of laboratory studies have focused on elucidat-
ing photochemical and oxidative processes that could lead
to the formation of HULIS and large macromolecules in at-
mospheric aerosol particles. These studies range from large
simulation experiments (smog chambers) to ﬂow tube stud-
ies, and invoke polymerization and oligomerization reactions
for formation of secondary organic aerosol in the presence
and absence of seed acid particles. Some of these studies are
reviewed in the next section.
9
Laboratory studies on the formation of HULIS
In laboratory experiments, Gelencser et al. (2003) demon-
strated the irreversible formation of HULIS in aqueous so-
lution by means of Fenton reaction to produce OH radicals
with 3,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid, as a model for aromatic
mono/diacids.
On a time scale of hours to days, brown
products were formed, which were characterized by UV-
VIS spectrophotometry, liquid chromatography, ESI-mass
spectrometry, thermally-assisted hydrolysis, methylation-
gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (THM-GC/MS), and
thermal proﬁling (Hoffer et al., 2004). The features observed
by all the analytical techniques closely resemble those found
for natural humic materials and aerosol HULIS. The formed
substances showed intense absorption in the lower visible to
UV range, such that they may be important in atmospheric
absorption of solar radiation.
The electrospray ionization
mass spectra of the entire reaction mixture exhibited a semi-
continuous distribution of ions up to about m/z=500. It was
concluded that the reaction products consist of a large num-
ber of species of different molecular weights, well below
1000 Da, analogous to the ﬁndings for HULIS isolated from
urban and rural aerosol particles (Havers et al., 1998; Kiss
et al., 2003). Liquid chromatography identiﬁed a number of
new compounds covering a wide range of polarity. The abun-
dance of low molecular weight compounds led the authors to
conclude that the reaction proceeds by oligomerization rather
than polymerization. As the time of the reaction proceeded
to a maximum of 7 days, thermal proﬁles clearly showed the
development of more refractory substances.
Experiments with acidic seed aerosol particles have shown
an increased formation of secondary organic aerosol (SOA)
mass, with formation of high molecular weight products,
compared to non-acidic aerosol (Jang et al., 2002). It was
suggested that acid-catalyzed chemical reactions, such as
aldol condensation and gem-diol reactions of biogenically-
emitted compounds, can lead to the formation of high molec-
ular weight oligomers which may affect the physical and
chemical properties of organic particles (Jang et al., 2002;
Jang et al., 2003; Tolocka et al., 2004). The chemical re-
actions include diverse acid-catalyzed reactions such as hy-
dration, polymerization, hemiacetal and acetal formation, al-
dol condensation, ring opening of terpenoid carbonyls, and
cross-linking in the particle phase. Speciﬁc functional groups
that lead to these reactions include aliphatic aldehydes and
carbonyls. For example, it was found that glyoxal, an un-
likely SOA precursor by virtue of its high vapor pressure,
can form high molecular weight products because of its
highly reactive α-dicarbonyl functionality. Isoprene oxida-
tion products may also participate in such chemistry (Jang
et al., 2002; Tolocka et al., 2004). The formation of these
compounds is relatively effective, leading to positive devi-
ations from the expected partition coefﬁcient of carbonyl-
containing and other semivolatile compounds. A good ex-
ample is the partition of 2-hydroxy-1,3-propanedial into the
condensed phase of SOA which is three orders of magni-
tude higher than can be predicted by its Kp due to the acid-
catalyzed heterogeneous reactions that consume it (Jang et
al., 2002). Limbeck et al. (2003) also presented evidence for
efﬁcient SOA formation in an acidic medium by means of
irreversible formation of HULIS in heterogeneous reactions
of dienes (i.e., isoprene) in the presence of sulfuric acid. The
humic-like character of the reaction products was evidenced
by UV-spectrometry, thermal analysis, and FTIR diffuse re-
ﬂectance spectroscopy. In addition, Iinuma et al. (2004) stud-
ied SOA formation by ozonolysis of α-pinene in the pres-
ence of acidic particles.
Thermographic TOC determina-
tion showed an increase of particle phase organics by 40%
in the presence of sulphuric acid seed particles. Capillary
electrophoresis ESI-MS analysis showed formation of com-
pounds with MWM>300, with HULIS character.
It is expected that acidic aerosols such as H2SO4 and
HNO3 could provide sites for such photochemical reactions
in the atmosphere. Diesel soot, due to its H2SO4 content, is
also expected to provide enough acidity for acid-catalyzed
reactions.
It was found that acid-catalyzed reactions can
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
745
occur even on wood burning soot, which has low sulfur con-
tent, suggesting that even small amounts of acid can have a
profound effect (Jang et al., 2002; Jang et al., 2003).
Kalberer et al. (2004) demonstrated polymerization re-
actions during the photoxidation of 1,3,4-trimethylbenzene
(TMB) over the course of about 20 h in a large photochemi-
cal chamber. They measured a large number of compounds
with molecular weight up to 1000 Da by laser desorption ion-
ization (LDI) mass spectrometry. Peaks between 400 and
900 Da showed a highly regular mass difference of 14, 16
and 18 Da, suggesting that polymerization reactions were re-
sponsible for the SOA formed in the reaction chamber. It
was suggested that the basic units correspond to glyoxal
and pyruvic acid. The proposed reaction mechanism is a
nonradical-induced acetal polymerization with methylgly-
oxal as the main monomer, though other carbonyls, carbonyl-
containing acids and hydrated carbonyls can also be incorpo-
rated into the products (Kalberer et al., 2004). However, if
other units play a role in the reaction mechanisms, it might
be more difﬁcult to explain the regular spacing observed in
the products. The polymer formed has a O/C ratio close to
1, which is rather higher than the ratio measured in ambi-
ent HULIS (Krivacsy et al., 2001a; Kiss et al., 2002). In
contrast to the experiments by Jang et al. (2002; Jang et al.
2003), the polymerization reaction demonstrated by Kalberer
et al. (2004) occurs without the use of acidic seed particles. It
was suggested that the acidity produced by the organic acids
sufﬁces to promote the reaction. The same products, with
higher formation rates, were observed when the reactions
were carried out under realistic atmospheric concentrations,
presumably due to the higher surface to volume ratios of the
smaller particles that formed in these experiments (Kalberer
et al., 2004).
In a series of photochemical chamber experiments, Gao
et al. (2004a, b) further studied the effect of acidity on
oligomer formation. Using acidic and basic seed aerosols,
they studied SOA formation from ozonolysis of several pre-
cursors (α-pinene, cyclohexene, 1-methyl cyclohexene, 1-
methyl cyclopentene, cyclopoctene, 1-methyl cyclohexene
and terpinolene). Products up to 1600 Da were observed us-
ing liquid chromatography – ion trap mass spectrometry. The
high molecular mass peak intensities compare to, or some-
times exceed, the peak intensities of low molecular mass
(<250 Da) species. It was found that while basic conditions
lead to oligomer formation, higher acidity in the seed par-
ticles resulted in faster and larger oligomer formation and
higher overall SOA yield (Gao et al., 2004b). It was also sug-
gested that the precursor hydrocarbon structure, substitution
and isomeric structures can affect the type of SOA formed
due to both gas-phase and aerosol-phase reaction pathways
(Gao et al., 2004a).
High molecular weight products were detected in the
ozonolysis of oleic acid-coated particles (Katrib et al., 2004).
Using HPLC-MS methods, it was shown that the oligomers
(often exceeding 1000 Da) exhibit regular spacing of 189 and
172 Da (Hung et al., 2005). The regular spacing of 172 Da
(9-oxononanoic acid) and 188 Da (azelaic acid Criegee inter-
mediate) in the mass spectra suggest that these species are
the monomers in condensed-phase polymerization reactions
(Hung et al., 2005). It was postulated that 9-oxononanoic
acid lengthens the molecular chain via secondary ozonide
formation; the azelaic acid Criegee intermediate links molec-
ular units via ester formation (speciﬁcally, α-acyloxyalkyl
hydroperoxides).
High molecular weight molecules also
formed in the reaction of oleic acid with the nitrate rad-
ical (Hung et al., 2005).
Other types of high molecular
weight species, mostly involving 5 and 6 oxygen-containing
rings, were detected by photoelectron resonance capture
ionization-aerosol mass spectrometry (Zahardis et al., 2005).
Formation of hydroperoxy products in the ozonolysis of oleic
acid particles was demonstrated also by thermal desorption
mass spectrometry (Ziemann, 2005). It is worth noting that
although these laboratory studies used pure oleic acid par-
ticles, which do not represent real SOA, the proposed reac-
tion mechanism can operate in real atmospheric particles as
the participating functional groups are abundant in real SOA.
The proposed reaction mechanism by Katrib et al. (2004) and
by Ziemann et al. (2005) do not require acidity for produc-
tion of high molecular weight products.
These laboratory studies have identiﬁed possible atmo-
spheric pathways for the formation of high molecular weight
species in oxidation reactions which involve reactions in
the condensed phase.
For example, polycarboxylic aro-
matic acids can be formed by the oxidation of soot by
ozone (Decesari et al., 2002), aromatic acids and phenols
can be formed via polymerization of aromatic acids and car-
bonyls in the liquid phase by H2O2 (Gelencser et al., 2003),
and polyhydroxy-aliphatic compounds and polyethers can be
formed by polymerization of aliphatic carbonyls (Jang et al.,
2003).
The results of these studies imply that due to oligomer-
ization and polymerization reactions, models that assume
phase partition of gas phase molecules based only on solu-
bility, may lead to large errors due to the reactive uptake of
semi-volatile species by aerosol particles (Jang et al., 2002;
Kalberer et al., 2004). This raises the need to provide better
estimates of the products’ molecular weights as well as the
actual SOA density in order to achieve good mass closure in
SOA formation (Gao et al., 2004a).
A major difﬁculty arises because it is not straightforward
to compare the characterization methods used in laboratory
studies with those used for analysis of collected aerosol par-
ticles. In general it can be claimed that the spectra of the
high molecular weight species in laboratory-generated SOAs
extend to higher masses, and exhibit more regular structure,
pointing to polymerization reactions. This may be attributed
to the more simpliﬁed chemical mixture and aerosol matri-
ces in which these reactions occur compared to the real at-
mosphere. The difference may also result from the fact that
some of the products probed are not necessarily water solu-
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

746
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
ble, which is the fraction most often studied in collected par-
ticles. Results obtained from more gentle ionization methods
are suggestive that traditional methods for characterizing the
organic content of atmospheric aerosol particles may have
overestimated the amount of low molecular weight species,
as these may sometimes form by disintegration of higher
molecular weight species during characterization.
10
Amounts and seasonal distribution of HULIS
WSOC derived from continental aerosol particles obtained
from a remote mountain site in China (Li et al., 2000) and
marine and continental aerosol from coastal Hong Kong (Yu
et al., 2004) displays a bimodal ﬁne and coarse mode dis-
tribution, dominated by the ﬁne (accumulation) mode (about
70%). On the basis of thermal proﬁling, coarse mode WSOC
was found to be comprised mainly of low molecular weight
compounds (Yu et al., 2004), while approximately 40% of
the ﬁne mode WSOC was estimated to consist of high molec-
ular weight polar compounds. Marine aerosol particles from
Mace head, Ireland, however, showed co-equal fractions of
HULIS in coarse and ﬁne mode WSOC (22 and 27%, re-
spectively), although altogether WSOC made up only 2% of
coarse mode aerosol particle and 15% of ﬁne mode aerosol
particles (Cavalli et al., 2004).
In general, the estimated fraction of HULIS out of ﬁne
mode WSOC can be quite variable, ranging, for example,
from a low of 15 to 36% in Amazon biomass burning aerosol
(Mayol-Bracero et al., 2002) to a high of 55 to 60% in Euro-
pean ﬁne aerosol (Krivacsy et al., 2001b). Other estimates for
aerosol and fog water HULIS fall within this range: HULIS
making up 32 to 50% of WSOC in fog water (<1.5 µm
droplet size) (Facchini et al., 1999), 29–42% of WSOC in at-
mospheric ﬁne aerosol (Decesari et al., 2001a), and 20–50%
of WSOC in European ﬁne aerosol (Zappoli et al., 1999).
Such broad ranges also encompass the early report by Likens
and Galloway (1983) of 42–54% macromolecular organic
carbon out of total DOC in rural northeast USA precipita-
tion.
Aerosol total carbon (TC) concentration in ﬁne aerosol
collected in the Po Valley follows the same annual trend of
the aerosol inorganic ion constituents, characterized by lower
values during the summer months and higher values in winter
(Decesari et al., 2001b). The WSOC concentration exhibited
an annual periodicity similar to that of TC and aerosol inor-
ganic constituents. Polycarboxylic acids (HULIS) were the
most abundant class of compounds of the WSOC fraction in
spring, fall, and winter, but not in summer, such that HULIS
concentration was found to be correlated to anthropogenic
emissions (Decesari et al., 2001b).
Seasonal differences in HULIS chemistry were reported
by Duarte et al. (2005), who showed that the relative aro-
maticity of HULIS as determined by 13C-NMR was greater
in autumn samples than in summer samples. This was at-
tributed to a greater contribution from lignin breakdown
products due to wood combustion processes (Duarte et al.,
2005). Samburova et al. (2005b) likewise observed seasonal
differences in urban aerosol particle composition (Zurich),
also attributed to wood combustion during the winter months
and photochemical production during the summer months.
Considering base-extracted humic-like materials, humic
acid carbon was found to represent 6–11% of total organic
carbon in urban dust (Havers et al., 1998), 1–6% of total
organic carbon in rural dust (Mukai and Ambe, 1986), and
0.5–2.2% of the total dust mass in aeolian dust (Simoneit,
1980).
11
Atmospheric HULIS: How humic-like are they?
The particularly small molecular size attributed to HULIS
in atmospheric samples as compared to fulvic acids and to
laboratory-generated macromolecular species, requires cer-
tain contemplation. First, it may be asked if atmospheric
HULIS truly can be considered macromolecular species.
This question may be part of a larger issue currently debated
in the humic substances literature involving a new model for
humic substances structure, whereby humic substances are
considered to consist of supramolecular associations rather
than macromolecular polymers (Piccolo et al., 1996a; Pic-
colo et al., 1996b; Conte and Piccolo, 1999; Piccolo et al.,
1999; Piccolo and Conte, 2000; Cozzolino et al., 2001; Pic-
colo, 2001; Piccolo et al., 2001; Piccolo, 2002; Piccolo et
al., 2003; Peuravuori and Pihlaja, 2004).
The new con-
ceptual model suggests that small and heterogeneous humic
molecules self-assemble into supramolecule conformations
stabilized mainly by weak forces such as van der Waals,
π−π, or CH-π bonds. These weakly bound conformations
are believed to have only apparent large molecular dimen-
sions, which can be reversibly disrupted into smaller molec-
ular associations when treated with organic acids. In par-
ticular, mono- and dicarboxylic acids have been reported to
have a maximal disaggregating effect (Piccolo et al., 1996a;
Piccolo et al., 2003). Inorganic acids, phenol, and alcohols
do not produce the same decrease in apparent size of hu-
mic substances (Piccolo et al., 1996b).
Size distributions
of true polymers such as polysaccharides and polystyrene
sulphonates do not change upon addition of organic acids
(Piccolo, 2001; Piccolo et al., 2001).
More details con-
cerning this model may be found in a recent review (Sutton
and Sposito, 2005). If the suprastructure model for terres-
trial humic substances is correct, the high mono-and dicar-
boxylic organic acid content as well as the inorganic acid
content of atmospheric aerosols (Fuzzi et al., 2002; Gra-
ham et al., 2002; Mayol-Bracero et al., 2002; Falkovich
et al., 2005) may actually prevent formation of larger hu-
mic suprastructures, explaining the observed low molecular
weights for HULIS in ﬁeld collected particles (Krivacsy et
al., 2000; Cappiello et al., 2003; Kiss et al., 2003; Samburova
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
747
et al., 2005a). Thus, this model, combined with recent ESI-
MS results for SEC fractionated fulvic acids (Reemtsma and
These, 2003), TEM results for humic acids (Baalousha et al.,
2005), and two-dimensional diffusion-ordered spectroscopy
(DOSY) NMR experiments at different concentrations of hu-
mic acids (Simpson, 2002) may shed some interesting light
on the small molecular size reported for atmospheric HULIS
as contrasted with fulvic and humic acids.
There are alternative explanations for the relatively small
size of atmospheric HULIS. First, UV radiation is well
known to degrade humic substances in lake waters, result-
ing in humic molecules of smaller size, formation of low
molecular weight organic compounds, and formation of in-
organic carbon in the form of CO2 (Dehaan, 1993; Molot
and Dillon, 1997; Gennings et al., 2001; Osburn et al., 2001;
Molot et al., 2005). Similarly, ozonolysis cleaves bonds in
humic substances, reducing their molecular size substantially
(Anderson et al., 1986; Feng et al., 1992; Ohlenbusch et al.,
1998; Myllykangas et al., 2002; Jung and Choi, 2003; Swi-
etlik et al., 2004). Ozonolysis involves oxidation of aromatic
and conjugated double bond moieties for all humic molecu-
lar weight fractions (Ohlenbusch et al., 1998; Myllykangas
et al., 2002; Slavinskaya and Selemenev, 2003; Swietlik et
al., 2004), and formation of low molecular weight carboxylic
acids (Myllykangas et al., 2002; Swietlik et al., 2004), oxy-
acids (Xiong et al., 1992) and aldehydes (Xiong et al., 1992).
Finally, hydroxyl radicals also enhance degradation of hu-
mic substances (Gjessing and Kallovist, 1991; Pullin et al.,
2004; Molot et al., 2005). Considering the reactivity of hu-
mic substances in the face of UV radiation, O3 and hydroxyl
radicals, it can be anticipated that conditions in the atmo-
sphere are such that relatively larger macromolecules, even
if formed, cannot be long-lived. HULIS, then, may represent
some non-equilibrium phase resulting from a quasi- steady
state between formation and destruction of larger species.
Yet another alternative to the small size conundrum is that
HULIS, or, at least, HULIS obtained from water extracts,
consists mainly of a complex, unresolved mixture of rel-
atively small molecules rather than a mixture of complex
macromolecular entities. The apparent similarity of HULIS
to humic substances would then be a fortuitous outcome of
the difﬁculty in comparing spectra of unresolved mixtures
of compounds. The evidence for such a claim may lie in
the ultraﬁltration behavior of HULIS, which, with the excep-
tion of precipitation studied by Likens and Galloway (1983),
has been found to pass in its entirety through ultraﬁltration
membranes of 500 and 1000 Da (Havers et al., 1998; Kri-
vacsy et al., 2001a; Kiss et al., 2003). Such behavior stands
in stark contrast to the ultraﬁltration behavior of many dif-
ferent fulvic and humic acids, which have been shown in nu-
merous works to be rejected in large proportion by ultraﬁl-
tration membranes with a nominal cutoff of 1000 Da (Aiken,
1984; Marley et al., 1992; Aoustin et al., 2001; Alberts and
Takacs, 2004; Assemi et al., 2004; Peuravuori et al., 2005;
Schwede-Thomas et al. 2005) (and many others). Part of
the discrepancy may lie in the different methodologies com-
monly applied for extraction and isolation of HULIS. In stud-
ies where HULIS from aerosol particles was extracted using
traditional soil science methods, apparent molecular sizes are
relatively larger. For example, gel permeation chromatogra-
phy applied to aerosol humic acid extracts gave a molecu-
lar size range of 500–10 000 Da compared with polyethylene
standards (Mukai and Ambe, 1986), while Subbalakshmi et
al. (2000) isolated their base extracted, acid precipitated hu-
mic acid from air particulate matter in 12–14 kDa dialysis
tubing. It is also worth contemplating why mass spectral
studies of secondary aerosol formation in laboratory settings
reveal polymeric materials with repeating mass units (Hung
et al., 2005), while similar studies of aerosol HULIS demon-
strate extremely complex mass spectra with no apparent re-
peating units.
The very different modes of formation and the duration
of formation for HULIS as compared with humic terres-
trial/aquatic humic substances may also account for the rel-
atively small size of HULIS, as well as many of the other
observed differences.
A general consensus views terres-
trial/aquatic humic substances as formed via a multistage
process involving microorganism-mediated decomposition
of plant biopolymers (lignin, cellulose, etc.)
into sim-
pler monomers and oligomers, repeated biogenic metabolism
and recycling of the smaller compounds, and concurrent
polymerization of reactive hydroxyquinones, polyphenols
and other compounds, into higher molecular weight humic
macromolecules (Stevenson, 1994). Such processes require
extensive periods of time and essential involvement of mi-
croorganisms. Considering that the major portion of HULIS
is believed to be of secondary atmospheric origin driven by
abiotic oxidizing reactions over a short time scale, it should
not perhaps come as a surprise that HULIS is smaller and
apparently less aromatic than terrestrial and aquatic humic
substances.
It is also possible that some of the differences between
HULIS and humic substances stem from the extraction and
isolation methods utilized, or from the not-uncommon prac-
tice of analyzing whole WSOC or even whole aerosol sam-
ples for various chemical tests. Thus, a major goal of fur-
ther research in the ﬁeld should be an inter-comparison be-
tween isolation methods and establishment of a standardized
approach to HULIS extraction and isolation, with more re-
alistic comparisons between laboratory and ﬁeld studies. To
now, the majority of studies of HULIS involves only the wa-
ter soluble fraction, and excludes the base-soluble and insol-
uble fractions of humic substances. Thus, characterization
of the water insoluble organic fraction is highly desirable,
as well as a comparative characterization of HULIS derived
from different sources. Likewise lacking in the literature is
information regarding HULIS colloidal properties, micellu-
lar or pseudo-micellular behavior, metals and organic con-
taminant binding abilities in both the solid and liquid phase,
and acidity constants. In part, the lack of such information is
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

748
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
a result of the difﬁculty of sampling and extracting sufﬁcient
amounts of material for such investigations.
Summarizing all the data reviewed above, we ﬁnd that the
polyacidic nature of HULIS, including number of COOH
groups out of total OC groups is similar to that of fulvic
acids. FTIR spectra of WSOC-derived HULIS are likewise
very similar to those of some aquatic fulvic acids. Dissimi-
larities between HULIS and fulvic acids include greater sur-
face activity, smaller droplet activation diameters, smaller
molecular size, lower aromaticity, higher H/C molar ratios,
and weaker acidic nature for HULIS. It should be recalled
that a relatively small number of HULIS samples have been
studied and characterized to now, and that the different ex-
traction and isolation schemes that have been employed are
expected to have an inﬂuence on the physical and chemical
properties of the extracted product. Therefore, these apparent
differences and similarities may change as our information
grows. Nevertheless, it does seem possible to conclude that
humic acids are not good models for WSOC-derived HULIS.
Also, fulvic acids do not always show the same behavior as
HULIS in certain atmospherically-important situations, such
as droplet activation. No such comparisons between humic
substances and HULIS extracted from non-water soluble or-
ganic carbon can be drawn, as there are hardly any studies of
this fraction.
Acknowledgements. Support from the Israel Science Foundation
(grant #162/05) has enabled the writing of this review.
Edited by: S. Martin
References
Aiken, G., McKnight, D. M., Wershaw, R. L., and MacCarthy, P.:
An introduction to humic substances in soil, sediment, and water,
in: Humic Substances in Soil, Sediment, and Water, edited by:
Aiken, G. R., McKnight, D. M., Wershaw, R. L., and MacCarthy,
P., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1–9, 1985.
Aiken, G. R.: Evaluation of ultraﬁltration for determining molec-
ular weight of fulvic acid, Environ. Sci. Technol., 18, 978–981,
1984.
Aiken, G. R.: Isolation and characterization techniques for aquatic
humic substances, in: Humic Substances in Soil, Sediment, and
Water, edited by: Aiken, G. R., McKnight, D. M., Wershaw, R.
L., and MacCarthy, P., John Wiley & Sons, New York, 363–386,
1985.
Aiken, G. R., McKnight, D. M., Thorn, K. A., and Thurman, E. M.:
Isolation of hydrophilic organic acids from water using nonionic
macroporous resins, Org. Geochem., 18, 567–573, 1992.
Aiken, G. R., Thurman, E. M., and Malcolm, R. L.: Comparison of
XAD Macroporous Resins for the Concentration of Fulvic Acid
from Aqueous Solution, Anal. Chem., 51, 1799–1803, 1979.
Alberts, J. J. and Takacs, M.: Comparison of the natural ﬂuores-
cence distribution among size fractions of terrestrial fulvic and
humic acids and aquatic natural organic matter, Org. Geochem.,
35, 1141–1149, 2004.
Anderson, L. J., Johnson, J. D., and Christman, R. F.: Extent Of
Ozone Reaction With Isolated Aquatic Fulvic-Acid, Environ.
Sci. Technol., 20, 739–742, 1986.
Andracchio, A., Cavicchi, C., Tonelli, D. and Zappoli, S.: A new
approach for the fractionation of water-soluble organic carbon
in atmospheric aerosols and cloud drops, Atmos. Environ., 36,
5097–5107, 2002.
Aoustin, E., Schafer, A. I., Fane, A. G., and Waite, T. D.: Ultra-
ﬁltration of natural organic matter, Separ. Puriﬁcation Technol.,
22-3, 63–78, 2001.
Assemi, S., Newcombe, G., Hepplewhite, C., and Beckett, R.:
Characterization of natural organic matter fractions separated by
ultraﬁltration using ﬂow ﬁeld-ﬂow fractionation, Water Res., 38,
1467–1476, 2004.
Baalousha, M., Motelica-Heino, M., Galaup, S., and Le Coustumer,
P.: Supramolecular structure of humic acids by TEM with im-
proved sample preparation and staining, Microsc. Res. Techniq.,
66, 299–306, 2005.
Baker, A.: Fluorescence excitation-emission matrix characteriza-
tion of some sewage-impacted rivers, Environ. Sci. Technol., 35,
948–953, 2001.
Beckett, R., Jue, Z., and Giddings, J. C.: Determination of molecu-
lar weight distribution of fulvic and humic acids using ﬂow ﬁeld-
ﬂow fractionation, Environ. Sci. Technol., 21, 289–295, 1987.
Broekhuizen, K., Kumar, P. P., and Abbatt, J. P. D.: Partially sol-
uble organics as cloud condensation nuclei: Role of trace solu-
ble and surface active species, Geophys. Res. Lett., 31, L01107,
doi:10.1029/2003GL018203, 2004.
Brooks, S. D., DeMott, P. J., and Kreidenweis, S. M.: Water uptake
by particles containing humic materials and mixtures of humic
materials with ammonium sulfate, Atmos. Environ., 38, 1859–
1868, 2004.
Brown, T. L. and Rice, J. A.: Effect of experimental parameters on
the ESI FT-ICR mass spectrum of fulvic acid, Anal. Chem., 72,
384–390, 2000a.
Brown, T. L. and Rice, J. A.: The effect of laser wavelength and
power density on the laser desorption mass spectrum of fulvic
acid, Org. Geochem., 31, 627–634, 2000b.
Calace, N., Petronio, B. M., Cini, R., Stortini, A. M., Pampaloni, B.,
and Udisti, R.: Humic marine matter and insoluble materials in
Antarctic snow, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 79, 331–348, 2001.
Cappiello, A., De Simoni, E., Fiorucci, C., Mangani, F., Palma, P.,
Trufelli, H., Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., and Fuzzi, S.: Molec-
ular characterization of the water-soluble organic compounds in
fogwater by ESIMS/MS, Environ. Sci. Technol., 37, 1229–1240,
2003.
Cavalli, F., Facchini, M. C., Decesari, S., Mircea, M., Emblico,
L., Fuzzi, S., Ceburnis, D., Yoon, Y. J., O’Dowd, C. D.,
Putaud, J. P., and Dell’Acqua, A.:
Advances in characteri-
zation of size-resolved organic matter in marine aerosol over
the North Atlantic, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 109, D24215,
doi:10.1029/2004JD005137, 2004.
Chan, M. N. and Chan, C. K.: Hygroscopic properties of two model
humic-like substances and their mixtures with inorganics of at-
mospheric importance, Environ. Sci. Technol., 37, 5109–5115,
2003.
Chen, Y. Y. and Lee, W. M. G.:
Hygroscopic properties of
inorganic-salt aerosol with surface-active organic compounds,
Chemosphere, 38, 2431–2448, 1999.
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
749
Chin, Y. P., Aiken, G., and Oloughlin, E.: Molecular-Weight, Poly-
dispersity, And Spectroscopic Properties Of Aquatic Humic Sub-
stances, Environ. Sci. Technol., 28, 1853–1858, 1994.
Cini, R., Innocenti, N. D., Loglio, G., Oppo, C., Orlandi, G., Stor-
tini, A. M., Tesei, U., and Udisti, R.: Air-sea exchange: Sea salt
and organic micro components in Antarctic snow, Int. J. Environ.
Anal. Chem., 63, 15–27, 1996.
Cini, R., Innocenti, N. D., Loglio, G., Stortini, A. M., and Tesei,
U.: Spectroﬂuorometric Evidence Of The Transport Of Marine
Organic-Matter In Antarctic Snow Via Air-Sea Interaction, Int.
J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 55, 285–295, 1994.
Clark, C. D., Jimenez-Morais, J., Jones, G., Zanardi-Lamardo, E.,
Moore, C. A., and Zika, R. G.: A time-resolved ﬂuorescence
study of dissolved organic matter in a riverine to marine transi-
tion zone, Mar. Chem., 78, 121–135, 2002.
Conte, P. and Piccolo, A.: Conformational arrangement of dissolved
humic substances. Inﬂuence of solution composition on associa-
tion of humic molecules, Environ. Sci. Technol., 33, 1682–1690,
1999.
Cozzolino, A., Conte, P., and Piccolo, A.: Conformational changes
of humic substances induced by some hydroxy-, keto-, and sul-
fonic acids, Soil Biol. Biochem., 33, 563–571, 2001.
Croue, J. P.: Isolation of humic and non-humic NOM fractions:
Structural characterization, Environ. Monitor. Assess., 92, 193–
207, 2004.
Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Fuzzi, S., and Tagliavini, E.: Char-
acterization of water-soluble organic compounds in atmospheric
aerosol: A new approach, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 105, 1481–
1489, 2000.
Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Matta, E., Lettini, F., Mircea, M.,
Fuzzi, S., Tagliavini, E., and Putaud, J. P.: Chemical features
and seasonal variation of ﬁne aerosol water-soluble organic com-
pounds in the Po Valley, Italy, Atmos. Environ., 35, 3691–3699,
2001a.
Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Matta, E., Lettini, F., Mircea, M.,
Fuzzi, S., Tagliavini, E., and Putaud, J. P.: Chemical features
and seasonal variation of ﬁne aerosol water-soluble organic com-
pounds in the Po Valley, Italy, Atmos. Environ., 35, 3691–3691,
2001b.
Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Matta, E., Mircea, M., Fuzzi, S.,
Chughtai, A. R., and Smith, D. M.: Water soluble organic com-
pounds formed by oxidation of soot, Atmos. Environ., 36, 1827–
1832, 2002.
Dehaan, H.: Solar Uv-Light Penetration And Photodegradation Of
Humic Substances In Peaty Lake Water, Limnol. Oceanog., 38,
1072–1076, 1993.
DeNobili, M. and Chen, Y.: Size exclusion chromatography of hu-
mic substances: limits, perspectives and prospects, Soil Sci., 164,
825–833, 1999.
Dinar, E., Taraniuk, I., Graber, E. R., Katsman, S., Moise, T.,
Anttila, T., Mentel, T. F., and Rudich, Y.: Cloud condensation nu-
clei properties of model and atmospheric HULIS, Atmos. Chem.
Phys. Discuss., 6, 1073–1120, 2006.
Duarte, R., Pio, C. A., and Duarte, A. C.: Synchronous scan and
excitation-emission matrix ﬂuorescence spectroscopy of water-
soluble organic compounds in atmospheric aerosols, J. Atmos.
Chem., 48, 157–171, 2004.
Duarte, R., Pio, C. A., and Duarte, A. C.: Spectroscopic study of the
water-soluble organic matter isolated from atmospheric aerosols
collected under different atmospheric conditions, Analy. Chim.
Acta, 530, 7–14, 2005.
Engebretson, R., Amos, T., and Von Wandruszka, R.: Quantitative
approach to humic acid associations, Environ. Sci. Technol., 30,
990–997, 1996.
Engebretson, R. and Von Wandruszka, R.: Microorganization in
dissolved humic acid, Environ. Sci. Technol., 28, 1934–1941,
1994.
Engebretson, R. B. and von Wandruszka, R.: Kinetic aspects of
cation enhanced aggregation in aqueous humic acids, Environ.
Sci. Technol., 32, 488–493, 1998.
Facchini, M. C., Decesari, S., Mircea, M., Fuzzi, S., and Loglio,
G.: Surface tension of atmospheric wet aerosol and cloud/fog
droplets in relation to their organic carbon content and chemical
composition, Atmos. Environ., 34, 4853–4857, 2000.
Facchini, M. C., Fuzzi, S., Zappoli, S., Andracchio, A., Gelencser,
A., Kiss, G., Krivacsy, Z., Meszaros, E., Hansson, H. C., Als-
berg, T., and Zebuhr, Y.: Partitioning of the organic aerosol com-
ponent between fog droplets and interstitial air, J. Geophys. Res.-
Atmos., 104, 26 821–26 832, 1999.
Falkovich, A. H., Graber, E. R., Schkolnik, G., Rudich, Y., Maen-
haut, W., and Artaxo, P.: Low molecular weight organic acids
in aerosol particles from Rondonia, Brazil, during the biomass-
burning, transition and wet periods, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 5, 781–
797, 2005.
Feng, J. S. and Moller, D.: Characterization of water-soluble macro-
molecular substances in cloud water, J. Atmos. Chem., 48, 217–
233, 2004.
Feng, X. O., Croue, J. P., and Legube, B.: Long-Term Ozone
Consumption By Aquatic Fulvic-Acids Acting As Precursors
Of Radical Chain-Reactions, Environ. Sci. Technol., 26, 1059–
1064, 1992.
Francioso, O., Montecchio, D., Gioacchini, P., and Ciavatta, C.:
Thermal analysis (TG-DTA) and isotopic characterization (C-13-
N-15) of humic acids from different origins, Appl. Geochem., 20,
537–544, 2005.
Francioso, O., Sanchez-Cortes, S., Casarini, D., Garcia-Ramos, J.
V., Ciavatta, C., and Gessa, C.: Spectroscopic study of humic
acids fractionated by means of tangential ultraﬁltration, J. Molec-
ular Struct., 609, 137–147, 2002.
Fuzzi, S., Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Matta, E., Mircea, M.,
and Tagliavini, E.: A simpliﬁed model of the water soluble or-
ganic component of atmospheric aerosols, Geophys. Res. Lett.,
28, 4079–4082, 2001.
Fuzzi, S., Facchini, M. C., Decesari, S., Matta, E., and Mircea, M.:
Soluble organic compounds in fog and cloud droplets: what have
we learned over the past few years?, Atmos. Res., 64, 89–98,
2002.
Gao, S., Keywood, M., Ng, N. L., Surratt, J., Varutbangkul, V.,
Bahreini, R., Flagan, R. C., and Seinfeld, J. H.: Low-molecular-
weight and oligomeric components in secondary organic aerosol
from the ozonolysis of cycloalkenes and alpha-pinene, J. Phys.
Chem. A, 108, 10 147–10 164, 2004a.
Gao, S., Ng, N. L., Keywood, M., Varutbangkul, V., Bahreini, R.,
Nenes, A., He, J. W., Yoo, K. Y., Beauchamp, J. L., Hodyss, R.
P., Flagan, R. C., and Seinfeld, J. H.: Particle phase acidity and
oligomer formation in secondary organic aerosol, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 38, 6582–6589, 2004b.
Gelencser, A.: Carbonaceous Aerosol, Springer, Dordrecht, 2004.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

750
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
Gelencser, A., Hoffer, A., Kiss, G., Tombacz, E., Kurdi, R., and
Bencze, L.: In-situ formation of light-absorbing organic matter
in cloud water, J. Atmos. Chem., 45, 25–33, 2003.
Gelencser, A., Hoffer, A., Krivacsy, Z., Kiss, G., Molnar, A., and
Meszaros, E.: On the possible origin of humic matter in ﬁne
continental aerosol, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 107, D12 4137,
doi:10.1029/2001JD001299, 2002.
Gelencser, A., Hoffer, A., Molnar, A., Krivacsy, Z., Kiss, G., and
Meszaros, E.: Thermal behaviour of carbonaceous aerosol from
a continental background site, Atmos. Environ., 34, 823–831,
2000a.
Gelencser, A., Meszaros, T., Blazso, M., Kiss, G., Krivacsy, Z.,
Molnar, A., and Meszaros, E.: Structural characterisation of
organic matter in ﬁne tropospheric aerosol by pyrolysis-gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry, J. Atmos. Chem., 37, 173–
183, 2000b.
Gelencser, A., Sallai, M., Krivacsy, Z., Kiss, G., and Meszaros, E.:
Voltammetric evidence for the presence of humic-like substances
in fog water, Atmos. Res., 54, 157–165, 2000c.
Gennings, C., Molot, L. A., and Dillon, P. J.: Enhanced photochem-
ical loss of organic carbon in acidic waters, Biogeochem., 52,
339–354, 2001.
Gjessing, E. T. and Kallovist, T.: Algicidal And Chemical Effect
Of UV-Radiation Of Water Containing Humic Substances, Water
Res., 25, 491–494, 1991.
Gorbunov, B., Hamilton, R., Clegg, N., and Toumi, R.: Water nu-
cleation on aerosolparticles containing both organic and soluble
inorganic substances, Atmos. Res., 47–48, 271–283, 1998.
Graham, B., Mayol-Bracero, O. L., Guyon, P., Roberts, G. C.,
Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Artaxo, P., Maenhaut, W., Koll,
P. and Andreae, M. O.: Water-soluble organic compounds in
biomass burning aerosols over Amazonia - 1. Characterization
by NMR and GC-MS, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos., 107, D20 8047,
doi:10.1029/2001JD000336, 2002.
Gysel, M., Weingartner, E., Nyeki, S., Paulsen, D., Baltensperger,
U., Galambos, I., and Kiss, G.:
Hygroscopic properties of
water-soluble matter and humic-like organics in atmospheric ﬁne
aerosol, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 4, 35–50, 2004.
Havers, N., Burba, P., Lambert, J., and Klockow, D.: Spectroscopic
characterization of humic-like substances in airborne particulate
matter, J. Atmos. Chem., 29, 45–54, 1998.
Hayase, K. and Tsubota, H.: Sedimentary humic acid and fulvic
acid as surface active substances, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta,
47, 947–952, 1983.
Hoffer, A., Kiss, G., Blazso, M., and Gelencser, A.: Chemical char-
acterization of humic-like substances (HULIS) formed from a
lignin-type precursor in model cloud water, Geophys. Res. Lett.,
31, LO6115, doi:10.1029/2003GL018962, 2004.
Hung, H. M., Katrib, Y., and Martin, S. T.: Products and mecha-
nisms of the reaction of oleic acid with ozone and nitrate radical,
J. Phys. Chem. A, 109, 4517–4530, 2005.
Hur, J. and Schlautman, M. A.: Using selected operational descrip-
tors to examine the heterogeneity within a bulk humic substance,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 37, 880–887, 2003.
Iinuma, Y., Boge, O., Gnauk, T., and Herrmann, H.: Aerosol-
chamber study of the alpha-pinene/O3 reaction: inﬂuence of par-
ticle acidity on aerosol yields and products, Atmos. Environ., 38,
761–773, 2004.
Ikeda, K., Arimura, R., Echigo, S., Shimizu, Y., Minear, R. A.,
and Matsui, S.: The fractionation/concentration of aquatic humic
substances by the sequential membrane system and their charac-
terization with mass spectrometry, Water Sci. Technol., 42, 383–
390, 2000.
Jang, M. S., Carroll, B., Chandramouli, B., and Kamens, R. M.:
Particle growth by acid-catalyzed heterogeneous reactions of or-
ganic carbonyls on preexisting aerosols, Environ. Sci. Technol.,
37, 3828–3837, 2003.
Jang, M. S., Czoschke, N. M., Lee, S., and Kamens, R. M.: Het-
erogeneous atmospheric aerosol production by acid-catalyzed
particle-phase reactions, Science, 298, 814–817, 2002.
Jung, H. and Choi, H.: Effects of in situ ozonation on structural
change of soil organic matter, Environ. Engineer. Sci., 20, 289–
299, 2003.
Kalberer, M., Paulsen, D., Sax, M., Steinbacher, M., Dommen, J.,
Prevot, A. S. H., Fisseha, R., Weingartner, E., Frankevich, V.,
Zenobi, R., and Baltensperger, U.: Identiﬁcation of polymers
as major components of atmospheric organic aerosols, Science,
303, 1659–1662, 2004.
Katrib, Y., Martin, S. T., Hung, H. M., Rudich, Y., Zhang, H. Z.,
Slowik, J. G., Davidovits, P., Jayne, J. T., and Worsnop, D. R.:
Products and mechanisms of ozone reactions with oleic acid for
aerosol particles having core-shell morphologies, J. Phys. Chem.
A, 108, 6686–6695, 2004.
Kawahigashi, M. and Fujitake, N.: Surface-active properties of par-
ticle size fractions in two humic acids, Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 44,
497–505, 1998.
Kiss, G., Tombacz, E., and Hansson, H. C.:
Surface ten-
sion effects of humic-like substances in the aqueous extract
of troposphere ﬁne aerosol, J. Atmos. Chem., 50, 279–294,
doi:10.1007/s10874-005-5079-5, 2005.
Kiss, G., Tombacz, E., Varga, B., Alsberg, T., and Persson, L.:
Estimation of the average molecular weight of humic-like sub-
stances isolated from ﬁne atmospheric aerosol, Atmos. Environ.,
37, 3783–3794, 2003.
Kiss, G., Varga, B., Galambos, I., and Ganszky, I.:
Charac-
terization of water-soluble organic matter isolated from atmo-
spheric ﬁne aerosol, J. Geophys. Res. - Atmos., 107, D21 8339,
doi:10.1029/2001JD000603, 2002.
Kiss, G., Varga, B., Gelencser, A., Krivacsy, Z., Molnar, A., Als-
berg, T., Persson, L., Hansson, H. C., and Facchini, M. C.: Char-
acterisation of polar organic compounds in fog water, Atmos.
Environ., 35, 2193–2200, 2001.
Krivacsy, Z., Gelencser, A., Kiss, G., Meszaros, E., Molnar, A.,
Hoffer, A., Meszaros, T., Sarvari, Z., Temesi, D., Varga, B., Bal-
tensperger, U., Nyeki, S., and Weingartner, E.: Study on the
chemical character of water soluble organic compounds in ﬁne
atmospheric aerosol at the Jungfraujoch, J. Atmos. Chem., 39,
235–259, 2001a.
Krivacsy, Z., Hoffer, A., Sarvari, Z., Temesi, D., Baltensperger, U.,
Nyeki, S., Weingartner, E., Kleefeld, S., and Jennings, S. G.:
Role of organic and black carbon in the chemical composition of
atmospheric aerosol at European background sites, Atmos. Env-
iron., 35, 6231–6244, 2001b.
Krivacsy, Z., Kiss, G., Varga, B., Galambos, I., Sarvari, Z., Ge-
lencser, A., Molnar, A., Fuzzi, S., Facchini, M. C., Zappoli,
S., Andracchio, A., Alsberg, T., Hansson, H. C., and Persson,
L.: Study of humic-like substances in fog and interstitial aerosol
by size-exclusion chromatography and capillary electrophoresis,
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
751
Atmos. Environ., 34, 4273–4281, 2000.
Krivacsy, Z., Molnar, A., Tarjanyi, E., Gelencser, A., Kiss, G., and
Hlavay, J.: Investigation of inorganic ions and organic acids in
atmospheric aerosol by capillary electrophoresis, J. Chromatog.
A, 781, 223–231, 1997.
Kudryavtsev, A. V., Perminova, I. V., and Petrosyan, V. S.: Size-
exclusion chromatographic descriptors of humic substances,
Analy. Chim. Acta, 407, 193–202, 2000.
Kujawinski, E. B., Hatcher, P. G., and Freitas, M. A.:
High-
resolution Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spec-
trometry of humic and fulvic acids: Improvements and compar-
isons, Anal. Chem., 74, 413–419, 2002.
Leenheer, J. A.: Comprehensive approach to preparative isolation
and fractionation of dissolved organic carbon from natural waters
and wastewaters, Environ. Sci. Technol., 15, 578–587, 1981.
Leenheer, J. A. and Croue, J. P.: Characterizing aquatic dissolved
organic matter, Environ. Sci. Technol., 37, 18A–26A, 2003.
Leenheer, J. A., Croue, J. P., Benjamin, M., Korshin, G., Hwang,
C., Bruchet, A., and Aiken, G.: Comprehensive isolation of nat-
ural organic matter from water for spectral characterization and
reactivity testing, ACS Symposium Series 76, 68–83, 2000.
Leenheer, J. A., Rostad, C. E., Gates, P. M., Furlong, E. T., and
Ferrer, I.: Molecular resolution and fragmentation of fulvic acid
by electrospray ionization/multistage tandem mass spectrometry,
Anal. Chem., 73, 1461–1471, 2001.
Li, S. M., Tang, J., Xue, H. S., and Toom-Sauntry, D.: Size distribu-
tion and estimated optical properties of carbonate, water soluble
organic carbon, and sulfate in aerosols at a remote high altitude
site in western China, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 1107–1110, 2000.
Likens, G. E. and Galloway, J. N.: The composition and deposition
of organic carbon in precipitation, Tellus, 35B, 16–24, 1983.
Limbeck, A., Handler, M., Neuberger, B., Klatzer, B., and
Puxbaum, H.: Carbon-speciﬁc analysis of humic-like substances
in atmospheric aerosol and precipitation samples, Anal. Chem.,
77, 7288–7293, 2005.
Limbeck, A., Kulmala, M., and Puxbaum, H.: Secondary organic
aerosol formation in the atmosphere via heterogeneous reaction
of gaseous isoprene on acidic particles, Geophys. Res. Lett., 30,
1996, 2003.
MacCarthy, P. and Rice, J. A.: Spectroscopic methods (other than
NMR) for determining functionality in humic substances, in: Hu-
mic Substances in Soil, Sediments, and Water, edited by: Aiken,
G. R., McKnight, D. M., Wershaw, R. L., and MacCarthy, P.,
Wiley-Interscience, New York, 527–560, 1985.
Malcolm, R. L. and MacCarthy, P.: Limitations in the use of com-
mercial humic acids in water and soil research, Environ. Sci.
Technol., 20, 904–911, 1986.
Marhaba, T. F. and Pu, Y.: Rapid delineation of humic and non-
humic organic matter fractions in water, J. Haz. Mat., 73, 221–
234, 2000.
Marley, N. A., Gaffney, J. S., Orlandini, K. A., Picel, K. C., and
Choppin, G. R.: Chemical characterization of size-fractionated
humic and fulvic materials in aqueous samples, Sci. Total Envi-
ron., 113, 159–177, 1992.
Mayol-Bracero, O. L., Guyon, P., Graham, B., Roberts, G., An-
dreae, M. O., Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Fuzzi, S., and Ar-
taxo, P.: Water-soluble organic compounds in biomass burning
aerosols over Amazonia – 2. Apportionment of the chemical
composition and importance of the polyacidic fraction, J. Geo-
phys. Res.-Atmos., 107, D20 8091, doi:10.1029/2001JD000522,
2002.
Miles, C. J., Tuschall, J. R., and Brezonik, P. L.: Isolation of aquatic
humus with diethylaminoethylcellulose, Anal. Chem., 55, 410–
411, 1983.
Molot, L. A. and Dillon, P. J.: Photolytic regulation of dissolved
organic carbon in northern lakes, Global Biogeochem. Cycles,
11, 357–365, 1997.
Molot, L. A., Hudson, J. J., Dillon, P. J., and Miller, S. A.: Effect of
pH on photo-oxidation of dissolved organic carbon by hydroxyl
radicals in a coloured, softwater stream, Aquatic Sci., 67, 189–
195, 2005.
Mukai, H. and Ambe, Y.: Characterization of a humic acid-like
brown substance in airborne particulate matter and tentative iden-
tiﬁcation of its origin, Atmos. Environ., 20, 813–819, 1986.
Myllykangas, T., Nissinen, T. K., Rantakokko, P., Martikainen, P.
J., and Vartiainen, T.: Molecular size fractions of treated aquatic
humus, Water Res., 36, 3045–3053, 2002.
Negre, M., Vindrola, D., Spera, S., Ferraris, L., and Gennari, M.:
Effect of the chemical composition of soil humic acids on their
viscosity, surface pressure, and morphology, Soil Sci., 167, 636–
651, 2002.
Nenes, A., Charlson, R. J., Facchini, M. C., Kulmala, M., Laak-
sonen, A., and Seinfeld, J. H.: Can chemical effects on cloud
droplet number rival the ﬁrst indirect effect? Geophys. Res. Lett.,
29, 1848, doi:10.1029/2002GL015295, 2002.
Ohlenbusch, G., Hesse, S., and Frimmel, F. H.: Effects of ozone
treatment on the soil organic matter on contaminated sites,
Chemosphere, 37, 1557–1569, 1998.
Osburn, C. L., Morris, D. P., Thorn, K. A., and Moeller, R. E.:
Chemical and optical changes in freshwater dissolved organic
matter exposed to solar radiation, Biogeochem., 54, 251–278,
2001.
Perminova, I. V.: Size exclusion chromatography of humic sub-
stances: Complexities of data interpretation attributable to non-
size exclusion effects, Soil Sci., 164, 834–840, 1999.
Perminova, I. V., Frimmel, F. H., Kovalevskii, D. V., Abbt-Braun,
G., Kudryavtsev, A. V., and Hesse, S.: Development of a pre-
dictive model for calculation of molecular weight of humic sub-
stances, Water Res., 32, 872–881, 1998.
Perminova, I. V., Frimmel, F. H., Kudryavtsev, A. V., Kulikova,
N. A., Abbt-Braun, G., Hesse, S., and Petrosyan, V. S.: Molec-
ular weight characteristics of humic substances from different
environments as determined by size exclusion chromatography
and their statistical evaluation, Environ. Sci. Technol., 37, 2477–
2485, 2003.
Persson, L., Alsberg, T., Kiss, G., and Odham, G.: On-line size-
exclusion chromatography/electrospray ionisation mass spec-
trometry of aquatic humic and fulvic acids, Rapid. Commun.
Mass Spectrom., 14, 286–292, 2000.
Pettersson, C., Ephraim, J., and Allard, B.: On the composition and
properties of humic substances isolated from deep groundwater
and surface waters, Org. Geochem., 21, 443–451, 1994.
Pettersson, C. and Rahm, L.: Changes in molecular weight of humic
substances in the Gulf of Bothnia, Environmentl International,
22, 551–558, 1996.
Peuravuori, J., Monteiro, A., Eglite, L., and Pihlaja, K.: Compar-
ative study for separation of aquatic humic-type organic con-
stituents by DAX-8, PVP and DEAE sorbing solids and tangen-
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006

752
E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
tial ultraﬁltration: elemental composition, size-exclusion chro-
matography, UV-vis and FT-IR, Talanta, 65, 408–422, 2005.
Peuravuori, J. and Pihlaja, K.: Molecular size distribution and spec-
troscopic properties of aquatic humic substances, Analy. Chim.
Acta, 337, 133–149, 1997.
Peuravuori, J. and Pihlaja, K.: Preliminary study of lake dissolved
organic matter in light of nanoscale supramolecular assembly,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 38, 5958–5967, 2004.
Peuravuori, J., Pihlaja, K., Trubetskaya, O., and Trubetskoj, O.: The
effects of a strong disaggregating agent on SEC-PAGE of aquatic
and soil humic matter, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 79, 217–228,
2001.
Pfeifer, T., Klaus, U., Hoffmann, R., and Spiteller, M.: Character-
isation of humic substances using atmospheric pressure chem-
ical ionisation and electrospray ionisation mass spectrometry
combined with size-exclusion chromatography, J. Chromatog. A,
926, 151–159, 2001.
Piccolo, A.: The supramolecular structure of humic substances, Soil
Sci., 166, 810–832, 2001.
Piccolo, A.: The supramolecular structure of humic substances: A
novel understanding of humus chemistry and implications in soil
science, in: Advances In Agronomy, 75, 57–134, 2002.
Piccolo, A. and Conte, P.: Molecular size of humic substances.
Supramolecular associations versus macromolecular polymers,
Adv. Environ. Res., 3, 508–521, 2000.
Piccolo, A., Conte, P., and Cozzolino, A.: Effects of mineral and
monocarboxylic acids on the molecular association of dissolved
humic substances, European J. Soil Sci., 50, 687–694, 1999.
Piccolo, A., Conte, P., and Cozzolino, A.: Chromatographic and
spectrophotometric properties of dissolved humic substances
compared with macromolecular polymers, Soil Sci., 166, 174–
185, 2001.
Piccolo, A., Conte, P., Spaccini, R., and Chiarella, M.: Effects of
some dicarboxylic acids on the association of dissolved humic
substances, Biol. Fertil. Soils, 37, 255–259, 2003.
Piccolo, A., Nardi, S., and Concheri, G.: Macromolecular changes
of humic substances induced by interaction with organic acids,
European J. Soil Sci., 47, 319–328, 1996a.
Piccolo, A., Nardi, S., and Concheri, G.: Micelle-like conformation
of humic substances as revealed by size exclusion chromatogra-
phy, Chemosphere, 33, 595–602, 1996b.
Piccolo, A. and Spiteller, M.: Electrospray ionization mass spec-
trometry of terrestrial humic substances and their size fractions,
Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 377, 1047–1059, 2003.
Plancque, G., Amekraz, B., Moulin, V., Toulhoat, P., and Moulin,
C.: Molecular structure of fulvic acids by electrospray with
quadrupole time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry, Rapid. Commun.
Mass Spectrom., 15, 827–835, 2001.
Pullin, M. J., Bertilsson, S., Goldstone, J. V., and Voelker, B. M.:
Effects of sunlight and hydroxyl radical on dissolved organic
matter: Bacterial growth efﬁciency and production of carboxylic
acids and other substrates, Limnol. Oceanog., 49, 2011–2022,
2004.
Reemtsma, T. and These, A.: On-line coupling of size exclusion
chromatography with electrospray ionization-tandem mass spec-
trometry for the analysis of aquatic fulvic and humic acids, Anal.
Chem., 75, 1500–1507, 2003.
Rostad, C. E. and Leenheer, J. A.: Factors that affect molec-
ular weight distribution of Suwannee river fulvic acid as de-
termined by electrospray ionization/mass spectrometry, Analy.
Chim. Acta, 523, 269–278, 2004.
Rudich, Y.: Laboratory perspectives on the chemical transforma-
tions of organic matter in atmospheric particles, Chem. Rev., 103,
5097–5124, 2003.
Samburova, V., Kalberer, M., and Zenobi, R.: Characterization of
high molecular weight compounds in urban atmospheric parti-
cles, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 5, 2163–2170, 2005a.
Samburova, V., Szidat, S., Hueglin, C., Fisseha, R., Baltensperger,
U., Zenobi, R., and Kalberer, M.: Seasonal variation of high
molecular weight compounds in the water-soluble organic frac-
tion of urban aerosols, J. Geophys. Res. – Atmos., 110(D23),
D23210, 2005b.
Sannigrahi, P., Sullivan, A. P., Weber, R. J., and Ingall, E. D.: Char-
acterization of Water-Soluble Organic Carbon in Urban Atmo-
spheric Aerosols Using Solid-State 13C NMR Spectroscopy, En-
viron. Sci. Technol., 2005.
Schafer, A. I., Mauch, R., Waite, T. D., and Fane, A. G.: Charge ef-
fects in the fractionation of natural organics using ultraﬁltration,
Environ. Sci. Technol., 36, 2572–2580, 2002.
Schwede-Thomas, S. B., Chin, Y. P., Dria, K. J., Hatcher, P., Kaiser,
E., and Sulzberger, B.: Characterizing the properties of dissolved
organic matter isolated by XAD and C-18 solid phase extraction
and ultraﬁltration, Aquatic Sci., 67, 61–71, 2005.
Simoneit, B. R. T.: Eolian particulates from oceanic and rural areas
– their lipids fulvic and humic acids and residual carbon, in: Ad-
vances in Organic Geochemistry, edited by: Douglas, A. G. and
Maxwell, J. R., Pergamon Press, Oxford, 343–352, 1980.
Simpson, A. J.: Determining the molecular weight, aggregation,
structures and interactions of natural organic matter using dif-
fusion ordered spectroscopy, Magnetic Resonance In Chemistry,
40, S72–S82, 2002.
Slavinskaya, G. V. and Selemenev, V. F.: Ozonation of fulvic acids
of natural waters in aqueous solutions, Russian J. Appl. Chem.,
76, 1472–1475, 2003.
Spokes, L. J., Campos, M. and Jickells, T. D.: The role of organic
matter in controlling copper speciation in precipitation, Atmos.
Environ., 30, 3959–3966, 1996.
Stenson, A. C., Landing, W. M., Marshall, A. G., and Cooper, W.
T.: Ionization and fragmentation of humic substances in electro-
spray ionization Fourier transform-ion cyclotron resonance mass
spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 74, 4397–4409, 2002.
Stenson, A. C., Marshall, A. G., and Cooper, W. T.: Exact masses
and chemical formulas of individual Suwannee River fulvic acids
from ultrahigh resolution electrospray ionization Fourier trans-
form ion cyclotron resonance mass spectra, Anal. Chem., 75,
1275–1284, 2003.
Stevenson, F. J.: Humus Chemistry: Genesis, Composition, Reac-
tions, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1982.
Stevenson, F. J.: Humus Chemistry (Genesis, Composition, Reac-
tions), 2nd ed., John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1994.
Subbalakshmi, Y., Patti, A. F., Lee, G. S. H., and Hooper, M. A.:
Structural characterisation of macromolecular organic material
in air particulate matter using Py-GC-MS and solid state C-13-
NMR, J. Environ. Monitor., 2, 561–565, 2000.
Sutton, R. and Sposito, G.: Molecular structure in soil humic sub-
stances: The new view, Environ. Sci. Technol., 39, 9009–9015,
2005.
Svenningsson, B., Rissler, J., Swietlicki, E., Mircea, M., Bilde, M.,
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/

E. R. Graber and Y. Rudich: Atmospheric HULIS
753
Facchini, M. C., Decesari, S., Fuzzi, S., Zhou, J., Monster, J., and
Rosenorn, T.: Hygroscopic growth and critical supersaturations
for mixed aerosoll particles of inorganic and organic compounds
of tmospheric relevance, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 5, 2833–
2877, 2005.
Swietlik,
J.,
Dabrowska,
A.,
Raczyk-Stanislawiak,
U.,
and
Nawrocki, J.: Reactivity of natural organic matter fractions with
chlorine dioxide and ozone, Water Res., 38, 547–558, 2004.
Tabazadeh, A.: Organic aggregate formation in aerosols and its im-
pact on the physicochemical properties of atmospheric particles,
Atmos. Environ., 39, 5472–5480, 2005.
Tagliavini, E., Moretti, F., Decesari, S., Facchini, M. C., Fuzzi,
S., and Maenhaut, W.:
Functional group anaylsis by H
NMR/chemical derivattization for the characterization of organic
aerosol from the SMOCC ﬁeld campaign, Atmos. Chem. Phys.
Discuss., 5, 9447–9491, 2005.
These, A. and Reemtsma, T.: Limitations of electrospray ionization
of fulvic and humic acids as visible from size exclusion chro-
matography with organic carbon and mass spectrometric detec-
tion, Anal. Chem., 75, 6275–6281, 2003.
These, A., Winkler, M., Thomas, C., and Reemtsma, T.: Determi-
nation of molecular formulas and structural regularities of low
molecular weight fulvic acids by size-exclusion chromatogra-
phy with electrospray ionization quadrupole time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometry, Rapid. Commun. Mass Spectrom., 18, 1777–1786,
2004.
Thurman, E. M. and Malcolm, R. L.: Concentration and Fraction-
ation of Hydrophobic Organic Acid Constitutents from Natu-
ral Waters by Liquid Chromatography, Geologic Survey Water-
Supply Paper, Washington D.C., United States Government
Printing Ofﬁce, 16, 1979.
Thurman, E. M. and Malcolm, R. L.: Preparative isolation of
aquatic humic substances, Environ. Sci. Technol., 15, 463–466,
1981.
Thurman, E. M., Malcolm, R. L., and Aiken, G. R.: Prediction of
capacity factors for aqueous organic solutes adsorbed on a porous
acrylic resin, Anal. Chem., 50, 775–779, 1978.
Tolocka, M. P., Jang, M., Ginter, J. M., Cox, F. J., Kamens, R.
M., and Johnston, M. V.: Formation of oligomers in secondary
organic aerosol, Environ. Sci. Technol., 38, 1428–1434, 2004.
Tombacz, E.: Colloidal properties of humic acids and spontaneous
changes of their colloidal state under variable solution condi-
tions, Soil Sci., 164, 814–824, 1999.
Varga, B., Kiss, G., Ganszky, I., Gelencser, A. and Krivacsy, Z.: Iso-
lation of water-soluble organic matter from atmospheric aerosol,
Talanta, 55, 561-572, 2001.
von Wandruszka, R.: The micellar model of humic acid: Evidence
from pyrene ﬂuorescence measurements, Soil Sci., 163, 921–
930, 1998.
Xiong, F., Croue, J. P., and Legube, B.: Long-term ozone consump-
tion by aquatic fulvic acids acting as precursors of radical chain
reactions, Environ. Sci. Technol., 26, 1059–1064, 1992.
Yates, L. M. and von Wandruszka, R.: Effects of pH and metals
on the surface tension of aqueous humic materials, Soil Sci. Soc.
Amer. J., 63, 1645–1649, 1999.
Yu, J. Z., Yang, H., Zhang, H. Y., and Lau, A. K. H.: Size dis-
tributions of water-soluble organic carbon in ambient aerosols
and its size-resolved thermal characteristics, Atmos. Environ.,
38, 1061–1071, 2004.
Zahardis, J., LaFranchi, B. W., and Petrucci, G. A.: Photoelectron
resonance capture ionization-aerosol mass spectrometry of the
ozonolysis products of oleic acid particles: Direct measure of
higher molecular weight oxygenates, J. Geophys. Res.-Atmos.,
110, D8 D08307, doi:10.1029/2004JD005336, 2005.
Zappoli, S., Andracchio, A., Fuzzi, S., Facchini, M. C., Gelencser,
A., Kiss, G., Krivacsy, Z., Molnar, A., Meszaros, E., Hansson, H.
C., Rosman, K., and Zebuhr, Y.: Inorganic, organic and macro-
molecular components of ﬁne aerosol in different areas of Europe
in relation to their water solubility, Atmos. Environ., 33, 2733–
2743, 1999.
Ziemann, P. J.:
Aerosol products, mechanisms, and kinet-
ics of heterogeneous reactions of ozone with oleic acid in
pure and mixed particles, Faraday Discuss., 130, 469–490,
doi:10.1039/b417502f, 2005.
www.atmos-chem-phys.net/6/729/2006/
Atmos. Chem. Phys., 6, 729–753, 2006
