African Journal of Food Science Vol. 4(5) pp. 200-222, May 2010 
Available online http://www.academicjournals.org/ajfs 
ISSN 1996-0794 ©2010 Academic Journals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Review Paper 
 
The importance of mineral elements for humans, 
domestic animals and plants: A review 
 
K. O. Soetan1*, C. O. Olaiya2 and O. E. Oyewole3 
 
1Department of Veterinary Physiology, Biochemistry and Pharmacology, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Oyo state, 
Nigeria. 
2Department of Biochemistry, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Oyo state, Nigeria. 
3Department of Health Promotion and Education, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Oyo state, Nigeria. 
 
Accepted 12 February, 2010 
 
Minerals are inorganic nutrients, usually required in small amounts from less than 1 to 2500 mg per day, 
depending on the mineral. As with vitamins and other essential food nutrients, mineral requirements 
vary with animal species. For example, humans and other vertebrates need large amounts of calcium 
for construction and maintenance of bone and normal function of nerves and muscles. Phosphorus is 
an important constituent of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and nucleic acid and is also essential for 
acid-base balance, bone and tooth formation. Red blood cells can not function properly without iron in 
haemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying pigment of red blood cells. Iron is also an important component of 
the cytochromes that function in cellular respiration. Magnesium, copper, selenium, zinc, iron, 
manganese and molybdenum are important co-factors found in the structure of certain enzymes and 
are indispensable in numerous biochemical pathways. Vertebrates need iodine to make thyroid 
hormones. Sodium, potassium and chlorine are important in the maintenance of osmotic balance 
between cells and the interstitial fluid. Magnesium is an important component of chlorophyll in plants. 
The interactions between nutrition and diseases, nutrition and drug metabolism have been reported. 
Excessive intake of some minerals can upset homeostatic balance and cause toxic side effects. For 
example, excess sodium intake is associated with high blood pressure and excess iron can cause liver 
damage. Also, severe shortages or self-prescribed minerals can alter the delicate balance in body 
functions that promotes health. The knowledge of the biochemistry of the mineral elements is also 
essential because individuals suffering from a chronic illness or taking medications that affect the 
body’s use of specific nutrients need to be enlightened. The aim of this paper is to review the 
biochemical functions and the importance of the mineral elements in health and disease conditions of 
humans, animals and plants as this will assist in the prevention of nutrition-related diseases and 
maintenance of good health for humans and animals that depend on plants for food. This paper could 
also serve as a ready source of literature review for researchers involved in nutritional sciences.  
 
Key words: Mineral elements, humans, animals, plants, nutrition. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Minerals are inorganic substances, present in all body 
tissues and fluids and their presence is  necessary for the  
 
 
 
*Corresponding author. E-mail: soetangboye@yahoo.com. 
maintenance of certain physicochemical processes which 
are essential to life.  Minerals are chemical constituents 
used by the body in many ways. Although they yield no 
energy, they   have   important   roles   to   play   in many 
activities in the body (Malhotra, 1998; Eruvbetine, 2003). 
Every   form   of   living   matter  requires  these inorganic  

 
 
 
 
elements or minerals for their normal life processes 
(Hays and Swenson, 1985; Ozcan, 2003). Minerals may 
be broadly classified as macro (major) or micro (trace) 
elements.  The third category is the ultra trace elements. 
The 
macro-minerals 
include 
calcium, 
phosphorus, 
sodium and chloride, while the micro-elements include 
iron, copper, cobalt, potassium, magnesium, iodine, zinc, 
manganese,   molybdenum, fluoride, chromium, selenium 
and sulfur (Eruvbetine, 2003). The macro-minerals are 
required in amounts greater than 100 mg/dl and the 
micro-minerals are required in amounts less than 100 
mg/dl (Murray et al., 2000). The ultra trace elements 
include boron, silicon, arsenic and nickel which have 
been found in animals and are believed to be essential 
for these animals. Evidence for requirements and 
essentialness of others like cadmium, lead, tin, lithium 
and vanadium is weak (Albion Research Notes, 1996). 
 The mineral elements are separate entities from the 
other essential nutrients like proteins, fats, carbohy-
drates, and vitamins. Animal husbandry had demon-
strated the need for minerals in the diet (Hegsted et al., 
1976). In this century, biological assay methods clarified 
the significance and importance of mineral elements for 
human and animal nutrition and modern analytical 
techniques led to the detection of trace elements as 
essential nutrients and this is still an active area of 
current research. 
 Micronutrient deficiencies are a major public health 
problem in many developing countries, with infants and 
pregnant women especially at risk (Batra and Seth, 
2002). Infants deserve extra concern because they need 
adequate micronutrients to maintain normal growth and 
development (Rush, 2000). The micronutrient deficien-
cies which are of greatest public health significance are 
iron deficiency, causing varying degrees of impairment in 
cognitive performance, lowered work capacity, lowered 
immunity to infections, pregnancy complications e.g. 
babies with low birth weight, poor learning capacity and 
reduced psychomotor skills (Batra and Seth, 2002). 
Medical reports show that very severe anaemia is a direct 
cause of maternal and child mortality (Chakravarty and 
Ghosh, 2000). There have been suggestions that more 
than anything else, lack of adequate information about 
the composition of varied feed resources in some regions 
have been the major drawback to their utilization, rather 
than real shortage (Aletor and Omodara, 1994). For 
instance, there is very limited information on the mineral 
elements in some plants used as human food and animal 
feeds consumed in Nigeria, especially the newly-
introduced varieties of diets and the lesser known 
legumes. Some of the earlier information on mineral 
elements was based on analysis employing less sensitive 
methods, which may not be reliable. The aim of this 
review is to re-visit the provision of information on the 
importance of mineral elements to humans, animals and 
plants and also to emphasize on the need for their levels to 
be ascertained in water and commonly consumed plant 
foods using modern analytical techniques. This will assist  
Soetan    et     al.      201 
 
 
 
greatly in providing relevant information on the importance 
of minerals to health and this would subsequently assist in 
prevention 
and 
management 
of 
mineral-associated 
deficiency diseases. Data on mineral contents of human 
foods and animal feeds are essential for formulation of 
feeding regimes and food processing techniques.  
 
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE MINERAL ELEMENTS 
 
The importance of mineral elements in human, animal 
and plant nutrition has been well recognized (Underwood, 
1971; Darby, 1976). Deficiencies or disturbances in the 
nutrition of an animal cause a variety of diseases and can 
arise in several ways (Gordon, 1977). When a trace 
element is deficient, a characteristic syndrome is pro-
duced which reflects the specific functions of the nutrient 
in the metabolism of the animal. The trace elements are 
essential components of enzyme systems. Simple or 
conditioned deficiencies of mineral elements therefore 
have profound effects on metabolism and tissue 
structure. To assess the dietary intake and adequacy of 
minerals, information needs to be collected on mineral 
element content of foods, diets and water (Rao and Rao, 
1981; Simsek and Aykut, 2007). There is limited 
information on the trace element content of water and 
numerous plant foods consumed in some less developed 
countries.  
The significance of the mineral elements in humans, 
animals and plants nutrition can not be overemphasized. 
The presence of mineral elements in animal feed is vital 
for the animal’s metabolic processes. Grazing livestock 
from tropical countries often do not receive mineral 
supplementation except for common salt and must 
depend almost exclusively upon forage for their mineral 
requirements 
(McDowell 
et 
al., 
1984). 
Mineral 
deficiencies or imbalances in soils and forages account 
partly for low animal production and reproductive 
problems. Soil acidity and season are factors affecting 
mineral uptake by plants. Plants use these minerals as 
structural components in carbohydrates and proteins; 
organic molecules in metabolism, such as magnesium in 
chlorophyll and phosphorus in ATP; enzyme activators 
like potassium, and for maintaining osmotic balance. 
Calcium is highly implicated in the maintenance of 
firmness of fruits (Olaiya, 2006) and its requirements in 
fruits are related to cell wall stability and membrane 
integrity (Belakbir et al., 1998). Mineral elements play 
important roles in health and disease states of humans 
and domestic animals. For example, iron deficiency 
anaemia and goitre due to iodine deficiency are reported 
to be problems of public health importance in some 
communities 
(Partwardhan, 
1961; 
Deosthale 
and 
Belavady, 1978). Trace elements of significance to 
people with HIV are zinc and selenium. Selenium is an 
antioxidant that increases immune function. Zinc, usually 
taken to stimulate the immune system, has been reported 
to  weaken  immune  system  function  and lower calcium  

202          Afr.     J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
levels in HIV – positive men (O’ Connor, 1995; Wood, 
2000). 
 
 
METHODS OF ANALYSES FOR THE MINERALS 
 
Mineral elements in plant and soil samples are essentially 
estimated by colorimetric procedure according to the method of 
Sandell (1959). The wet-ashing procedure of Gorsuch (1959) using 
nitric acid, perchloric acid and sulphuric acid in the ratio of 3:2:1 is 
usually employed for the digestion of the food samples. Processing 
of samples of foods and water for mineral analysis are carried out in 
a dust-free room to avoid contamination, using distilled deionized 
water for all dilutions (Rao and Rao, 1981). Appropriate blanks are 
also included along with the samples and trace elements are 
estimated 
in 
the 
samples 
using 
an 
atomic 
absorption 
spectrophotometer. Internationally approved standards are also run 
along with the samples to be analysed to check the results 
obtained. Studying the chemical composition of plants provide clues 
about their nutritional requirements (Roberts, 1985). Researchers 
use a method known as hydroponic culture to determine which of 
the mineral elements are actually essential nutrients. In the 
technique known as hydroponic culture, a researcher baths the 
roots of plants in solutions of various minerals dissolved in known 
concentrations. Aerating the water will provide the roots with 
oxygen for cellular respiration. A particular mineral, such as 
potassium, can be ommited from the culture medium to test 
whether it is essential to the plants. If the element removed from the 
mineral solution is an essential nutrient, then the incomplete 
medium will cause plants to become abnormal in appearance 
compared with controls grown on a complete mineral medium. 
Analyses of the mineral content of a plant or soil are used to 
confirm the diagnosis of a specific mineral deficiency. Such studies 
have helped identify 17 elements that are essential nutrients in all 
plants and a few other elements that are essential to certain groups 
of plants as shown in Table 1.   
 
 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE CONCENTRATION AND 
AVAILABILITY OF   THE MINERAL ELEMENTS 
 
Several factors directly or indirectly influence the levels of 
minerals in plants and hence the amounts available for 
humans and animals that depend on plants for foods and 
feeds respectively. The amount of a particular nutrient in 
the diet may be insufficient to meet the requirements. 
However, the metabolism of the animal may be deranged 
by the interaction of dietary, environmental and genetic 
factors (Gordon, 1977).     
Location has been reported to influence the mineral 
and trace element compositions of rice, wheat, oats and 
barley (Basargin and Peregudora, 1969; Kavanek and 
Janicek, 1969) and these are mainly attributed to the 
altered soil conditions. The nature and chemical 
composition of the soil are also involved in the locational 
differences observed in the mineral elements present in 
grain sorghum (Deosthale and Belavady, 1978). Feeds 
grown on high-selenium soils are good sources of 
selenium and may be used in ration formulation for 
poultry in order to supply a source of selenium (Merck, 
1986). Uptake of copper, zinc and manganese by plants 
is affected by  the  level  of phosphate  fertilizer  (Mongia,  
 
 
 
 
1966; Baser and Deo, 1967), while the chemical form of 
nitrogen fertilizer has been reported to affect the uptake 
of copper (Chand, 1969). Environmental factors such as 
location rather than genotype is reported to have greater 
influence on the mineral and trace element composition 
of sorghum grain (Belavady and Deosthale, 1978). 
Cobalt, copper, iodine and selenium deficiencies in the 
soil and flora in certain areas of the world have led to 
deficiencies of these minerals in domestic animals (Hays 
and Swenson, 1985). Also, the increment of selenium in 
the soil may lead to high levels in plants which are toxic 
to animals. Nutritional disorders involving the mineral 
elements may arise as simple deficiencies or excesses of 
particular elements but the extent to which the other 
organic or inorganic nutrients are present in the diet will 
determine the deficiencies or toxicities. The conditioning 
factors may be a reflection of the soils on which the 
plants are grown, or they may be related to the presence 
of specific plants that are seleniferous or goitogenic 
(Hays and Swenson, 1985). Mineral deficiencies or 
imbalances in soils or forages have been implicated, in 
part, for low animal production, and poor reproductive 
performance in the developing regions of the world 
(Aletor and Omodara, 1994). 
Antinutritional factors (ANF) present in plants could 
also affect the absorption and availability of some 
minerals by humans and animals. Anti-nutritional factors 
reduce the nutrient utilization and or food intake of plant 
foods (Osagie, 1998). The need for adequate processing 
to reduce the antinutritional factors in plants used as 
human foods and animal feeds have been reviewed by 
(Soetan and Oyewole, 2009). The levels of these 
substances in plants vary with the specie of plant, cultivar 
and post-harvest treatment. Examples of ANF which 
could reduce the bioavailability of minerals are oxalates 
and phytates. Oxalalic acid, like phytic acid, has the 
ability to bind some divalent metals such as calcium and 
magnesium thereby interfering with their metabolism 
(Blood and Radostits, 1989). Chelates bind many 
elements making them nutritionally unavailable, thereby 
inducing dietary deficiencies (Nelson et al., 1968). Zinc 
may be complexed with calcium-phytate and lead to 
inefficient utilization of dietary zinc. Adequate calcium 
intake will compensate for the reduced availability of 
calcium, but this will aggravate the zinc deficiency and 
such a relationship has frequently led to parakeratosis in 
pigs.  Phytic acid reduces the absorption of calcium from 
the gastro-intestinal tract and consequently implicated in 
the development of rickets when chicks are fed cereals 
such as sorghum.  Zinc and iron deficiency symptoms 
have been reported in man and chicken (Lease, 1966) 
when fed diets high in phytic acid.  There is a significant 
inverse relationship between phytic acid content and the 
availability of calcium, magnesium, phosphorus and zinc 
in products like soya bean, palm kernel, rapeseed and 
cottonseed meals (Nwokolo and Bragg, 1977).  Phytic 
acid  may  decrease  the  availability  of  divalent   cations  

Soetan    et     al.      203 
 
 
 
Table 1. Functions and deficiency symptoms of macro- and micro- elements in plants. 
 
Element 
Form available to plants 
Major functions 
Deficiency symptoms 
Macronutrients 
 
 
 
Carbon 
CO2 
Major component of plant’s organic compounds. 
Growth retardation  
Oxygen 
CO2 
Major component of plant’s organic compounds. 
Plants become stunted 
Hydrogen 
H2O 
Major component of plant’s organic compounds. 
Plants become stunted 
 
Nitrogen 
 
NO3
-, NH4
+ 
 
Component of nucleic acids, proteins, hormones, 
coenzymes and chlorophylls 
 
Stunted growth, light green older leaves, older leaves 
become yellow and die (chlorosis)  
 
Sulfur  
 
SO4
2- 
 
Component of proteins, two vitamins, coenzymes 
 
Light green or yellow leaves, reduced growth 
 
Phosphorus 
 
H2PO4
-, HPO4
2- 
 
Component of nucleic acids, phospholipids, adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP), several coenzymes 
 
Purplish veins in older leaves, fewer seeds and fruits, 
stunted growth 
 
Potassium 
 
K+ 
 
Cofactor that functions in protein synthesis, activation of 
enzymes,  major solute functioning in water balance and 
thus affecting osmosis, operation of stomata 
 
Reduced growth, curled, mottled, or spotted older 
leaves, burned leaf margins, weakened roots and stems 
 
Calcium 
 
Ca2+ 
 
Important in formation and stability of cell walls and in 
maintenance of membrane structure and permeability, 
activates some enzymes, regulates many responses of 
cells to stimuli 
 
Leaves are deformed, terminal buds die, reduced root 
growth 
 
Magnesium 
 
Mg2+ 
 
Component of chlorophylls, activates many enzymes 
 
Chlorosis, drooped leaves 
 
Micronutrients 
 
 
 
Chlorine 
Cl- 
Required for water-splitting step of photosynthesis, 
functions in water balance, role in root, shoot growth, 
plays a role in photolysis 
Wilting, chlorosis, death of some leaves  
 
Iron 
 
Fe3+, Fe2+ 
 
Component of cytochromes, electron transport, activates 
some enzymes, plays a role in chlorophyll synthesis 
 
Chlorosis, yellow and green striping in grasses 
 
Boron 
 
H2BO3
- 
 
Cofactor in chlorophyll synthesis, may be involved in 
carbohydrate transport and nucleic acid synthesis, play 
roles in flowering, germination, fruiting, cell division, 
nitrogen metabolism 
 
Terminal buds, lateral branches die, leaves thicken, 
curl, become brittle 
 
 

204         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
Table 1. Contd. 
 
 
Manganese 
 
Mn2+ 
 
Active in formation of amino acids, activates some 
enzymes, coenzyme activity, required for water-splitting 
step of photosynthesis, chlorophyll synthesis 
 
Light green leaves with green major veins, leaves 
whiten and fall off  
 
Zinc 
 
Zn2+ 
 
Active in formation of chlorophyll, activates some 
enzymes, plays a role in formation of auxin, chloroplasts, 
and starch 
 
Chlorosis, mottled or bronzed leaves, abnormal roots 
 
Copper 
 
Cu+,Cu2+ 
 
Component of many redox and lignin-biosynthetic 
enzymes 
 
Chlorosis, dead spots in leaves, stunted growth, 
terminal buds die, necrosis in young leaves  
 
Molybdenum 
 
MoO4
2- 
 
Essential for nitrogen fixation, cofactor that functions in 
nitrate reduction, component of enzyme used in nitrogen 
metabolism   
 
Possible nitrogen deficiency, pale green, rolled or 
cupped leaves, mottling and necrosis in old leaves 
 
Nickel 
 
Ni2+ 
 
Cofactor 
for 
an 
enzyme 
functioning 
in 
nitrogen 
metabolism 
 
 
Source: (Williams, 1992). 
Note: All mineral elements contribute to the water-solute balance. 
 
 
 
such as calcium, zinc and iron, by the formation of 
an insoluble protein-phytic acid- mineral complex, 
it has been cited as causing reduced availability of 
zinc in soybean foods (O’Dell and Savage, 1960; 
Forbes and Parker, 1977). Sometimes, either as a 
conse-quence of low availability of iodine from the 
soil, or the presence in the food of goitrogenic 
substances, which interfere with the utilization of 
iodine by the thyroid, the iodine requirements of 
some animals e.g. the sheep are not met in the 
natural diet and so iodine supplements must be 
fed (Merck, 1986).     
 
  
INTERRELATIONSHIPS AND INTERFERENCES 
AMONG THE MINERAL ELEMENTS 
 
There   are    many    metabolic    and   absorptive  
interrelationships among the mineral elements 
which contribute to variations in the degree of 
physiological response to deficient or toxic levels. 
These relationships make it difficult to determine 
the optimum dietary level for the individual 
elements required for humans and domestic 
animals. As a result of this, the recommended 
dietary level of any element should rarely be 
considered independent of the level of other 
essential nutrients (Hays and Swenson, 1985).  
The functions of minerals in humans and animals 
are inter-related. Examples are the definite 
relationship of calcium and phosphorus in the 
formation of bones and teeth and as the major 
structural 
elements 
of 
the 
skeletal 
tissue. 
Hypocalcaemia may cause weakness of the heart 
similar to that caused by hyperkalaemia. A high 
level    of   potassium   appears   to   increase  the 
requirement for sodium and vice versa (Merck, 
1986). Potassium deficiency leads to an increase 
in the basic amino acid concentration of the tissue 
fluids and some increase in cellular sodium levels 
as a means of maintaining cation-anion balance. 
Potassium influences the contractibility of smooth, 
skeletal, and cardiac muscles and has an effect 
on muscular irritability that, like that of sodium, 
tends to antagonize the effect of the calcium ion. 
Under conditions of salt restriction, calcium 
appears highly important in helping to maintain 
the potassium content of tissue (Hays and 
Swenson, 1985). The plasma phosphorus level is 
inversely related to the blood calcium level. There 
are also inter-relationships of iron, copper and 
cobalt (in vitamin B12) in haemoglobin synthesis 
and red blood cell formation (Hays and Swenson, 
1985). It is reported  that  mercuric chloride toxicity in  

 
 
 
 
mammals can be overcome by co-administration of 
sodium selenite (Gailer et al., 2000). It has been 
repeatedly speculated that a deficiency in copper (Cu) or 
an excessive provision with dietary manganese (Mn) 
could play a role in spongiform encephalopathies [bovine 
(BSE) and others] (Clauss et al., 2007). 
Copper functions in the utilization of iron in an early 
stage of haemopoiesis. Copper deficiency results in an 
increase in iron in the liver, whereas an excesss of 
copper results in a decrease in iron content of the liver, 
thus reflecting the role of copper in iron utilization. 
Copper is present in blood plasma as a copper-carrying 
plasma 
protein 
called 
erythrocuprin. 
Erythrocuprin 
provides a link between copper and iron metabolism and 
mediates 
the 
release 
of 
iron 
from 
ferritin 
and 
haemosiderin (Hays and Swenson, 1985). The dietary 
requirement of copper is affected by the level of some 
other minerals in the diet, and is increased in ruminants 
by excessive molybdenum. Treatment of copper poi-
soning is based on the rationale that excess molybdenum 
may cause copper deficiency and molybdenum in 
conjunction with the sulfate ion has been used in treating 
copper poisoning in ruminants (Pierson and Aenes, 
1958). The Cu requirement varies among animal species 
to some extent but is influenced to a large degree by its 
relationship with and the intake of other mineral elements 
such as iron, molybdenum and sulfate.   
Sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorus and chlorine 
serve individually and collectively in the body fluids. 
Under stress conditions, a loss of sodium may be 
compensated for by an increase in potassium; but the 
animal is limited  in its capacity to substitute bases, and 
major losses of sodium lead to a significant lowering of 
osmotic pressure, and therefore to a loss of water or 
dehydration. A close relationship exists between chloride 
and sodium ions. Chloride ion is accompanied by 
hydrogen ion in nearly equal amounts. In animals, excess 
chloride and a constant level of sodium can result in 
acidosis, whereas an excess sodium and a constant level 
of chloride can result in alkalosis. Intake of excess dietary 
manganese had been reported to interfere with phos-
phorus retention (Hays and Swenson, 1985). The amount 
of copper in the diet of animals necessary to prevent a 
copper deficiency is influenced by the intake of other 
dietary constituents, notably molybdenum and inorganic 
sulphate (Merck, 1986). High intake of molybdenum in 
the presence of adequate sulphate increases the require-
ment for copper in animals (sheep) (Merck, 1986).  
Cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle and nervous tissue 
depend on a proper balance between calcium and 
magnesium ions. A high calcium intake will increase the 
need for zinc. The symptoms of magnesium deficiency 
resemble that of low-calcium tetany (Hays and Swenson, 
1985). Deficiencies of trace elements like zinc, copper 
and magnesium have been implicated in various 
reproductive events like infertility, pregnancy wastage, 
congenital anomalies,  pregnancy-induced  hypertension,  
Soetan    et     al.      205 
 
 
 
placental abruption, premature rupture of membranes, 
still births and low birth weight (Pathak and Kapil, 2004). 
An excess of dietary fat or poor digestion of fat may 
reduce calcium absorption through the formation of 
insoluble calcium soaps; however, small amounts of fat 
may improve calcium absorption. An excess of iron, 
aluminium or magnesium interferes with phosphorus 
absorption through the formation of insoluble phosphates. 
In plants, a high level of fertilization results in high levels 
of nitrogen and potassium and this tends to reduce the 
uptake of magnesium by the plant. In turn, the high level 
of potassium interferes with the absorption of magne-
sium, and the high levels of dietary nitrogen provided by 
the plants increase the excretion of magnesium. These 
effects lead to a physiological deficiency of magnesium 
and can result in tetany and death (Hays and Swenson, 
1985). A reciprocal antagonism exists between molybde-
num and copper. Molybdenum, in the presence of 
sulfates, limits copper retention in cattle and sheep; 
however, neither molybdenum or sulfates alone affect 
copper retention. Chronic copper poisoning associated 
with high levels of copper in the liver of ruminants had 
been observed under conditions of moderate intake of 
copper but very low dietary levels of molybdenum and 
sulfate.  
Conversely, excessive levels of molybdenum and 
sulfate may cause characteristic symptoms of copper 
deficiency even with apparently adequate intake of 
copper (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Trace elements and 
anti-oxidants have also been shown to influence host 
cellular and humoral immunological functions. The 
immune system utilizes these essential minerals and 
factors to meet the demands of challenges by infectious 
agents (Spallholz et al., 1990; Sherman, 1990). Trace 
elements are essential in the maturation, activation and 
functions of host defence mechanism (Bendich, 1990; 
Romero, 2003). Cu, Fe, Se, Mn and Zn are integral part 
of enzymatic anti-oxidants. Arinola et al. (2008b) reported 
that infection with malaria parasites during pregnancy 
leads to raised plasma trace elements and total anti-
oxidants as a result of free radical generation. Trace 
metals are known to play important roles in the catalytic 
activities of major antioxidant enzymes (Arinola et al., 
2008a). Trace elements are required in small concentra-
tions as essential components of biological enzyme 
systems or of structural portions of biologically active 
constituents (Arinola et al., 2008c). Immune cells, like all 
other types of cells, require an adequate supply of trace 
elements (Fe, Cu and Zn) to express and preserve the 
structure and function of key metalloproteins that 
participate in house keeping processes such as energy 
production and to protect the cell against highly toxic 
reactive oxygen species. Also adequate level of Fe and 
Zn is required for continous generation of immune cells in 
bone marrow and the clonal expansion of lymphocytes in 
response to antigenic stimulation (Chandra, 1990). 
Neurologic   disorders   and   trace   elements  are closely  

206         Afr.   J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
related (Arinola et al., 2008c). Non-living plant biomass 
have the ability to bind metals and this has been 
attributed to the presence of various functional groups, 
which can attract and sequester the metal ions (Horsfall 
et al., 2003). Cu and Zn are an integral part of Cu-ZnSOD 
(superoxide dismutase). Fe is an integral part of catalase, 
Mn is an integral part of Mn-SOD while Se is an integral 
part of Se-GPX (glutathione peroxidase) which is a major 
scavenger of H2O2 (Arinola et al., 2008a). The SOD 
catalyses the dismutation of of superoxide to H2O2, which 
must be removed by catalase or glutathione peroxidase. 
Deficiency of Se, Zn and Cu decreases activities of 
superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxidase (El-
Behairy et al., 1997; Ellis and Salt, 2003). It has been 
reported that plants can use rich source of nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium for growth if suitably 
managed (Sharma et al., 2008). However, some 
elements serve very specific roles such as iodine in 
thyroxine and cobalt as an integral part of vitamin B12. 
Thyroxin and vitamin B12 are also intimately involved in 
processes related to many other organic and inorganic 
nutrients. Strontium and calcium have a similar and 
interrelated physiological behaviour. Rubidium is found in 
animal tissue and it resembles potassium in its distribu-
tion and excretory pattern (Hays and Swenson, 1985). 
The amelioration of mercury toxicity by selenium shows 
the importance of interactions of selenium with other 
elements (Panzek and Ostadalova, 1967). Studies of 
these interactions on a molecular level indicate a 
profound effect of selenium on mercury metabolism in 
animals (Burk et al., 1974). Arsenic has long been known 
to decrease selenium toxicity under some conditions. 
Increased biliary excretion of selenium accompanies 
arsenic administration and is the presumed mechanism 
(Lexander and Baumann, 1966). Interactions of selenium 
with several other elements are known and new 
developments in this area are being expected.      
 
     
THE BIOCHEMISTRY AND FUNCTIONS OF THE 
INDIVIDUAL  MINERAL ELEMENTS  
 
The basic functions performed by the minerals are: they 
are structural components of body tissues, are involved in 
the maintenance of acid-base balance and in the 
regulation of body fluids, in transport of gases and in 
muscle contractions (Malhotra, 1998; Murray et al., 
2000). 
Knowledge of the biochemistry and functions of the 
mineral elements in humans, animals and plants will 
assist plant physiologists and breeders/geneticists, to 
give priority to mineral elements of importance in health 
and disease of humans and animals when selecting 
desirable traits in diets and this will also assist food 
industries, dieticians, human and animal nutritionists, and 
veterinarians to be aware of the effects of different 
processing methods/techniques on these important 
mineral elements . For example, high   dietary   sodium is 
 
 
 
 
implicated 
in 
cardiovascular 
and 
renal 
disorders. 
Consequently, high dietary sodium is often discouraged 
in patients/subjects who suffer from or are prone to 
hypertension. Also, knowledge of the importance of the 
mineral elements in plants is essential as the global trend 
in nutrition and medicine is shifting towards the 
consumption of plant foods (fruits and vegetables) and 
medicinal plants (phyto-medicines) respectively, because 
the plant kingdom is reported to be full of large numbers 
of beneficial substances to both human and animal health 
(Igile, 1995; Nwadiaro and Nwachukwu, 2007; Ogbonna 
et al., 2007; Soetan, 2008).  
The symptoms of a mineral deficiency depend on the 
function and mobility of the element. The metabolism of 
soil bacteria makes nitrogen available to plants (Roberts, 
1985). Carnivorous plants supplement their mineral nutri-
tion by digesting animals (Roberts, 1985). Plants need 
sunlight as the energy source for photosynthesis, but to 
synthesize organic matter, plants also require raw 
materials in the form of inorganic substances: carbon 
dioxide, water, and a variety of minerals present as 
inorganic ions in the soil. With its ramifying root system 
and shoot system, a plant is extensively networked with 
its environment-soil and air, which are the reservoirs of 
the plant’s inorganic nutrients (Roberts, 1985). A 
particular chemical element is considered to be an 
essential nutrient if it is required for a plant to grow from a 
seed and complete the life cycle, producing another 
generation of seeds. 
 
 
Biochemical 
functions 
of 
mineral 
elements 
in 
humans and animals 
 
Calcium (Ca)  
 
Calcium functions as a constituent of bones and teeth, 
regulation of nerve and muscle function.  In blood coagu-
lation, calcium activates the conversion of prothrombin to 
thrombin and also takes part in milk clotting. It plays a 
vital role in enzyme activation. Calcium activates large 
number of enzymes such as adenosine triphosphatase 
(ATPase), succinic dehydrogenase, lipase etc. It is also 
required for membrane permeability, involved in muscle 
contraction, normal transmission of nerve impulses and in 
neuromuscular excitability. A reduced extracellular blood 
calcium increases the irritability of nerve tissue, and very 
low levels may cause spontaneous discharges of nerve 
impulses leading to tetany and convulsions (Hays and 
Swenson, 1985; Malhotra, 1998; Murray et al., 2000). 
Calcium absorption requires calcium-binding proteins and 
is regulated by vitamin D, sunlight, parathyroid hormone 
and thyrocalcitonin. Thyrocalcitonin decreases plasma 
calcium and phosphate levels whereas parathyroid 
hormone increases them. Dietary calcium and phos-
phorus are absorbed mainly in the upper small intestine, 
particularly the duodenum and the amount absorbed is 
dependent    on     source,     calcium-phosphorus    ratio, 

 
 
 
 
intestinal pH, lactose intake and dietary levels of calcium, 
phosphorus, vitamin D, iron, aluminium, manganese and 
fat. The greater the need, the more efficient the absorp-
tion. Absorption of calcium and phosphorus is facilitated 
by a low intestinal pH which is necessary for their 
solubility and thus normal gastric secretion of hydro-
chloric acid or H+ is necessary for efficient absorption. 
Achlorhydria decreases absorption of these minerals. 
The low pH of the duodenum accounts for the greater 
absorption in that area. Lactose also enhances the 
aborption of calcium (Hays and Swenson, 1985).  
In plants, calcium is taken up in the ionized form (as 
Ca2+), the leafy parts are relatively high in calcium and 
low in phosphorus, whereas, the reverse is true of the 
seeds. Legumes, in general, have higher calcium content 
than grasses (Merck, 1986). In children, calcium 
deficiency causes rickets due to insufficient calcification 
by calcium phosphate of the bones in growing children. 
The bones therefore remain soft and deformed by the 
body weight. In adults, it causes osteomalacia, a genera-
lized demineralization of bones. It may also contribute to 
osteoporosis, a metabolic disorder resulting in decalcifi-
cation of bone with a high incidence of fracture, that is, a 
condition where calcium is withdrawn from the bones and 
the bones become weak and porous and then breaks 
(Hays and Swenson, 1985; Malhotra, 1998; Murray et al., 
2000). Calcium deficiency also affects the dentition of 
both children and adult. Toxicity symptoms occur with 
excess absorption due to hypervitaminosis D or 
hypercalcaemia due to hyperparathyroidism, or idiopathic 
hypercalcaemia. Excess calcium depresses cardiac 
activity and leads to respiratory and cardiac failure; it may 
cause the heart to stop in systole, although, normally, 
calcium ions increase the strength and duration of 
cardiac 
muscle 
contraction. 
Excess 
calcium 
and 
phosphorus are excreted by the kidney. Ca and P 
excreted in faeces are largely the unabsorbed dietary 
minerals; some comes from the digestive juices, including 
bile (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Growing, pregnant and 
especially lactating humans and animals require liberal 
amounts of calcium and phosphorus. Parturient paresis, 
or milk fever, in cows is associated with calcium 
metabolism. This illness usually occurs with the onset of 
profuse lactation and the most common abnormality is 
acute hypocalcaemia with decline in blood calcium level 
from normal. Serum magnesium levels may be elevated 
or depressed, low levels being accompanied by tetany 
and high levels by a flaccid paralysis. Sources of calcium 
include Beans, lentils, nuts, leafy vegetables, dairy 
products, small fishes including sardines, bones, etc. 
 
 
Phosphorus (P) 
 
Phosphorus is located in every cell of the body and is 
vitally concerned with many metabolic processes, 
including those involving the buffers in body fluids (Hays 
and Swenson, 1985). It  functions   as   a   constituent   of  
Soetan    et     al.      207 
 
 
 
bones, teeth, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), phosphory-
lated metabolic intermediates and nucleic acids. It serves 
buffering action, that is, phosphate buffers, functions in 
the formation of high energy compounds, that is, 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and is involved in the 
synthesis 
of 
phospholipids 
and 
phosphoproteins. 
Practically, every form of energy exchange inside living 
cells involve the forming or breaking of high-energy 
bonds that link oxides of phosphorus to carbon or to 
carbon-nitrogen com-pounds (Hays and Swenson, 1985; 
Malhotra, 1998; Murray et al., 2000). Vitamin D is 
probably involved in the control of phosphorus absorption 
and serum levels are regulated by kidney reabsorption. 
Phosphorus is an essential macronutrient for plants and 
one of the three nutrients generally added to soils in 
fertilizers because of its vital role of energy transfer in 
living organisms and in plants. Adequate phosphorus 
availability stimulates early growth and hastens maturity 
in plants (Sharma et al., 2008).  
Phosphorus is also needed for soil fertility. In plants, as 
grasses mature, phosphorus is transferred to the grain. 
Also, the phosphorus content of the plant is influenced 
markedly by the availability of phosphorus in the soil. As 
a result of this, low-quality pastures devoid of legumes 
and range plants tend to be naturally low in phosphorus, 
as the forage matures and the seeds fall; characteristi-
cally, the range soil is also deficient in phosphorus 
(Merck, 1986). A large percentage (60-80%) of the total 
phosphorus of cereal grains and oil seeds exists 
organically bound as phytic acid. Phytic acid, the 
hexaphosphoric acid ester of inositol, is present in cereal 
and legume seeds primarily as the Ca-Mg salt called 
phytin. The organically bound phosphorus, phytin 
phosphorus, is largely unavailable to monogastric 
animals, whereas ruminants can utilize it relatively very 
well. This species difference is explained by the presence 
of the enzyme phytase from rumen microorganisms, 
which hydrolyzes the organically bound phosphorus and 
renders it available for absorption. This partly, coupled 
with the slower growth rate of ruminants, accounts for the 
rather large difference in phosphorus requirements of 
ruminant and nonruminant animals (Hays and Swenson, 
1985). 
Decrease in serum phosphorus is found in rickets, 
hyperparathyroidism, De Toni-Fanconi Syndrome. Defi-
ciency disease or symptoms in children causes rickets 
and in adults, it causes osteomalacia. Increase in serum 
phosphorus is found in chronic nephritis and hypopara-
thyroidism. Toxicity disease or symptoms include low 
serum Ca2+ : P ratio. It may also lead to bone loss 
(Malhotra, 1998; Murray et al., 2000). Sources of 
phosphorus include phosphate food additives, green 
leafy vegetables and fruits, especially banana. 
 
 
Sodium (Na) 
 
Sodium  is  the  principal  cation  in  extracellular  fluids. It  

208         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
regulates plasma volume and acid-base balance, 
involved in the maintenance of osmotic pressure of the 
body fluids, preserves normal irritability of muscles and 
cell permeability, activates nerve and muscle function 
and 
involved 
in 
Na+/K+-ATPase, 
maintenance 
of 
membrane potentials, transmission of nerve impulses 
and the absorptive processes of monosaccharides, 
amino acids, pyrimidines, and bile salts. The changes in 
osmotic pressure are largely dependent on sodium 
concentration (Hays and Swenson, 1985; Malhotra, 1998; 
Murray et al., 2000).  Its metabolism is regulated by 
aldosterone.  
Commonly used vegetable foodstuffs do not contain 
sufficient quantities of sodium to meet the animal’s 
dietary need. This inadequacy is compensated for by 
including sodium chloride, common salt, in their diet or by 
allowing them to consume salt ad libidum. Sodium is 
readily absorbed as the sodium ion and circulates 
throughout the body. Excretion occurs mainly through the 
kidney as sodium chloride or phosphate. There are 
appreciable losses in perspiration, and the quantities lost 
by this route vary rather markedly with the environmental 
humidity (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Sodium deficiency 
in young chicks cause growth retardation. Egg production 
and hatchability in laying chickens are depressed (Merck, 
1986).      
Increased level of sodium in the serum is called 
hypernatraemia and this occurs in Cushion’s disease, 
administration of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
administration of sex hormones, diabetes insipidous and 
after active sweating (Malhotra, 1998). Excessive intake 
of sodium chloride may result in salt toxicity which is 
mainly caused by sodium ion, since sodium acetate or 
sodium propionate affects the animals in a manner 
similar to that of sodium chloride. The amounts required 
for toxicity vary and are largely dependent on the 
availability of water to the animals. Toxicity usually occurs 
when animals are deprived of salt and then have access 
to a brine solution or loose salt without access to 
sufficient water (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Low level of 
sodium in the serum is hyponatraemia and this occurs in 
acute Addison’s disease, vomiting, diarrhea, nephro-
sissevere burns and intestinal obstruction (Malhotra, 
1998). Toxicity disease or symptoms may cause 
hypertension in susceptible individuals. Sources include 
table salt, salt added to prepared foods and most natural 
foods contain sodium. 
 
 
Potassium (K)  
 
Potassium is the principal cation in intracellular fluid and 
functions in acid-base balance, regulation of osmotic 
pressure, conduction of nerve impulse, muscle contrac-
tion particularly the cardiac muscle, cell membrane 
function and Na+/K+-ATPase. Potassium is also required 
during glycogenesis. It also helps in the transfer of 
phosphate from ATP to pyruvic acid and  probably  has  a 
 
 
 
 
role in many other basic cellular enzymatic reactions. Its 
metabolism is regulated by aldosterone. Hyperkalaemia 
is increased level in serum potassium and this occurs in 
Addison’s disease, advanced chronic renal failure, shock 
and dehydration. Toxicity disease or symptoms include 
dilatation of the heart, cardiac arrest, small bowel ulcers.  
Hypokalaemia is low level of serum potassium and this 
occurs in diarrhoea, metabolic alkalosis and familial 
periodic paralysis. When lactating dairy cows have 
hypokalaemia, the milk production is markedly lowered.  
Deficiency disease or symptoms occurs secondary to 
illness, functional and structural abnormalities including 
impaired neuromuscular functions of skeletal, smooth, 
and cardiac muscle, muscular weakness, paralysis, 
mental confusion (Hays and Swenson, 1985; Malhotra, 
1998; Murray et al., 2000). Others are cardiac arrythmias, 
impaired carbohydrate tolerance, altered electrocardio-
gram in calves. Potassium deficiency affects the 
collecting tubules of the kidney, resulting in the inability to 
concentrate urine, and also causes alterations of gastric 
secretions and intestinal motility (Streeten and Williams, 
1952). The rapidly growing animals apparently have a 
higher requirement for potassium, and increasing the 
protein level increases the requirement. Plant products 
contain many times as much potassium as sodium. 
Sources include vegetables, fruits, nuts. 
 
 
Chlorine (Cl) 
 
Chlorine is involved in fluid and electrolyte balance, 
gastric fluid and chloride shift in HCO3
- transport in 
erythrocytes. Chloride is the principal anion in extra-
cellular fluid. It is involved in the regulation of extracellular 
osmotic pressure and makes up over 60% of the anions 
in this fluid compartment and is thus important in acid-
base balance. The concentration of chloride ion is subject 
to more variation than that of sodium, since other anions, 
especially bicarbonates, can exchange for the chloride. It 
is the chief anion of the gastric juice and is accompanied 
by the hydrogen ions in nearly equal amounts. The 
chloride of the gastric secretions is derived from blood 
chloride and is normally reabsorbed during the latter 
stages of digestion in the lower intestine (Hays and 
Swenson, 1985; Murray et al., 2000).  
It is the major negative ion of the extracellular fluid and 
participates in acid production in the stomach. Deficiency 
disease or symptoms occur in infants fed salt-free 
formula. On a chloride-deficient diet, the excretion of 
chloride in the urine or perspiration is markedly reduced 
(Hays and Swenson, 1985; Murray et al., 2000). It is also 
secondary to vomiting, diuretic therapy, renal disease. 
Excessive depletion of chloride ions through losses in the 
gastric secretions or by deficiencies in the diet may lead 
to alkalosis due to an excess of bicarbonate, since the 
inadequate level of chloride is partially compensated for 
or replaced by bicarbonate. Chloride is excreted in the 
faeces,   sweat,   and   urine   primarily    as    sodium   or 

 
 
 
 
potassium chloride, although it may be accompanied by 
ammonium ions when base needs to be conserved (Hays 
and Swenson, 1985). Sources include table salt and 
drinking water.  
 
 
Magnesium (Mg) 
 
Magnesium is an active component of several enzyme 
systems in which thymine pyrophosphate is a cofactor. 
Oxidative phosphorylation is greatly reduced in the 
absence of magnesium. Mg is also an essential activator 
for the phosphate-transferring enzymes myokinase, 
diphophopyridinenucleotide kinase, and creatine kinase. 
It also activates pyruvic acid carboxylase, pyruvic acid 
oxidase, and the condensing enzyme for the reactions in 
the citric acid cycle. It is also a constituent of bones, 
teeth, enzyme cofactor, (kinases, etc) (Murray et al., 
(2000). The health status of the digestive system and the 
kidneys 
significantly 
influence 
magnesium 
status. 
Magnesium is absorbed in the intestines and then 
transported through the blood to cells and tissues. 
Approximately one-third to one-half of dietary magnesium 
is absorbed into the body. Gastrointestinal disorders that 
impair absorption such as Crohn's disease can limit the 
body's ability to absorb magnesium. These disorders can 
deplete the body's stores of magnesium and in extreme 
cases may result in magnesium deficiency. When a 
magnesium-deficient diet is fed to young chicks, it leads 
to poor growth and feathering, decreased muscle tone, 
ataxia, 
progressive 
incoordination 
and 
convulsions 
followed by death (Merck, 1986).   
Chronic or excessive vomiting and diarrhea may also 
result in magnesium depletion. Deficiency diseases or 
symptoms is secondary to malabsorption or diarrhoea, 
alcoholism. Acute magnesium deficiency results in 
vasodilation, with erythemia and hyperaemia appearing a 
few 
days 
on 
the 
deficient 
diet. 
Neuromuscular 
hyperirritability increases with the continuation of the 
deficiency, and may be followed eventually by cardiac 
arrhythmia and generalized tremours. A common form of 
magenesium-deficiency tetany in ruminants is called 
grass tetany or wheat wheat-pasture poisoning. This 
condition occurs in ruminants grazing on rapidly growing 
young grasses or cereal crops and develops very quickly. 
The physiological deficiency of magnesium can be 
prevented by magnesium supplementation of a salt or 
grain mixture and adequate consumption is also very 
important (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Toxicity disease or 
symptoms of magnesium deficiency in humans include 
depressed deep tendon reflexes and respiration (Murray 
et al., 2000). Sources include leafy green vegetables 
(containing chlorophyll). 
 
 
Chromium (Cr) 
 
Chromium is   an   essential   element   for   animals   and 
Soetan    et     al.      209 
 
 
 
humans (Frieden, 
1984). It has been found in 
nucleoproteins isolated from beef liver and also in RNA 
preparations (Uppala et al., 2005). It could play a role in 
maintaining the configuration of the RNA molecule, 
because Cr has been shown to be particularly effective 
as a cross-linking agent for collagen (Eastmond et al., 
2008). Cr has also been identified as the active ingredient 
of the glucose tolerant factor (Brown, 2003), a dietary 
factor required to maintain normal glucose tolerance in 
the rat. Trivalent chromium is a constituent of ‘‘glucose 
tolerance 
factor’’ 
(GTF), 
which 
binds 
to 
and 
activates/potentiates insulin action (Wennberg, 1994; 
Murray et al., 2000).  
Chromium compounds have a wide variety of industrial 
uses, including production of stainless steel and other 
alloys, high-melting refractory materials, pigments and 
mordants for paints and dyes, tanned leather goods and 
chrome plating (Frieden, 1984). Cr affects the action of 
insulin in protein metabolism, as indicated by rats fed 
chromium-deficient diets repleted by chromium (Roginski 
and Mertz, 1969). Insulin-mediated amino acid transport 
into tissues was enhanced and incorporation of labeled 
glycine, serine and methionine into heart protein was 
greater in chromium-supplemented animals. Evidence of 
a role for chromium in lipid metabolism and chromium 
deficiency in the development of atherosclerosis is 
accumulating from animal and human studies (Frieden, 
1984). Cr deficiencies may exist, particularly in children 
suffering from protein-calorie malnutrition (Mertz, 1974). 
In experimental animals, Cr deficiency leads to a reduced 
rate of removal of ingested glucose, due to a low 
sensitivity of peripheral tissues to insulin. Chromium is 
needed for growth of rats and its deficiency leads to a 
reduced life span, corneal lesions and interference with 
insulin action producing a diabetic state and this causes 
removal of glucose from the blood at a rate that is one-
half that of animals on a chromium-containing diet 
(Wennberg, 1994; Juturu and Komorowski, 2003). The Cr 
content of foodstuffs varies widely and is present in 
combination with a small organic molecule, the glucose 
tolerant factor. Chromium poisoning in humans is usually 
limited to accidental ingestion of chromic acid or 
chromates. Toxicity to kidney, liver, nervous system and 
blood are the major causes of death (Langard, 1980).  
Sources include meat, liver, brewer’s yeast, whole grains, 
nuts, cheese. 
 
 
Cobalt (Co) 
 
Cobalt is required as a constituent of vitamin B12 and its 
metabolism is the same as for vitamin B12. In addition to 
its role in vitamin B12, cobalt is also a cofactor of enzymes 
involved in DNA biosynthesis and amino acid metabolism 
(Arinola et al., 2008c). In cattle and sheep, bacteria in the 
rumen can use metallic Co to synthesize vitamin B12 and 
are thus the ultimate source of the vitamin in human 
diets.  Vitamin B12 also plays a role in methylating choline  

210         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
and thamine. The latter is required for the synthesis of 
DNA, which regulates cell division and growth. Co is 
readily absorbed into the bloodstream and excreted 
primarily in the urine.  Deficiency disease or symptoms is 
manifested in vitamin B12 deficiency. Co deficiency in 
ruminants have been successfully alleviated by the use of 
cobalt oxide pellets, which remain in the reticulum or 
rumen fluid (Hays and Swenson, 1985). In humans, 
toxicity 
disease 
or 
symptoms 
include 
goitre, 
hypothyroidism and heart failure (Murray et al., 2000). In 
animals, excessive intake results in polycythaemia, 
apparently due to the inhibition by cobalt of certain 
respiratory enzyme systems, for example, cytochrome 
oxidase and succinic dehydrogenase. Deficiencies of 
cobalt in ruminants cause anorexia, wasting of skeletal 
muscle, fatty livers, haemosiderosis of the spleen and 
anaemia (Hays and Swenson, 1985).  Dietary sources of 
cobalt are the same as for vitamin B12, such as foods of 
animal origin or fermented foods where the bacteria 
produce the vitamin. Organ meats are the best source of 
vitamin B12 (liver, kidney, heart, and pancreas), followed 
by clams, oysters, extra-lean beef, seafood, eggs, milk 
and yogurt, chicken, cheese, and miso (a fermented 
soybean product). 
 
 
Copper (Cu) 
 
Copper is a constituent of enzymes like cytochrome c 
oxidase, amine oxidase, catalase, peroxidase, ascorbic 
acid oxidase, cytochrome oxidase, plasma monoamine 
oxidase, erythrocuprin (ceruloplasmin), lactase, uricase, 
tyrosinase, cytosolic superoxide dismutase etc. and it 
plays a role in iron absorption (Chandra, 1990). Cu is an 
essential micro-nutrient necessary for the haematologic 
and neurologic systems (Tan et al., 2006). It is necessary 
for the growth and formation of bone, formation of myelin 
sheaths 
in 
the 
nervous 
systems, 
helps 
in 
the 
incorporation of iron in haemoglobin, assists in the 
absorption of iron from the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) and 
in the transfer of iron from tissues to the plasma 
(Malhotra, 1998; Murray et al., 2000).   
It is transported by albumin; bound to ceruloplasmin. 
Ceruloplasmin has oxidase activity and thereby facilitates 
the incorporation of ferric iron into transferrin. The 
copper-containing protein in red blood cells (rbc) is 
erythrocuperin, in liver, it is hepatocuperin and in brain, it 
is cerebrocuperin. In the monogastric animals, copper is 
absorbed mainly in the upper part of the small intestine, 
where the pH of the contents is still acidic. In general, Cu 
is poorly absorbed, and under normal conditions >90% of 
the ingested copper appears in the faeces. Most of the 
faecal copper is unabsorbed dietary copper, but some of 
it comes from the bile, which is the major pathway of Cu 
excretion. Biliary obstruction increases the excretion of 
copper through the kidney and intestinal wall (Hays and 
Swenson, 1985). Increased levels of copper are seen in 
acute  infections  and   in   chronic   conditions   such   as 
 
 
 
 
cirrhosis, rheumatoid arthritis and in post-operative 
stages. Increased level is also found in malnutrition 
(Malhotra, 1998). Clinical disorders associated with Cu 
deficiencies include anaemia, bone disorders, neonatal 
ataxia, depigmentation and abnormal growth of hair, fur 
or wool, impaired growth and reproductive performance, 
heart failure and gastrointestinal disturbances. The 
incidence of these disorders varies widely among animal 
species. Cu deficiency has also been associated with 
cardiac hypertrophy and sudden cardiac failure. Gardea-
Torresdey et al. (1990) reported that carboxyl groups 
found on the cell walls of dead algal biomass are 
potentially responsible for copper binding. Toxicity 
disease or symptoms are rare and is secondary to 
Wilson’s disease (Murray et al., 2000).  
In Wilson’s disease, a large amount of copper is 
deposited in liver, brain, etc. Total copper content in the 
plasma 
and 
ceruloplasmin-bound 
copper 
content 
decreases and there is an increased excretion of copper 
in the urine. Sometimes, Cu may be deposited in the 
renal tubules giving rise to renal tubular degeneration and 
this is manifested as glycosuria and amino aciduria 
(Malhotra, 1998). 
Excess dietary 
Cu causes 
an 
accumulation of Cu in the liver with a decrease in blood 
haemoglobin concentration and packed cell volume. Liver 
function is adversely affected in copper poisoning. 
Jaundice results from erythrocyte haemolysis and this 
may lead to death unless treatment is started. In animals, 
sheep are more susceptible than cattle to the toxic effects 
of copper (Merck, 1986).  Deficiency disease or symptom 
include anaemia (hypochromic, microcytic). Sources 
include liver, whole grains, molasses, legumes, nuts, 
shell fish and other seafoods. 
 
 
Iodine (I) 
 
Iodine is a basic component of the thyroid hormones, 
thyroxine and mono-, di-, and tri-iodothyronine and it is 
stored in thyroid as thyroglobulin (Hays and Swenson, 
1985; Murray et al., 2000). A few cases of goiter, or 
enlarged thyroids, have been observed in poultry, 
probably because it is difficult to observe the glands. 
Goitre has been produced experimentally in chickens by 
feeding a diet exceedingly low (about 0.025 ppm) in 
iodine to laying hens. Iodine ion is freely diffusible, is 
readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, and is 
excreted mainly in the urine at a relatively constant rate 
provided the dietary intake is sufficient. Some older 
varieties of rapeseed meal, which were high in 
goitrogenic factors, invariably resulted in birds with 
enlarged thyroids if large quantities were used in the 
ration. Goitrogens have been demonstrated in the milk of 
cows following their ingestion of cruciferous plants in 
grazing or as fodder.  Iodine deficiency was reported to 
be the most widespread of all mineral deficiencies in 
grazing livestock. A deficiency of iodine can be prevented 
by  feeding  stabilized  iodized salt to animals or in poultry 

 
 
 
 
by supplementing the feed with as little as 0.35 mg/kg of 
iodine (Merck, 1986). Plants are highly variable in iodine 
content depending on the species, soil type including its 
iodine content, fertilizer, and climate. In children, 
deficiency causes cretinism and in adults, goiter and 
hypothyroidism and myxedema. The toxicity diseases or 
symptoms of iodine are thyrotoxicosis, goiter. Sources 
include iodized salt, sea food. 
 
 
Iron (Fe) 
 
Iron functions as haemoglobin in the transport of oxygen. 
In cellular respiration, it functions as essential component 
of enzymes involved in biological oxidation such as 
cytochromes c, c1, a1, etc (Malhotra, 1998). Fe is an 
important constituent of succinate dehydrogenase as well 
as a part of the haeme of haemoglobin (Hb), myoglobin 
and the cytochromes (Chandra, 1990). Iron is required for 
proper myelination of spinal cord and white matter of 
cerebellar folds in brain and is a cofactor for a number of 
enzymes involved in neurotransmitter synthesis (Larkin 
and Rao, 1990). Iron is involved in synthesis and 
packaging 
of 
neurotransmitters, 
their 
uptake 
and 
degradation into other iron-containing proteins which may 
directly or indirectly alter brain function (Beard, 2001).  
Iron exists in the blood mainly as haemoglobin in the 
erythrocytes and as transferrin in the plasma. It is 
transported 
as 
transferrin; 
stored 
as 
ferritin 
or 
haemosiderin and it is lost in sloughed cells and by 
bleeding (Murray et al., 2000). Fe is required for making 
Hb and it is a prooxidant which is also needed by 
microorganisms for proliferation (Galan et al., 2005). 
Biologically important compounds of iron are haemoglo-
bin, myoglobin, cytochromes, catalases and peroxidase 
(Malhotra, 1998).  Factors effecting the absorption of iron 
are: low phosphate diet which increases iron absorption, 
whereas high phosphate diet decreases iron absorption 
by forming insoluble iron phosphates. Adrenocortical 
hormones (glucocorticoids) play a role in regulating the 
level 
of 
plasma 
iron. 
During 
stress, 
when 
the 
hypothalamus, adenohypophysis, and adrenal cortex are 
activated, regardless of the source, the plasma iron 
decreases (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Iron in ferrous 
form is more soluble and is readily absorbed than the 
ferric form. Phytic acid and oxalic acid decreases iron 
absorption by forming iron phytate and iron oxalate. The 
absorption of iron is inhibited by profuse diarrhoea, 
malabsorption syndrome, achlorohydria, dissertion of 
small intestine and partial or total gastrectomy (Malhotra, 
1998).  
The plasma iron content is determined by the extent of 
blood losses, role of erythropoeisis, rate of apoferritin 
synthesis, rate of iron absorption from intestines and rate 
of red blood cell destruction. Deficiency disease or 
symptoms include anaemia, (hypochromic, microcytic). 
Fe deficiency has been reported to have a role in brain 
development and in the pathophysiology of  restless  legs  
Soetan     et     al.       211 
 
 
 
syndrome (Tan et al., 2006). Also, Fe deficiency is 
associated with alterations in many metabolic processes 
that may impact brain functioning, among whom are 
neurotransmitter metabolism, protein synthesis, organo-
genesis etc (Beard, 1999). Early iron deficiency has also 
been reported to affect GABA metabolism in adult rats 
(Youdim et al., 1989; Taneja et al., 1986). Fe accumu-
lation has been related to some neurologic disorders 
such as Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, type-1 
neuro-degeneration with brain iron accumulation and 
other disorders (Sadrzadeh and Saffari, 2004). Brain is 
quite sensitive to dietary iron depletion and uses a host of 
mechanisms to regulate iron flux homostatically (Batra 
and Seth, 2002). The pig is born with low iron stores and 
develops an iron deficiency anaemia if not provided with 
supplementary iron. The factors causing the onset of 
anaemia in piglets are its relatively low iron stores at 
birth, its high growth rate early in life, and the low level of 
iron in sow milk. If the pig is given iron supplements at 
birth, the total red cell mass or volume per unit of body 
weight increases from birth to three weeks of age (Hays 
and Swenson, 1985).  
Iron deficiency anaemia also occurs at birth in other 
animals like dogs, cats, cattle, etc but it is more 
pronounced in pigs. Excessive accumulation of iron in the 
liver, pancreas, heart, lungs and other tissues cause 
haemosiderosis and when this is accompanied by bronze 
pigmentation of the skin, the condition is called 
haemochromatosis (Malhotra, 1998; Murray et al., 2000). 
Sources include red meat, spleen, heart, liver, kidney, 
fish, egg yolk, nuts, legumes, molasses, iron cooking 
ware, dark green leafy vegetables.  
 
 
Manganese (Mn) 
 
Manganese is a cofactor of hydrolase, decarboxylase, 
and transferase enzymes (Murray et al., 2000). It is 
involved in glycoprotein and proteoglycan synthesis and 
is a component of mitochondrial superoxide dismutase. 
Manganese is a co-factor in phosphohydrolases and 
phosphotransferases 
involved 
in 
the 
synthesis 
of 
proteoglycans in cartilage. Mn is a part of enzymes 
involved in urea formation, pyruvate metabolism and the 
galactotransferase of connective tissue biosynthesis 
(Chandra, 1990). Mn activates several important enzyme 
systems and in this capacity it is required for the 
synthesis 
of 
acid 
mucopolysaccharides, 
such 
as 
chondroitin sulphate, to form the matrices of bones and 
egg shells. Consequently skeletal deformities and defects 
in shell quality occur when the manganese intake is 
inadequate (Gordon, 1977). The fact that Mn is 
concentrated in the mitochondria has led to the 
suggestion that, in vivo, manganese is involved in the 
partial regulation of oxidative phosphorylation. Absorption 
of Mn is inhibited by the presence of excessive amounts 
of calcium and phosphorus in the diet. 
The absorption and retention of manganese from foods  

212         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
low in iron, such as milk, are relatively high. If milk is 
supplemented with iron, the percentage of manganese 
absorbed is reduced (Gruden, 1977). Increased absorp-
tion of manganese has been reported during pregnancy 
in sows (Kirchgessner et al., 1981) and with coccidiosis 
infection in chickens (Southern and Baker, 1983). Mn 
deficiency has been demonstrated in several animal 
species including laboratory animals, pigs, poultry, and 
possibly in cattle. Its severity depends greatly on the 
degree and duration of the deficiency and on the maturity 
of the animal (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Manganese 
deficiency presents with the following signs; in pigs, 
lameness, enlarged hock joints, and shortened legs, in 
cattle, leg deformities with overknuckling, in chicks, poults 
and ducklings, perosis or slipped tendon; and in chick 
embryos, nutritional chondrodystrophy. In laboratory 
animals, effects of deficiency include deformities of bone, 
poor growth, impaired reproduction, egg shell formation, 
and blood clotting. Some of these defects are related to 
the role of the manganese ion as the most effective 
activator of glycosyl transferase enzymes in the synthesis 
of mucopolysaccharides and glycoproteins (Leach, 
1974).   
Other deficiency disease symptoms are ataxia and 
abnormal formation of otoliths in the inner hear. In other 
species, congenital defects in embryonic bone develop-
ment result from Mn deficiency. Birds are much more 
susceptible to manganese deficiency than mammals 
because their requirements for this element are 
considerably higher and this is attributable partly to 
relatively poor absorption from the intestine (Gordon, 
1977). Deficiency disease or symptoms is unknown in 
humans. Mn overexposure reportedly may have an 
adverse effect on central nervous system (CNS) function 
and mood (Tan et al., 2006). Toxicity disease or 
symptoms by inhalation poisoning produces psychotic 
symptoms and parkinsonism. Corn is extremely low in 
manganese (4-12 ppm) and so animals fed high-corn 
diets especially if supplemented with animal by-products, 
which are also low in manganese content, may receive 
inadequate amounts. The high requirement of poultry and 
the low levels of Mn in many of the ingredients of poultry 
diets make Mn supplementation highly important (Hays 
and Swenson, 1985). Sources include whole grains, tea, 
legumes, nuts and seeds.  
 
 
Molybdenum (Mo) 
 
Molybdenum is a component of several metalloenzyme 
including xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase, nitrate 
reductase, and hydrogenase. Xanthine oxidase and 
aldehyde oxidase play a role in iron utilization as well as 
in cellular metabolism in electron transport. Xanthine 
oxidase is actively involved in the uptake and release of 
iron from ferritin in the intestinal mucosa and in the 
release of iron from ferritin in the liver, placenta, and 
erythropoietic tissues   to   the   ferrous   form   (Hays and  
 
 
 
 
Swenson, 1985; Murray et al., 2000). It is readily 
absorbed from foods. Molybdenum is an important 
micronutrient 
both 
in 
animal 
and 
plant 
nutrition 
(Deosthale, 1980). In plants, it plays a role in nitrogen 
fixation and nitrate assimilation through nitrate reductase 
which is a key enzyme in the metabolic process in 
leguminous plants.  
Dietary molybdenum affects copper metabolism in man 
(Deosthale and Gopalan, 1974). High intake of molybde-
num can apparently precipitate copper deficiency in cattle 
and sheep (Underwood, 1971). The amount in the body 
is regulated by excretion in the urine and bile. 
Molybdenum is a cofactor for enzymes necessary for the 
metabolism of sulphur-containing amino acid and 
nitrogen-containing compounds present in DNA and 
RNA, the production of uric acid, and the oxidation and 
detoxification of various other compounds. Sardesai, 
(1993) reported that low molybdenum intake is a 
predisposing cause of renal xanthine calculi.  Deficiency 
disease or symptoms are secondary to parenteral 
nutrition. It also causes gout. Sources include whole 
grains, dairy products, organ meats and legumes. 
 
 
Selenium (Se) 
 
Selenium is a constituent of glutathione peroxidase 
(Murray et al., 2000). It is a constituent element of the 
entire defence system that protects the living organism 
from the harmful action of free radicals. Organic selenium 
is more thoroughly resorbed and more efficiently 
metabolized than its inorganic equivalent, which is poorly 
resorbed and acts more as a prooxidant provoking 
glutathione oxidation and oxidative damage to the DNA 
(Levander, 1983; Schrauzer, 2000; Wycherly et al., 
2004).  Se is a synergistic antioxidant with vitamin E. Its 
activity appears to be closely related to the antioxidative 
properties of -tocopherol (vitamin E) and coenzyme Q 
(ubiquinone). It enhances the overall activity of the -
ketoglutarate oxidase system, probably by affecting the 
decarboxylation reaction. Organic and inorganic selenium 
compounds function in preventing certain disease 
conditions that have in the past been associated with 
vitamin E deficiency. Se prevents liver necrosis in rats, 
white muscle disease in lambs, and exhudative diathesis 
in chicks. Se protects the organism from oxidative 
damage to cell membranes by destroying H2O2, whereas 
vitamin E protects against damage by preventing the 
formation of the lipid hydroperoxides (Hays and 
Swenson, 1985). 
The most important metabolic role of selenium is 
manifested in the activities of the selenoenzymes 
glutathione 
peroxidase 
(GSH-Px) 
and 
thioredoxin 
reductase. According to the reports by Surai, (2000), over 
the first few days after hatching, chicks mainly depend on 
selenium supplies stored in the liver. The activity of 
selenium and an adequate supply of vitamin E and some 
enzymes   like   GSH-Px,   superoxide  dismutase (SOD),  

 
 
 
 
catalase (CAT) protect chicks from numerous diseases 
like encephalomalacia, exudative diathesis and muscular 
dystrophy (Combs Jr. 1981; Hassan et al., 1990). The 
activity of SOD in the cells and in the extracellular fluid is 
very important in the prevention of diseases closely 
associated with oxidative stress, for example, cardiovas-
cular diseases, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease 
and many other diseases (Pollack and Leeuwenburgh, 
1999).  
Se deficiency results in white muscle disease, an 
illness that cause high mortality in young calves and 
lambs. The clinical signs are myopathy that affects both 
the heart and skeletal muscle, frequently accompanied by 
abnormal calcification. White muscle disease is not a 
serious problem in areas where the soil is high in 
selenium. In the mild acute form, Se deficiency interferes 
with the normal growth processes of sheep and cattle. Se 
deficiency also disrupts the normal reproductive process, 
apparently affecting ovulation and fertilization, resulting in 
a higher incidence of embryonic mortality. Se deficiency 
has also been associated with a high incidence of 
retained placenta, resulting in delayed onset of oestrus 
and impaired conception (Hays and Swenson, 1985). Se 
deficiency in growing chickens cause exudative diathesis, 
signs like unthriftiness, ruffled feathers appear early at 
the growing stage. Egg production and feed conversion 
are adversely affected (Merck, 1986). In plants, Se is 
incorporated primarily by replacement of sulfur in the 
amino acids cystine and methionine. Toxic levels in 
plants result in blind staggers in horses and in the 
sloughing of hair and hoofs in horses and cattle.  
The animals become lame, and death in such cases is 
mainly caused by starvation resulting from movement 
impedement. In pigs, Se deficiency results in liver 
necrosis, hepatosis dietetica, resulting in high mortality. 
Mulberry heart disease in swine has been attributed to Se 
deficiency and is complicated by other factors other than 
Se deficiency (Hays and Swenson, 1985). In humans, 
toxic levels in some soils and megadose supplementation 
induces hair loss, dermatitis, and irritability (Murray et al., 
2000). Deficiency disease or symptoms are also 
secondary 
to 
parenteral 
nutrition, 
protein-energy 
malnutrition. There is a considerable variation in the 
availability of selenium in different feedstuffs. Even in the 
presence of adequate levels of vitamin E, poultry rations 
still require an adequate level of selenium in the feed but 
care should be taken to prevent selenium toxicity. 
Sources include fishmeal, seafoods, dried brewer’s yeast, 
kidney, liver, eggs and grains. 
 
 
Silicon (Si) 
 
Silicon is one of the most abundant elements in plant and 
animal tissue. Silicon was confirmed as an essential 
element in 1972, when rats and chickens fed on a silicon-
depleted diet showed reduced weight gains and 
pathological changes in the  formation  and  structures  of  
Soetan     et     al.       213 
 
 
 
collagenous connective tissues and bone (Birchall et al., 
1996). Si is an essential component of certain mucopoly-
saccharides, hyaluronic acid and chondroitin-4-sulfate, 
which are important constituents of connective tissue. It 
appears to function as a biological cross-linking agent 
contributing to the structure and resiliency of connective 
tissue (Carlisle, 1974; Hays and Swenson, 1985). It plays 
a role in calcification of bone and in glycosaminoglycan 
metabolism in cartilage and connective tissue (Murray et 
al., 2000).  Studies have shown that silicic acid, Si(OH)4, 
the form in which silicon exists in physiology, interacts 
with aqueous aluminium (Al) species to form hydroxyl 
aluminosilicates that can have low bio-availability and 
toxicity and it is also established that the gastrointestinal  
absorption of aluminium is greatly reduced in the 
presence of silicic acid and also that the intake of dietary 
silicic acid also influences the excretion of aluminium  via 
the kidneys so that Si appears to be profoundly involved 
in aluminium homesostasis  (Birchall et al., 1996).  
There are also strong indications that silicic acid pro-
motes copper utilization and that the observed effects of 
silicon deficiency on collagen and osteogenesis may be 
due to low copper utilization (Birchall et al., 1996). It is 
however uncertain whether reduced copper utilization is 
caused by aluminium so that it is enhanced by silicic acid 
via the latters interaction with aluminium. Silicon and its 
salt are poorly soluble in water and only trace amounts 
are present in tissues. Herbivorous animals consume 
relatively large quantities of silica (silicon dioxide) daily, 
and most of the insoluble silica passes unabsorbed 
through the alimentary tract, but appreciable amounts are 
absorbed and excreted in the urine. Although, the silica is 
eliminated without side-effects, in some animals a portion 
is deposited as granules in the bladder, kidney, or urethra 
to form uroliths or calculi and these can block urine 
passages, which can result in death. These calculi may 
be composed of various minerals, especially Mg, P and 
Si. Silicon is essential for the normal growth and skeletal 
development in rats and chicks (Schwarz, 1974). 
Deficiency disease or symptoms implies impairment of 
normal growth. Silicosis due to long-term inhalation of 
silica dust arises from silicon toxicity. Sources include 
whole grain products, root vegetables. 
 
 
Zinc (Zn) 
 
Zinc is distributed widely in plant and animal tissues and 
occurs in all living cells. It functions as a cofactor and is a 
constituent of many enzymes like lactate dehydrogenase, 
alcohol 
dehydrogenase, 
glutamic 
dehydrogenase, 
alkaline phosphatase, carbonic anhydrase, carboxypep-
tidase, superoxide dismutase, retinene reductase, DNA 
and RNA polymerase. Zn dependent enzymes are 
involved in macronutrient metabolism and cell replication 
(Hays and Swenson, 1985; Arinola, 2008). Carbonic 
anhydrase is present in erythrocytes, kidney tubules, 
gastrointestinal  mucosa  and  glandular  epithelium.  The  

214         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
primary roles of zinc appear to be in cell replication and 
gene expression and in nucleic acid and amino acid 
metabolism. Vitamins A and E metabolism and bioavaila-
bility are dependent on zinc status (Szabo et al., 1999). It 
is necessary for fertility of mice. It is also required for 
normal testicular development (Merck, 1986) and for 
functions of the taste buds. It is needed for tissue repair 
and wound healing, plays a vital role in protein synthesis 
and digestion, and is necessary for optimum insulin 
action as zinc is an integral constituent of insulin. It is an 
important constituent of plasma (Malhotra, 1998; Murray 
et al., 2000).  
In birds, zinc is required primarily for the growth and 
development of the skeleton, the formation and mainte-
nance of epithelial tissue and for egg production (Gordon, 
1977). Elemental zinc prevents and cures parakeratosis 
(thickening or hyperkeratinization of the epithelial cells of 
the skin and oesophagus) in swine and it prevents a 
similar disease in chicks. Excess calcium in diet however 
hastens the onset of parakeratosis. Formation of zinc 
fingers in nuclear receptors for steroid-thyroid, calcitriol 
receptors, 
gene 
expression, 
essential 
in 
protein 
synthesis, involves in the storage and release of insulin, 
growth and repair of tissues, development of sex organs, 
needed in the enzymes required for the synthesis of DNA 
and RNA, mobilization of vitamin A from the liver and 
stabilization of cell membranes. It is present in meat and 
other protein foodstuffs, but intestinal absorption is 
affected by other dietary constituents. Absorbed zinc 
enters the liver where it is incorporated into zinc 
metalloenzymes and exported to peripheral tissue in 
plasma, bound to albumin. A large percentage, about 
90%, of the total plasma zinc concentration is associated 
with albumin, <10% with alpha-2 macroglobulin, and a 
small amount, <1%, complexed to amino acids and other 
low molecular weight species. A high dietary iron intake 
can decrease zinc absorption.  
Zinc homeostasis is achieved by regulation of 
enterohepatic re-circulation. An amount of zinc equivalent 
to the total absorbed zinc is re-excreted into the gut in 
intestinal fluids. In normal health zinc output by the gut is 
equal to the total dietary intake. Urinary excretion of zinc 
is low and does not vary markedly with dietary supply. It 
is increased in catabolic states, by certain drugs and/or 
chelating agents. Galvanized cages and troughs provide 
poultry with appreciable amounts of zinc and to a certain 
extent, this have been responsible for the infrequent 
occurrence of zinc deficiency in the field (Gordon, 1977). 
However, with the increasing use of plastics instead of 
galvanized steel, it is now important to ensure that poultry 
diets contain adequate amounts of this element and 
some are now supplemented with zinc oxide or 
carbonate. In humans, deficiency disease or symptoms 
include hypogonadism, growth failure, impaired wound 
healing, decreased taste and smell acuity, secondary to 
acrodermatitis enteropathica, parenteral nutrition (Murray et 
al., 2000). In poultry, Zn deficiency causes growth 
retardation   and   poor   feather    development.   The   hock 
 
 
 
 
joints may become enlarged and the long bones 
shortened and thickened. The skin on the footpads may 
become 
dry 
and 
thickened 
with 
fissures 
and 
hyperkeratosis develops (Merck, 1986). In mature hens, 
Zn deficiency reduces egg production and hatchability. 
Embryos show a wide range of skeletal abnormalities, 
including micromelia, curvature of the spine and 
shortened, fused thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (Merck, 
1986).  
Zinc deficiency in pigs causes a marked depression of 
appetite, growth rate and parakeratosis. In the young 
birds a deficiency of zinc is characterized by poor growth, 
severe dermatitis, especially of the feet and poor 
feathering, abnormal respiration, skeletal abnormalities 
causing leg weakness and ataxia. The long bones are 
shortened and thickened and are sometimes crooked and 
the joints are enlarged and rigid (Gordon, 1977). A 
necrotic dermatitis appears, particularly on the legs and 
feet, and feather development is impaired by hyperkerati-
nization of the epidermis. In severely deficient embryos, 
there are gross faults in the development of the skeleton 
and entire limbs may be absent. The biochemical lesions 
causing this syndrome in the osteogenic processes are 
probably due partly from a reduction in the activity of 
alkaline phosphatase which is a zinc enzyme (Gordon, 
1977). Toxicity disease or symptoms of zinc in humans 
include gastrointestinal irritation, vomiting, decreased 
immune function and a reduction in high density 
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Higher dietary levels of Zn 
are required in the presence of phytic acid to prevent 
parakeratosis and allow for normal growth (Sidhu et al., 
2004).  
The oxide, carbonate, and sulfate forms of zinc are 
efficiently utilized, whereas the sulfide form is poorly 
utilized. Zn, either ingested or injected, is primarily 
excreted in the faeces. The Zn found in the faeces 
consist mainly of unabsorbed dietary Zn, and the balance 
is from pancreatic excretions. Urinary excretion of Zn and 
several other metals are increased if chelating agents 
such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) are 
administered in combination with zinc (Hays and 
Swenson, 1985). Sources include red meat, fish meals, 
liver, eggs, dairy products, vegetables and some sea 
foods.    
 
                                              
Fluorine (F) 
 
Fluorine is widely but unevenly distributed in nature. It 
increases hardness of bones and gives strength to the 
enamel tissues of the teeth. It is also essential for rat 
growth. It plays a role in the prevention and treatment of 
dental caries. Fluoride in saliva reduces cavities by 
reducing acid produced by bacteria and by increasing 
enamel remineralization after acid exposure. Fluoride has 
great affinity for calcium and so it is associated with 
calcification of bones and teeth (Malhotra, 1998; Murray 
et  al., 2000).  Fluoridation  is the addition of fluoride salts  

 
 
 
 
to water. Low fluoride intake had been reported to cause 
growth retardation, reduces fertility, and results in 
anaemia (Messer et al., 1974; Cerklewski, 1998). 
Fluoride is incorporated into the tooth enamel crystals, 
where it forms the compound fluorhydroxyapatite. This 
compound is more resistant to acidic materials than the 
hydroxyapatite, which used to cover the tooth before. 
Deficiencies of fluorine seem to increase the incidence of 
dental caries. It is also involved in osteoporosis.  
Excessive intake of fluorine gives rise to fluorosis. 
Excessive concentrations of fluorine in drinking water 
causes corrosion of the enamel of the teeth, a process 
called mottling. Fluorine is an enzyme inhibitor and when 
this happens in odontoblasts and osteoblasts, teeth and 
bone deformities occur. Exostoses of the jaw and long 
bones develop and the joints become thickened and 
ankylosed, resulting in lameness. This could further result 
in reduction in food consumption, accompanied by 
reduced growth or weight loss (Hays and Swenson, 
1985). No single symptom of fluorosis is a proof of 
toxicity. The chemical analysis of bone, teeth, and urine, 
with evidence of chalkiness, mottling, erosion of the 
enamel, enamel hypoplasia, and excessive wear of the 
teeth, as well of evidence of anorexia, inanition, and bone 
changes, are all necessary in diagnosing fluorine 
toxicosis. Sources include fluorinated drinking water, tea, 
toothpaste, marine fish consumed with bones, food 
cooked with Teflon utensils can pick up fluoride, leading 
to increase in content.  
 
 
Sulfur (S) 
 
Sulfur is present in three amino acids which are cystine, 
cysteine and methionine. Connective tissue, skin, hair 
and nails are rich in sulfur. Also, thiamine and biotin 
(member of vitamin B complex) and coenzyme A contain 
sulfur in their molecules (Malhotra, 1998). Proteins vary 
widely in sulfur content, depending on their amino acid 
composition. The preformed amino acid and sulfur 
deficiencies are reflected as sulfur-containing amino acid 
deficiencies. 
Ruminants, 
that 
depend 
largely 
on 
nonprotein nitrogen sources, such as urea, biuret, or 
ammonium phosphate, may need supplemental inorganic 
sulfur, which is utilized by the microorganisms for 
synthesis of methionine and cystine. Inadequate sulfur 
intake reduces the feed intake, digestibility, rate of weight 
gain, and milk production (Hays and Swenson, 1985).  
Taurine and sulfuric acid are the end products of sulfur 
metablosim. The sulfuric acid is either neutralized and 
excreted as inorganic sulfates in the urine or conjugated 
with phenol, glucuronic acid, or indoxyl. The taurine is 
conjugated with cholic acid and excreted in the bile. The 
other sulfur compounds of biological significance are 
cyanate (SCN) in saliva and other fluids, ergothioneine of 
the red blood cells, glutathione, present in all cells, and 
chondroitin sulfate, which serves a  structural  function  in  
Soetan     et     al.       215 
 
 
 
cartilage, bone, tendons, blood vessel walls etc. The 
primary function of sulphur is as the disulfide linkage, -S-
S-, of such organic compounds (Hays and Swenson, 
1985). Dietary sources of sulfur are diets which are 
adequate in protein and these meet the daily requirement 
of sulfur.  
 
 
Iodine (I) 
 
Iodine is a trace element that is essential for the 
synthesis of thyroid hormones in vertebrates, although 
iodoproteins are are present in invertebrates (Frieden, 
1984). Some regions of the world are naturally deficient 
in iodine due to the low availability of iodine from their soil 
or other climatic and environmental factors affecting 
iodine availability. 
Several goiter, cretinism and the other iodine deficiency 
disorders (IDD) have their main cause in the lack of 
availability of iodine from the soil which is linked to a 
severe limitation of food exchanges (Thilly et al., 1992). 
Severe selenium deficiency have also been associated 
with IDD in the human population, whereas in animals, it 
has been proven to play a role in thyroid function either 
through a thyroidal or extrathyroidal mechanism. The 
former involves oxidative damages mediated by free 
radicals, whereas the latter implies an inhibition of the 
deiodinase responsible for the utilization of T4 and T3 and 
is then concluded that: (i). goiter has a multifactorial 
origin (ii). IDD are an important public health problem and 
(iii). IDD are a good model to study the effects of other 
trace elements whose actions in many human metabo-
lisms have been somewhat underestimated. Not less 
than 5% of the world’s population have goiters and many 
of these are associated with other disorders and 
constitute a major public health problem (Gaitan, 1990). 
 
 
The Biochemical functions of the other Mineral 
Elements 
 
Tin (Sn) 
 
Tin is required for normal growth in the rat and there is no 
specific clinical or pathological changes in the animal 
(Schwarz, 1974). It also improved the pigmentation of 
incisors in the rats.  
 
 
Bromine (Br) 
 
Bromine increases the growth rate of chicks and mice 
(Huff et al., 1956). It has been reported that thyroid 
glands of rabbits concentrate bromine during periods of 
dietary iodine deficiency. This then suggests that the 
thyroid gland does not distinguish perfectly between 
iodine  and  bromine. However, bromine does not prevent  

216         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
the occurrence of goiter, and it is rapidly replaced by 
iodine when the latter is restored to the diet. According to 
Vobecky et al., (1996), in experiments with rats, it has 
been found that at enhanced intake of bromide, bromine 
does not replace chlorine in the thyroid, it replaces iodine. 
They further reported that more than one third of the 
iodine content in the thyroid was replaced by bromine.  
 
 
Strontium (Sr) 
 
The omission of strontium caused an impairment of the 
calcification of the bones and teeth and a higher 
incidence of carious teeth. 90Sr is one of the most 
abundant and potentially hazardous radioactive by-
products of nuclear fission and plants are more efficient 
than animals in the absorption of strontium. Radioactive 
strontium is absorbed and deposited in tissues especially 
the bones, and is also readily transmitted to the foetus 
and secreted in the milk (Hays and Swenson, 1985). 
Stronium is preferentially excreted, especially in the 
urine, thereby providing some means of protection 
against 90Sr. 
 
 
Nickel (Ni) 
 
Nickel is an essential element in animals (Nielsen, 1976). 
It has been speculated that nickel may play a role in the 
maintenance of membrane structure, control of prolactin, 
nucleic acid metabolism or as a cofactor in enzymes. It 
appears that most dietary intakes would provide sufficient 
amounts of this element (Hurley, 1976). Nickel (Ni) is an 
in nickel that is, containing <0.05 ppm developed 
increased skin pigmentation of the legs, swollen hocks 
and thickening of the legs near the joints. These signs 
were not apparent in chicks fed the same diet 
supplemented with 3-5 ppm nickel (Nielsen, 1974). In a 
trace element-controlled environment, chicks unsupple-
mented with nickel have shorter, thicker legs, lower 
haematocrit and plasma cholesterol levels and and 
higher liver cholesterol levelsthan control chicks. In rats, 
there is slower growth rate and post-natal mortality. In 
swine, 
there 
is 
impaired 
reproduction, 
abnormal 
haircoats, and poor growth of offspring (Anke et al., 1974; 
Tejada-Jimenez et al., 2009).     
 
 
Arsenic (As) 
 
Arsenic stimulates the growth of tissue cultures (Nandi et 
al., 2006) and the beneficial effects of various organic 
arsenicals on the health and performance of pigs and 
poultry had been reported. Its action is similar to that of 
antibiotics and appears to be mainly related to the control 
of 
harmful 
intestinal 
micro-organisms 
(Hays 
and 
Swenson,   1985). The  fact   that   cadmium   in   specific  
 
 
 
 
association with protein macromolecules had been 
fractionated from the horse kidney cortex suggests a 
biological role for cadmium (Kagi and Vallee, 1960).       
 
 
Rubidium (Rb) 
 
Rubidium is found in animal tissue and it resembles 
potassium in its distribution and excretory pattern. 
Relatively high levels can be found in the soft tissue, 
while the skeletal tissue contains low level. The additions 
of rubidium or cesium (Cs) to potassium-deficient diets 
prevent the lesions characteristic of potassium depletion 
in rats (Follis, 1943) and supports near normal growth for 
short periods of time (Heppel and Schmidt, 1938).  
 
 
Vanadium (V)  
 
Vanadium compounds have been demonstrated to have 
effects on glucose metabolism in vitro (Frieden, 1984) 
and also in lipid metabolism (Hopkins and Mohr, 1974).  
Vanadium also has a wide range of other biological 
activities 
like 
effects 
on 
ribonuclease, 
alkaline 
phosphatase, adenyl cyclase, NADH oxidase and 
phosphofructokinase (Ramasarma and Crane, 1981). 
Vanadium has been shown to be nutritionally essential 
for both the chick and the rat (Hopkins and Mohr, 1971; 
Strasia, 1971; Nielsen and Ollerich, 1973; Hopkins and 
Mohr, 1974). Hopkins and Mohr, (1971) reported reduced 
growth of wing and tail feathers in chicks fed a diet 
containing less than 10mg vanadium per gram. Bone 
development was also abnormal. In rats, reduced growth  
and increased packed cell volume as well as increased 
iron in blood and bone were observed (Strasia, 1971). 
Reproductive performance was also impaired in rats. 
However, rats fed purified diets low in vanadium 
responded to dietary vanadium supplementation with 
increased weight gain (Strasia, 1971) and with improved 
reproductive performance (Hopkins and Mohr, 1974).  
A precise biochemical or physiological role for 
vanadium (V) is yet to be determined, but it has long 
been suspected because of its effects on phospholipids 
oxidation and inhibition of cholesterol synthesis. It is 
necessary for normal feather development in chicks and 
for normal growth in chicks and rats and the required 
level appears to be very low, < 0.1 to 2 ppm (Hays and 
Swenson, 1985). Essentiality of vanadium in man has 
been hypothesized but not demonstrated (Hopkins and 
Mohr, 1974). 
 
 
Cadmium (Cd) 
 
The possible effects of the general population of long 
term, low level exposure to cadmium have been of 
concern   recently   (Asagba, 2009),  because cadmium is  

 
 
 
 
readily distributed in tissues after exposure and it inhibits 
antioxidant enzymes (Gupta et al., 1991; Bagchi et al., 
1996; Asagba and Eriyamremu, 2007; Chater et al., 
2009) and this inhibition can lead to increased oxidative 
stress which may result in membrane damage and loss of 
membrane-bound enzymes like ATPases (Figueiredo-
Pereira et al., 1998; Asagba et al., 2004; Asagba and 
Obi, 2005; Galazyn-Sidorczuk et al., 2009). Liver and 
kidney are considered as the main target organs in acute 
and chronic Cd exposure (Sarker et al., 1995; Asagba 
and Obi, 2000). Other tissues involved in Cd toxicity are 
the testis, heart, bone, eye and brain (WHO, 1992; Pal et 
al., 1993; Lall et al., 1997; Asagba et al., 2002; 
Eryamremu et al., 2005; Asagba 2007). The role of diet in 
absorption and toxicity of oral cadmium have been 
reviewed by (Asagba, 2009).  
 
      
Lead (Pb) 
 
Lead is an ubiquitous environmental and industrial 
pollutant that has been detected in every facet of 
environmental and biological systems. Lead can be found 
in water pipes, insecticides, lining of equipment where 
corrosion resistance and pliability are required, in 
petroleum refining, in construction, gun bullets, x-ray and 
atomic radiation protection (Ait et al., 2009) and the 
manipulation of lead for these uses had caused lead 
contamination of air, dust and soil (Kiran et al., 2008).  
Reports suggest that there is a close relationship 
between cases of declining reproductive health and 
environmental pollutants like lead (Bonde et al., 2002), 
while human exposure to lead continues to be a serious 
public health problem (Pirke et al., 1998).  According to 
Satoskar et al. (1999), chronic lead poisoning is 
commonly seen in young children arising from sucking 
lead paint or lead toys and is also seen in workers 
engaged in printing, paint and petroleum industries. 
Reproductive dysfunction by lead has distinct morpho-
logical and biochemical features such as disorganized 
epithelia, decreased sperm quality and altered sperm 
morphology and low androgen levels (Hsu et al., 1997; 
Alexander et al., 1996). In the animal model, lead has a 
primary toxic effect on the hypothalamic-pituitary unit, a 
primary effect on the testes and acts at all levels of the 
reproductive axis (Sokol et al., 2002). Male rats exposed 
to lead acetate have been reported to show a significant 
decrease in the weight of both the testes, epididymis 
(Wang et al., 2008; Smith et al., 2008) and pituitary 
(Cooper et al., 1986; Coffigny et al., 1994) and this 
weight reduction in sex glands and pituitary was 
accompanied by an alteration of the normal histological 
structure. There are reports that some metal such as 
lead, cadmium, arsenic and mercury can affect male 
reproductive functions including sperm counts (Chia et 
al., 1992), motility and morphology (Meeker et al., 2008) 
and spermatogenesis (Telisman et al., 2007). 
The  coastal  zone  receives  a  large  amount  of  metal 
Soetan     et     al.        217 
 
 
 
pollution from agricultural and industrial activities (Usero 
et al., 2005). Pollution by heavy metals is a serious 
problem due to their toxicity and ability to accumulate in 
the biodata (Islam and Tanak, 2004). There is a general 
concern about the impact of metals in the aquatic 
environment (Grosell and Brix, 2005). Lead (Pb), 
Cadmium (Cd), copper (Cu), zinc (Zn) are the most 
present trace heavy metals in the wastewater of the gulf 
(Semadi and Deruelle, 1993; Abdennour et al., 2000; 
2004). Zn and Cu are used in small amounts as fertilizers 
in some soils deficient in these elements, while Zn, Cu 
and Cd are constituents of some fungicides. In addition, 
Cd and Zn occur as contaminants of phosphoric fertilizers 
(Migon et al., 1991).  
According to Beldi et al. (2006), biomonitoring 
programs based on measures of contaminants in marine 
organisms are interesting from a human health point of 
view. Many factors such as season and physiological 
state or size of animals could affect the bioaccumulation 
of heavy metals in molluscs (Romeo and Gnassia-Barelli, 
19988). It is generally agreed that heavy metal uptake 
occurs mainly from water, food and sediment (Beldi et al., 
2006). However, effectiveness of metal uptake from 
these sources may differ in relation to ecological needs 
and metabolism of animals and concentrations of the 
heavy metals in water, food and sediments as well as 
some other factors such as salinity, temperature and 
interacting agents (Roesijiadi and Robinson, 1994).      
 
 
THE 
BIOCHEMICAL 
FUNCTIONS 
AND 
THE 
DEFICIENCY 
SYMPTOMS 
OF 
THE 
MINERAL 
ELEMENTS IN PLANTS 
 
The essential elements that are required for the healthy 
growth of higher plants are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen 
and those listed in Table 1 (Williams, 1992). Plants take 
in carbon in the form of atmospheric carbon dioxide, 
obtain hydrogen and oxygen from water and take up the 
remaining elements from the soil. Mineral nutrients are 
essential chemical elements absorbed from the soil in the 
form of inorganic ions. More than 50 chemical elements 
have been identified in plants among the inorganic 
substances present in plants, although it is unlikely that 
all these elements are essential. Roots can absorb 
minerals selectively, thus, enabling the plant to accumu-
late essential elements that may be present in the soil in 
very minute quantities. To a certain extent, however, the 
minerals in a plant reflect the composition of the soil in 
which the plant is growing. For example, plants growing 
on mine tailings may contain gold or silver.  
Minerals play essential role in enzyme activity in plants. 
For instance, the effects of cobalt on enzyme activity in 
plants have been reported in many publications (Frieden, 
1984). Cobalt additions increased the activity of catalase 
in cotton and of catalase, ascorbic oxidase, polypheno-
loxidase and peroxidase in grapevines. Cobalt also 
enhanced  the activity of catalase and dehydro-genase in 

218         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
potatoes and of catalase and peroxidase in tomatoes. In 
legumes, cobalt was found to exert to exert a positive 
effect on the enzyme activity of nodules. Cobalt has also 
been reported to improve the drought-resistance of 
barley, corn, oats and soybeans, and also increases the 
rates of synthesis and migration of carbohydrates from 
the leaves to the fruit-bearing organs (Frieden, 1984). 
The fact that all soil-grown plants contain silicon and that 
large quantities may be present in such species as rice, 
other grasses and horsetails had led to the suggestion 
that silicon has beneficial effects on plant growth and 
crop yield. It has also been suggested in some 
circumstances to promote resistance to insect and fungal 
attack and this has been reviewed by (Lewin and 
Reimann, 1969).  
Plant uptake of silicon is governed by its concentration 
in the soil solution and other factors like the nature of the 
plant (Frieden, 1984). Boron is also believed to be 
important mineral element for all vascular plants (Lewis, 
1980). It is the only element known to be required for 
higher plants for which there is no role in humans and 
animals (Mondy and Munshi, 1993). Lee and Aronoff, 
(1967) have proposed that the primary function of boron 
is based on its capacity to form stable 6-P-gluconate-
borate complexes and hence restrict both the influx of 
substrate into the pentose-phosphate pathway and the 
synthesis of phenols resulting in increases in glycolysis 
and the synthesis of hemicelluloses and other related cell 
wall materials.  In plants, boron is thought to regulate the 
metabolic pathways leading to phenol synthesis and is 
also thought to be involved in the pathway leading to the 
synthesis of lignin. Lewis (1980) proposed that boron’s 
primary role in plants is in the biosynthesis of lignin and 
the differentiation of xylem tissue. Compounds like 
leucoanthocyanins, flavonols, flavonones and flavonol-3-
glucosides, have been reported to accumulate in boron-
deficient plant tissue (Rajaratnam and Lowry, 1974; 
Shkol’nik and Abysheva, 1975). The interralationships 
among boron, lignification, peroxidase enzymes and 
auxin in plants have been discussed by (Lewis, 1980).  In 
addition,  he discussed the similarities by which wounding 
a vascular plant, microbial infection of the plant and 
boron deficiency bring about changes in the level of 
phenolic compounds and in indole acetic acid (IAA) 
metabolism (Lewis, 1980).     
It has been proposed that a study of the evolution of 
vascular plants may provide a possible key to the role of 
boron in plant metabolism. Lewis (1980a) had proposed 
that the development of an essential role for boron was a 
prerequisite to the evolution of vascular plants. Augsten 
and Eichhorn (1976) demonstrated that a suboptimal 
level of boron caused an increase in the photosynthetic 
rate of Wolffia arrhiza. Leaves usually exhibit the first 
symptoms of boron toxicity which include yellowing of the 
leaf tip, with the chlorosis subsequently progressing along 
the leaf margin and then spreading into the blade.  
Necrosis of the chlorotic tissue follows, followed by leaf 
abscission  (Wilcox, 1960). As   a   result  of   this,   boron 
 
 
 
 
toxicity results in a loss of plant toxicity.   
The most common symptoms of mineral deficiency are 
stunted growth and discoloured leaves. The symptoms of 
a mineral deficiency depend partly on the function of that 
nutrient in the plant. For example, a deficiency of magne-
sium, an ingredient of chlorophyll, causes yellowing of the 
leaves or chlorosis and in some cases, the relationship 
between a mineral deficiency and its symptoms is less 
distinct. For instance, iron deficiency can cause chlorosis 
even though chlorophyll contains no iron, because this 
metal is required as a cofactor in one of the steps of 
chlorophyll synthesis (Roberts, 1985).  
Mineral deficiency symptoms depend not only on the 
role of the nutrient in the plant but also on its mobility 
within the plant. If a nutrient moves about freely from one 
part of the plant to another, symptoms of a deficiency will 
show up first in older organs. This is because young, 
growing tissues have more ability/power than old tissues 
to draw the nutrients that are in short supply. In contrast, 
the deficiency of a nutrient that is relatively immobile 
within the plant will first affect young parts of the plant 
because older tissues may have adequate amounts of 
the  mineral, which they are able to retain during periods 
of short supply. The symptoms of a mineral deficiency 
are often distinctive enough for a plant physiologist or 
farmer to diagnose its cause. Deficiencies of nitrogen, 
potassium and phosphorus are the most common 
problems, while shortages of micronutrients are less 
common and tend to be geographically localized because 
of deficiencies in soil composition. However, overdoses 
of 
some 
micronutrients 
can 
be 
toxic 
to 
plants      
(Roberts, 1985). Table 1 shows the macronutrients and 
micronutrients in plants, the form available to plants, their 
major functions and deficiency symptoms. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In view of the importance of these macro and micro 
mineral elements in the nutrition of humans, animals and 
plants and their metabolic inter-relationships which 
influences other vital factors needed for the survival of 
living organisms like enzymes, anti-oxidants, vitamins 
etc, it is important to regularly obtain up-to-date 
information on the minerals content of water and the 
variously commonly consumed plant foods used for 
human and animal foods and feeds respectively e.g. 
legumes, cereals, fruits and vegetables. This is because 
of the effects of chemicals like pesticides, herbicides, 
fertilizers on the mineral contents of the soils where these 
plants are cultivated. Genetic, location and environmental 
factors could also influence the levels of the mineral 
elements in plants.   
 
                                                           
RECOMMENDATION 
 
With the advancements in the field of analytical sciences,  

 
 
 
 
involving the use of more sophisticated equipment for the 
quantitative and qualitative analysis of foods/feeds. There 
is need to re-visit the studies/investigations /assessments 
/evaluations, so as to re-validate the data on the mineral 
elements composition of human and animal diets, 
especially in the developing countries. The earlier 
information on these mineral elements were based on 
analysis employing less sensitive methods which may not 
be reliable. Further research is required to find out the 
interactions between the mineral elements, for example, 
the interaction between silicon, aluminium and copper.  
There is also the need to evaluate the effects of different 
processing methods on the minerals content of water and 
plant foods. This will go a long way in reducing the 
problem of malnutrition caused by inadequate food 
supply, consumption of unbalanced diets and inadequate 
nutrition education.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Abdennour C, Khelili K, Boulakoud MS, Rainbow PS (2004). Trace 
metals in marine, brackish and fresh water prawns (Crustacea, 
Decapoda) from NorthEast Algeria. Hydrobiologia 432: 217-227.  
Abdennour C, Smith BD, Boulakoud MS, Samraoui B, Rainbow PS 
(2000). Trace metals in shrimps and sediments from Algerian water. 
J. Catalog. Mat. Env. 3: 9-12. 
Albion Research Notes (1996). A compilation of vital research updates 
on human nutrition, 5: 2, Albion Laboratories, Inc. May, 1996. 
Aletor  VA.Omodara OA (1994). Studies on some leguminous browse 
plants, with particular reference to their proximate, mineral and some 
endogenous anti-nutritional constituents. Anim. Feed Sci. Technol. 
46: 343-348. 
Alexander BH, Chechoway H, Van Netten C, Muller CH, Ewers TG, 
Kaufman JD (1996). Semen quality of men employed at a lead 
smelter. Occup. Environ. Med.  53(6): 411-416.  
Anke M, Grun M, Dittrick G, Groppel B, Hennig A (1974). In: Trace 
Element Metabolism in Animals-2, WG Hoekstra, JW Shuttle, HE 
Ganther and W Mertz Editors. University Park Press, Baltimore pp. 
715-718. 
Arinola OG (2008). Essential trace elements and metal binding proteins 
in Nigerian consumers of alcoholic beverages. Pak. J. Nutr. 7(6): 
763-765.  
Arinola OG, Badmos SO, Ademowo OG (2008b). Trace elements and 
anti-oxidant  status in Gravid BALB/c mice infected with Plasmodium 
yoelii malaria parasites  at different gestational periods. Pak. J. Nutr.  
7(6): 757-762.  
Arinola OG, Nwozo SO, Ajiboye JA, Oniye AH (2008c). Evaluation of 
trace elements and total antioxidant status in Nigerian cassava 
processors Pak. J. Nutr. 7(6): 770-772. 
Arinola OG, Olaniyi JA, Akiibinu MO (2008a). Evaluation of antioxidant 
levels and  trace element status in Nigerian sickle cell disease 
patients with Plasmodium  parasitaemia. Pak.  J. Nutr. 7(6): 766-769. 
Asagba SO (2007). Alterations in activities of tissue enzymes in oral 
cadmium toxicity. Niger. J. Sci. Env. 6: 91-102.  
Asagba SO (2009). Role of diet in absorption and toxicity of oral 
cadmium. Afr. J.  Biotechnol. 8(25): 7428-7436.  
Asagba SO, Eriyamremu GE (2007). Oral cadmium exposure alters 
haematological and  liver function parameters of rats fed a Nigerian-
like diet. J. Nutr. Envt. Med. 16(1-3): 267-274. 
Asagba SO, Eriyamremu GE, Adaikpoh MA, Ezeoma A (2004). Levels 
of lipid peroxidation, superoxide dismutase and Na+/K+- ATPase in 
some tissues of rats exposed to a Nigerian diet and cadmium. Biol. 
Trace Elem. Res. 100(1): 075-086.  
Asagba SO, Isamah GK, Ossai EK, Ekakitie AO (2002). Effect of oral 
exposure to cadmium on the levels of vitamin A and lipid peroxidation 
in the eye. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 68: 18-21.  
Soetan    et     al.        219 
 
 
 
Asagba SO, Obi FO (2005). A comparative evaluation of the biological 
effects of environmental cadmium contaminated control diet and 
laboratory cadmium supplemented test diet. Biometals 18: 155-161. 
Asagba SO, Obi FO (2000). Effect of cadmium on kidney and liver cell 
membrane integrity and antioxidant enzyme status: implications for 
Warri River cadmium level. Trop. J. Environ. Sci. Health 3(1): 33-39.  
Augsten H, Eichhorn B (1976). Biochemistry and physiology of the 
effect of boron in plants, Biol. Rundsch. 14: 268-285.  
Bagchi D, Bagchi M, Hassoun EA, Stohs SJ (1996). Cadmium-induced 
excretion of urinary lipid metabolites, DNA damage, glutathione 
depletion and hepatic lipid peroxidation in Sprague-Dawley rats. Biol. 
Trace Elements Res. 52(2): 143-154.  
Basargin NN, Peregudora LA (1969). Zinc and molybdenum content of 
different varieties of spring and winter wheat. Vop. Pttan, 28: 65. 
Baser BL, Deo R (1967). J. Ind. Soc. Soil Sci. 15: 245. as cited by 
Kanwar JS and  Randhawa NS (1974). Micronutrient Research in 
Soils and Plants in India (A Review). 2nd Edn, pp. 41-78. Indian 
Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. 
Batra J, Seth PK (2002). Effect of iron deficiency on developing rat 
brain. Indian J. Clin. Biochem. 17(2): 108-114.  
Beard JL (1999). Iron deficiency and neural development: an update-
Arch. Latinoam Nutr. 49(3 Suppl. 2): 34-39.  
Beard JL (2001). Iron biology in immune function, muscle metabolism 
and neuronal functioning, J. Nutr. 131: 5685-5695.  
Belakbir A, Ruiz JM, Romero L (1998). Yield and fruit quality of pepper 
(Capsicum annum L.) in response to bioregulators. Hort. Sci. 33: 85-
87. 
Beldi H, Gimbert F, Maas S, Scheifler R, Soltani N (2006). Seasonal 
variations of Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn in the edible Mollusc Donax trunculus 
(Mollusca, Bivalvia) from the gulf of Annaba, Algeria. Afr. J.  Agric. 
Res. 1(4): pp. 085-090.  
Bendich A (1990). Antioxidant micronutrients and immune responses. 
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 587: 180. 
 Birchall JD, Bellia JP, Roberts NB (1996). On the mechanisms 
underlying the essentiality of silicon-interactions with aluminium and 
copper. Coordination Chemistry Reviews (Abstract), 149: 231-240.  
Blood DC, Radostits OM (1989). Veterinary Medicine, 7th Ed. Balliere 
Tindall, London pp. 589-630.  
Bonde JP, Joffe M, Apostoli P, Dale A, Kiss P, Spano M (2002). Sperm 
count and chromatin structure in men exposed to inorganic lead: 
lowest adverse effect levels. Occup. Environ. Med. 59(4): 234-242.  
Brown M (2003). Harnessing chromium in the fight against diabetes. 
Drug Discovery today 8: 962-963. 
 Burk RF, Foster KA, Greenfield PM, Kiker KW (1974). Binding of 
Simultaneously Administered Inorganic Selenium and Mercury to a 
Rat Plasma Protein. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 145: 782-785.  
Carlisle EM (1974). Essentiality and function of silicon. In Hoekstra et 
al., eds. Trace Elements Metabolism in Animals, 2nd Ed. University 
Park Press, Baltimore.  
Cerklewski FL (1998). Fluoride: Essential or just beneficial. Nutr. Rev. 
14: 475-476.  
Chand M (1969). Effect of different levels of nitrogen application on the 
micronutrients removal by Mexican and local wheat varieties. M.Sc. 
Thesis. Punjab Agricultural  University, Ludhiana. 
Chandra RK (1990). Micro-nutrients and immune functions: An 
overview. Annal New York Acad. Sci. 587: 9-16. 
Chater S, Douki T, Favier A, Sakly M, Abdelmelek H (2009). Changes in 
antioxidant status and biochemical parameters after oral cadmium 
administration in female rats. Acta. Biol. Hung. 60(1): 79-88. 
Chakravarty I, Ghosh k (2000). Micronutrient malnutrition-present status 
and future  remedy. J. Indian Med. Assoc. 98(9): 539-542. 
Chia SE, Ong CN, Lee ST, Tsakok FH (1992). Blood concentrations of 
lead, cadmium, mercury, zinc and copper and human semen 
parameters. Arch. Androl. 29: 177-183.  
Clauss M, Sauter-Loius C, Kienzle E (2007). Historical copper and 
manganese levels in cattle feeds in Bavaria, Germany. J. Nutr. 
Environ. Med. 16: 69-74.  
Coffigny H, Thoreux-Manlay A, Pinon-Lataillade G, Masse R, Soufir JC 
(1994). Effects of lead poisoning of rats during pregnancy on the 
reproductive system and fertility of their offspring. Hum. Exp. Toxicol. 
13(4): 241-246.  
Combs Jr. GF (1981). Influence of dietary vitamin E and selenium on 

220         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
the oxidant defence system of the chick. Poultry Sci. 60: 2098-2105. 
Cooper RL, Goldman JM, Rehnberg GL (1986). Pituitary function 
following treatment with reproductive toxins. Environ. Health Persp. 
70: 177-184.  
Darby WJ (1976). Trace elements in human health and disease, Prasad 
AS.and Oberleas D. Eds (Academic Press, New York, San 
Francisco, London) 1: 17. 
Deosthale YG (1990). Molybdenum content of some common Indian 
Foods. The Ind.  J. Nutr. Dietet. 18: 15-19. 
Deosthale YG, Belavady B (1978). Mineral and Trace Element 
Composition of Sorghum grain: Effect of Variety, Location and 
Application of the Nitrogen Fertilizer. Ind. J. Nutr. Dietet. 15: 302- 
308. 
Deosthale YG, Gopalan C (1974). The effect of molybdenum levels in 
sorghum (Sorghum vulgare Pers.) on uric acid and copper excretion 
in man. Brit. J. Nutr. 31: 451. 
Eastmond DA, MacGregor JT, Slesinki RS (2008). Trivalent Chromium: 
Assessing the genotoxic risk of the essential trace element and 
widely used human and animal nutritional supplement. Crit. Rev. 
Toxicol. 38: 173-190. 
Ellis DR, Salt DE (2003). Plants, Selenium and Human Health. Current 
Opinions in Plant Biology 6: 273-279. 
El-Behairy F, El-Blassousy E, Diwany KM (1997). Manual of 
Paediatrics. University Book Centre p. 16. 
Eriyamremu GE, Asagba SO, Onyeneke EC, Adaikpoh MA (2005). 
Changes in carboxypeptidase A, dipeptidase and Na+/K+-ATPase 
activities in the intestine of rats orally exposed to different doses of 
cadmium. Biometals 18: 1-6.  
Eruvbetine D (2003). Canine Nutrition and Health. A paper presented at 
the seminar  organized by Kensington Pharmaceuticals Nig. Ltd., 
Lagos on August 21, 2003. 
Figueiredo-Pereira ME, Yakushin S, Cohen G (1998). Disruption of the 
intracellular  sulhydryl homeostasis by cadmium-induced oxidative 
stress leads to protein  thiolation and ubiquitination in neuronal cells. 
J. Biol. Chem. 273: 12703-12709.  
Follis RH Jr. (1943). Histological effects in rats resulting from adding 
rubidium or cesium to a diet deficient in potassium. Am. J. Physiol. 
138: 246-250. 
Forbes RM, Parker HM (1977). Biological availability of zinc in and as 
influenced by whole-fat soy flour in rat diets. Nutr. Reports Int. 15: 
681- 688.  
Frieden E (1984). Biochemistry of the essential ultratrace elements. 
Plenum press, New York.  
Gailer J, George GN, Pickering IJ, Madden S, Prince RC, Yu EY, 
Denton MB, Younis  HS, Aposhian HV (2000). Structural basis of the 
antagonism between inorganic  mercury and selenium in mammals. 
Chem. Res. Toxicol. 13(11): 1135-1142.  
Gaitan E (1990). Goitrogens in food and water. Annual Rev. Nutr. 10: 
21-37. 
Galan P, Viteri F, Bertrais S, Czernichow S, Faure H (2005). Serum 
concentrations of beta carotene, vitamins C and E, zinc and selenium 
are influenced by sex, age, diet, smoking status, alcohol consumption 
and corpulence in a general French adult population. Eur. J. Clin. 
Nutr. 59: 1181-1190. 
Galazyn-Sidorczuk M, Brzoska MM, Jurczuk M, Moniuszk-Jaconiuk J 
(2009). Oxidative  damage to proteins and DNA in rats exposed to 
cadmium and or ethanol. Chem. Biol. Interac. 180(1): 31-38.  
Gardea-Torresdey JL, Becker-Hapak MK, Hosea JM, Darnall DW 
(1990). Effect of  chemical modification of algae carboxyl groups 
onmetal ion binding. Environ.  Sci. Technol. 24: 1372-1378. 
Gordon RF (1977). Poultry Diseases. The English Language Book 
Society and Bailliere  Tindall, London. 
Gorsuch TT (1959). Radiochemical investigations on the recovery for 
analysis of  trace elements in organic and biological materials. 
Analyst 84: 135. 
Grashuis J, Lehr JJ, Beuvery LLE, Beuvery-Asman A (1953). ‘‘De 
Schothorste’’ Inst.  Moderne Veevoeding, Netherlands. Cited by EJ 
Underwood in Trace Elements in Human and Animal Nutrition, 2nd ed. 
Academic Press, New York, 1962, p. 197. 
Grossell M, Brix KV (2005). Introduction to the special issue on 
mechanisms in metal toxicology. Aquat. Toxicol. 72: 3-4.  
Gruden N (1977). Suppression of transduodenal manganese transport 
 
 
 
 
by milk diet supplemented with iron, Nutr. Metab. 21: 305-309. 
Gupta S, Althar M, Behari JR, Srivastava RC (1991). Cadmium-
mediated induction of cellular defence mechanism: a novel example 
for the development of adaptive response against a toxicant. Ind. 
Health 29: 1-9.  
Hassan S, Hakkarainen J, Jonson L, Tyopponen J (1990). 
Histopathological and biochemical changes associated with selenium 
and vitamin E deficiency in chicks. J. Vet. Med. Assoc. 37: 708-720.  
Hays VW, Swenson MJ (1985). Minerals and Bones. In: Dukes’ 
Physiology of Domestic Animals, Tenth Edition pp. 449-466.  
Hegsted DM, Chichester CO, Darby WJ, McNutt KW, Stalvey RM, Stotz 
EH (1976). In: Present Knowledge in Nutrition (Nutrition Reviews’), 
Fourth Edition. The Nutrition Foundation, Inc. New York, Washington.  
Heppel LA, Schmidt CLA (1938). Studies on the potassium metabolism 
of the rat during pregnancy, lactation and growth. Univ. Calif. 
(Berkeley) Pub. Physiol. 8: 189-205. 
Hopkins LL Jr, Mohr HE (1971). The biological essentiality of vanadium, 
In: Newer Trace Elements in Nutrition. W Mertz, WE Cornatzer, 
Editors, Marcel Dekker, New York pp. 195-213.  
Hopkins LL Jr, Mohr HE (1974). Vanadium as an essential nutrient, 
Fed. Proc. 33: 1773-1775.  
Horsfall M Jnr, Abia AA, Spiff AI (2003). Removal of Cu(II) and Zn(II) 
ions from waste water by cassava (Manihot esculenta Cranz) waste 
biomass. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2(10): 360-364.  
Hsu PC, Liu MY, Hsu CC, Chen LY, Leon Guo Y (1997). Lead exposure 
causes generation of reactive oxygen species and functional 
impairment in rat sperm.Toxicology 122(12): 133-143.  
Huff JW, Bosshardt DK, Miller OP, Barnes RH (1956). A nutritional 
requirement for bromine. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 92: 216-219. 
Hurley LS (1976). Manganese and other Trace Elements. In: Present 
Knowledge in Nutrition (Nutrition Reviews’), Fourth Edition. The 
Nutrition Foundation, Inc. New  York, Washington.  
Igile GO (1995). Phytochemical and Biological Studies on some 
constituents of Vernonia  amygdalina (compositae) leaves. Ph.D 
Thesis, Department of Biochemistry, University of Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Islam MD, Tanaka M (2004). Impact of pollution on coastal and marine 
ecosystems  including coastal and marine fisheries and approach for 
management: A review and synthesis. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 48: 624-649.  
Juturu V, Komorowski JR (2003). Chromium Supplements, glucose and 
insulin responses. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 78: 190. 
Kagi JHR, Vallee BL (1960). Metallothionein: A cadmium- and zinc-
containing protein from quine renal cortex. J. Biol. Chem. 235: 3460-
3465. 
Kavanek M, Janicek G (1969). Effect of locality and variety on the 
content of some trace elements in oat grains. Shorn. Vys. Skoly 
Chemtechnol Praze E, 24: 65.  
Kiran KB, Erika B, Rashidi M, Prabhakara RY, Sharada R, Rajanna B 
(2008). Lead-induced increase in antioxidant enzymes and lipid 
peroxidation products in developing rat brain, Biometals 21: 9-16. 
Kirchgessner M, Schwarz FJ, Roth-Maier DA (1981). Changes in the 
metabolism  (retention, absorption, excretion) of copper, zinc, and 
manganese in gravidity and lactation, in: Trace Element Metabolism 
in Man and Animals (TEMA-4), McC 
 Howell J, Gawthorne JM and White CL (eds.), Australian Academy of 
Sciences, Canberra pp. 85-88.  
Lall SB, Das N, Rama R, Peswin SS, Khattar S, Gulatti K, Seth SP 
(1997). Cadmium- induced nephrotoxicity in rats. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 
35(2): 151-154.  
Langard S (1980). Chromium, in Metals in the Environment, 
H.H.Waldron (ed,), Academic Press, London pp. 111-132. 
Larkin EC, Rao CA (1990). Importance of fetal and neonatal iron; 
adequacy for normal development of central nervous system, In: 
Brain behavior and iron in the infant diet (Dobbing J ed), London, UK 
pp. 43-63.  
Lease JG (1966). The efficiency of autoclaving sesame meat on its 
phytic acid content and on the availability of its zinc to the chicken. 
Poult. Sci. 45: 237 - 241. 
Leach RM Jr. (1974). Biochemical role of manganese. In: WG Hoekstra 
et al eds., Trace Element Metabolism in Animals, 2nd ed. University 
Park Press, Baltimore. 
Lee S, Aronoff S (1967). Boron in Plants: A Biochemical role. Science 
158(3802): 798-799. 

 
 
 
 
Lexander OA, Baumann CA (1966). Selenium Metabolism VI. Effect of 
Arsenic on the Excretion of Selenium in the Bile. Toxicol. Aplied 
Pharmacol. 9: 106-115. 
Levander O (1983). Considerations in the design of selenium 
bioavailability studies. Fed.  Proc. 42: 1721-1725. 
Lewin J, Reimann BEF (1969). Silicon and plant growth, Ann. Rev. 
Plant Physiol. 20: 289-304. 
Lewis OH (1980). Boron is an essential micronutrient for higher plants. 
Plant Physiol. 113: 649-555.  
Malhotra VK (1998). Biochemistry for Students. Tenth Edition. Jaypee 
Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd, New Delhi, India. 
McDowell LR, Conrad JH, Ellis GI (1984). Mineral deficiencies and 
imbalances and their diagnosis. Proc. Symp. on Herbivore nutrition in 
subtropics and tropics, Pretoria pp. 67-88. 
Meeker JD, Rossano MG, Protas B, Diamond MP, Puscheck E, Daly D, 
Paneth N, Wirth JJ (2008). Cadmium, lead and other metals in 
relation to semen quality: Human evidence for Molybdenum as a 
male reproductive toxicant. Environ. Health Perspec. 116: 1473-
1479.  
Merck VM (1986). The Merck Veterinary Manual. Sixth Edition. A 
handbook of diagnosis, therapy and disease prevention and control 
for the veterinarian. Published by Merck and Co., Inc., Rahway, New 
Jersey, USA.  
Mertz W (1974). Chromium as a dietary essential for man. In: WG 
Hoekstra et al eds., Trace Element Metabolism in Animals, 2nd ed. 
University Park Press, Baltimore. 
Messer HH, Armstrong WD, Singer L (1974). Essentiality and function 
of fluoride. In WG Hoekstra et al., eds., Trace Element Metabolism in 
Animals, 2nd ed. University Park Press, Baltimore.  
Migon C, Morelli J, Nicolas E, Copin-Motegut G (1991). Evaluation of 
total atmospheric deposition of Pb, Cd, Cu and Zn to the Ligurian 
sea. Sci. Total Environ. 105: 135-148.  
Mongia AD (1966). Phosphorus-zinc relationship in wheat as affected 
by sources and rates of applied phosphorus M.Sc. Thesis. Punjab 
Agricultural University, Hissar.  
Murray RK, Granner DK, Mayes PA, Rodwell VW (2000). Harper’s 
Biochemistry, 25th Edition, McGraw-Hill, Health Profession Division, 
USA. 
Nandi D, Patra RC, Swarap D (2006). Oxidative stress indices and 
plasma biochemical parameters during oral exposure to arsenic in 
rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 44: 1579-1584.  
Neher GM, Doyle LP, Thrasher DM, Plumlee MP (1956). Radiographic 
and histopathological findings in the bones of swine deficient in 
manganes. Am. J. Vet. Res. 17: 121-128. 
Nelson TS, Ferrara LW, Stover HL (1968). Effect of phytate on the 
calcium requirement of chicks. Poult. Sci. 47: 185-189. 
Nielsen FH (1976). In: Trace Elements in Human Health and Disease. A 
Prasad, Editor, Academic Press, New York 2: 379-399. 
Nielsen FH (1974). Essentiality and function of nickel. In: WG Hoekstra 
et al eds.,  Trace Element Metabolism in Animals, 2nd ed. University 
Park Press, Baltimore. 
Nielsen FH, Ollerich DA (1973). Studies on a vanadium deficiency in 
chicks, Fed. Proc. 32: 929. 
Nwadiaro PO, Nwachukwu I (2007). Inhibition of Pathogenic Fungi by 
Ethnobotanical  Extracts of Cymbopogon citrates, Ceiba pentandra 
and Loranthus bengwelensis. Niger. J. Biotechnol. 18: 61-65. 
Nwokolo EN, Bragg DB (1977). Influence of phytic acid and crude fibre 
on the availability of minerals from four protein supplements in 
growing chicks. Can. J. Anim. Sci. 57: 475-477. 
O’ Connor BB (1995). Vernacular health care response to HIV and 
AIDS.  Alternative Therapies 1(5): 35-52. 
Ogbonna AI, Makut MD, Gyar SD, Adamu EU (2007). Antimicrobial 
Activity of ethanolic extracts of the seeds of Ricinus communis L. 
Niger. J. Biotechnol. 18(1-2): 40-43.  
Olaiya CO (2006). Effects of three plant bioregulators on some 
biochemical properties of Lycopersicon esculentum (L.) Mill. Ph.D 
Thesis, Department of Biochemistry, University of Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Osagie AU (1998). Nutritional quality of plant foods pp. 221-244. 
Ozcan M (2003). Mineral Contents of some Plants used as condiments 
in Turkey. Food Chemistry 84: 437-440. 
Pal R, Nath R, Gill DK (1993). Influence of Ethanol on cadmium 
accumulation and its impact on lipid peroxidation and membrane- 
Soetan     et     al.        221 
 
 
 
bound functional enzymes (Na+/K+ ATPase, acetylcholinesterase) in 
various regions of adult rat brain. Neurochem. Int. 235: 451-458. 
Panzek J, Ostadalova I (1967). The Protective effect of small amounts 
of selenite in sublimate intoxication. Experientia, 23: 142-143. 
Pathak P, Kapil U (2004). Role of trace elements zinc, copper and 
magnesium during pregnancy and its outcome. Indian J. Paediatr. 71: 
1003-1005. 
Patwardhan VN (1961). Nutrition in India. Ind. J. Med. Sci., Bombay.  
Pierson RE, Aenes WA (1958). Treatment of chronic copper poisoning 
in sheep. J. Am. Vet. Med. Ass. 133: 307-311.  
Pirkle JL, Kaufmann RB, Brody DJ, Hickman T, Gunter EW, Paschal 
DC (1998). Exposure of the US population to lead, 1991-1994. 
Environ. Health Perspec. 106: 745-750. 
Pollack M, Leeuwenburgh C (1999). Mollecular mechanisms of 
oxidative stress in aging: free radicals, aging, antioxidant and 
disease. In: Handbook of Oxidants and  Antioxidants in Exercise (Sen 
CK, Packer L, Hinninen O. Eds). Elsevier Science, BV, pp. 881-923. 
Rajaratnam JA, Lowry JB (1974). The role of boron in the oil palm 
(Elaeis  guineensis), Ann. Bot. 38: 193-2000. 
Ramasarma T, Crane FL (1981). Does vanadium play a role in cellular 
regulation? Current Topics in Cellular Regulation 20: 247-301.  
Rao CN, Rao BSN (1981). Trace element content of Indian foods and 
the dietaries. Indian J. Med. Res. 73: 904-909. 
Roberts JV (1985). Textbook of Biology, First Edition, JB Publishers, 
India. 
Roesijiadi G, Robinson WE (1994). Metal regulation in aquatic animals: 
mechanism of uptake, accumulation and release. In: Malins DC, 
Ostrander GK (Eds), Aquatic Toxicology (Molecular, Biochemical and 
Cellular Perspectives), Lewis Publishers,London p. 539.  
Roginski EE, Mertz W (1969). Effects of chromium supplementation on 
glucose and amino acid metabolism in rats fed a low protein diet, J. 
Nutr. 97: 525-530. 
Romeo M, Gnassia-Barelli M (1988). Donax trunculus and Venus 
verrucusa as bioindicators of trace metal concentrations in 
Mauritanian coastal waters. Mar. Biol. 99: 223-227.  
Romero R (2003). Intra-uterine infection, premature birth and the Fetal 
Inflammatory Response Syndrome. J. Nutr. 33: 1668-1673.  
Rush D (2000). Nutrition and Maternal mortality in the developing world, 
Am. J. Clin.  Nutr. 72(Suppl.): 2125-2405. 
SAtoskar RS, Bhandarkar SD, Alnapure SS (1999). Pharmacology and 
Pharmacotherapeutics, 6th Edition, Popular Prakashan, Mumbai, India 
pp. 1012-1013. 
Sadrzadeh SM, Saffari Y (2004). Iron and brain disorders. Am. J. Clin. 
Pathol, pp. 64-70. 
Sandel EB (1959). Colorimetric Determination of Traces of Metals. 3rd 
Edition, Interscience Publishers Inc., New York p. 460. 
Sardesai OK (1993). Molybdenum: An essential trace element. Nutr. 
Clin. Pract. 8: 277-281.  
Sarker S, Yadar P, Trivedi R, Bansal AK, Bhatnagar D (1995). 
Cadmium-induced lipid peroxidation and the status of the antioxidant 
system in rat tissues. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 9(3): 144-149.  
Schrauzer GN (2000). Selenometionine: A role of its nutritional 
significance, metabolism  and toxicity. J. Nutr. 130: 1653-1656. 
Schwarz K (1974). New essential trace elements (Sn, V, F, Si): 
Progress report and outlook. In: WG Hoekstra et al eds., Trace 
Element Metabolism in Animals, 2nd ed.  University Park Press, 
Baltimore. 
Semadi A, Deruelle S (1993). Lead pollution monitoring by transplanted 
lichens in Annaba area (Algeria). Rev. Poll. Atmos. Oct.-Dec. pp. 86-
102. 
Sharma S, Mahotra P, Bhattacharyya AK (2008). Effect of electroplating 
industrial  waste on ‘‘available phosphorus’’ of soil in relation to other 
physico-chemical  properties. Afr. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2(9): 257-
264. 
Sherman RA (1990). Influence of iron on immunity and disease 
resistance. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 587: 123-139.  
Shkol’nik MY, Abysheva LN (1975). Effect of boron deficiency on the 
level of the growth inhibitor flavonol-3-glycoside and other flavonoids 
in tomatoes, Fiziol. Biokhim. Kul’t. Rast. 7: 291-297. 
Sidhu P, Gorg ML, Morgenstern P, Vogt J, Butz T, Dhawan DK (2004). 
Role of Zinc in regulating the levels of hepatic elements following 
nickel toxicity in rats. Biological Trace Elements Res. 102: 161-172.  

222         Afr.    J.     Food    Sci. 
 
 
 
Simsek A, Aykut O (2007). Evaluation of the microelement profile of 
Turkish  hazelnut (Corylus avellana L) varieties for human nutrition 
and health. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 58: 677-688. 
Smith DM Jr, Mielke HW, Heneghan JB (2008). Subchronic lead 
feeding study in male rats. Arch. Environ. Contamn. Toxicol. 55(3): 
518-528.  
Soetan KO (2008). Pharmacological and other Beneficial effects of 
Antinutritional Factors in Plants- A Review. Afr. J. Biotechnol Vol. 
7(25): 4713-4721.  
Soetan KO, Oyewole OE (2009). The need for adequate processing to 
reduce the anti- nutritional factors in plants used for human food and 
animal feeds- A Review. Afr.  J. Food Sci.  3(9): 123-132.  
Sokol RZ, Saixi W, Yu-Jui Y, Frank ZS, Elizabeth G, Robert EC (2002). 
Long-term, low-dose lead exposure alters the gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone system in the male rat. Environmental Health Perspectives 
110: 871-874.  
Southern LL, Baker DH (1983). Eimeria acervulina infection in chicks 
fed deficient or excess levels of manganese, J. Nutr. 113: 172-177. 
Spallholz EJ, Boylan ML, Larsen SH (1990). Advances in understanding 
selenium’s role in the immune system. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 587: 123-
139. 
Strasia CA (1971). Vanadium: Essentiality and toxicity in the laboratory 
rat. Ph.D Thesis, University Microfilms, Ann. Arbor, Mich. 
Streeten DHP, Williams EMV (1952). Loss of cellular potassium as a 
cause of intestinal  paralysis in dogs. J. Physiol. 118: 149-170. 
Surai PF (2000). Selenium in poultry nutrition 2. Reproduction, egg and 
meat quality and practical applications. World Poult. Sci. J. 58: 431-
450. 
Szabo G, Chavan S, Mandrekar P, Catalano D (1999). Acute alcoholic 
consumption  attenuates IL-8 and MCP-1 induction in response to ex 
vivo stimulation. J. Clin. Immunol. 19: 67-76. 
Tan JC, Burns DL, Jones HR (2006). Severe ataxia, myelopathy and 
peripheral  neuropathy due to acquired copper deficiency in a patient 
with history of gastrectomy. J. Paenteral Nutr. 30: 446-450. 
Taneja V, Mishra K, Agarwal KN (1986). Effect of early iron deficiency in 
the rat on gamma amino butyric acid shunt in brain. J. Neurochem. 
46: 1670-1674.  
Tejada-Jimenez M., Galvan A., Fernandez E., Liamas A. (2009). 
Homeostasis of the micronutrients Ni, Mo and Cl with specific 
biochemical functions. Curr. Opin. Plt. Biol. 12: 358-363.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Telisman S, Colak B, Pizent A, Jurasovic J, Cvitkovic P (2007). 
Reproductive toxicity of low-level lead exposure in men. Environ. 
Res. 105: 256-266.  
Thilly CH, Vanderpas JB, Bebe N, Ntambue K, Contempre B, Swennen 
B, Moreno-Ryes R, Bourdoux P, Delange F (1992). Iodine deficiency, 
other trace elements and goitrogenic factors in the ethiopathogeny of 
iodine deficiency disorders (IDD). Biological Trace Elem. Res. 32(1-
3): 229-243.  
Underwood EJ (1971). Trace Elements in Human and Animal Nutrition, 
3rd Edition, Academic Press, New York p. 116.  
Uppala RT, Roy SK, Tousson A, Barnes S, Uppala GR, Eastwood Da 
(2005). Induction of cell proliferation micronuclei and hyperdiploidy 
/diploidy in the mammary cells of DDT and DMBA-treated pubertal 
rats.Environmental and Molecular Mutagenesis 46: 43-52.  
Usero J, Morillo J, Gracia I (2005). Heavy metal concentrations in 
molluscs from the Atlantic coast of Southern Spain. Chemosphere 
59: 1175-1181.  
Vobecky M, Babicky A, Lener J, Svandova E (1996). Interaction of 
bromine with iodine  in the rat thyroid gland at enhanced bromide 
intake. Biological Trace Element Res. 54(3): 207-212. 
Wang L, Xun P, Zhao Y, Wang X, Qian L, Chen F (2008). Effects of 
lead exposure on sperm concentrations and testes weight in male 
rats: a meta-regression analysis. Toxicol. Environ. Health. 71(7): 454-
463.  
Williams US (1992). A Textbook of Biology, Third Edition.  
Wennberg A (1994). Neurotoxic effects of selected metals. Scand. J. 
Work. Environ. Health 20: 65-71. 
Wilcox LV (1960). Boron injury to plants. Agric. Info. Bull. 211, US. Dept 
of Agric., Washington, DC, 1960. 
Wood RJ (2000). Assessment of marginal zinc status in humans. J.  
Nutr. 130: 1350-1354. 
World Health Organization (WHO) (1992). Environmental Health 
Criteria, Cadmium, WHO, Geneva p.134. 
Wycherly BJ, Moak MA, Christensen MJ (2004). High dietary intake of 
sodium selenite induces oxidative DNA damage in rat liver. Nutr. 
Cancer 48: 78-83.  
Youdim MBH, Ben Shacher D, Yehuda S (1989). Putative biological 
mechanism of the effect of iron deficiency on brain biochemistry and 
behavior. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 50: 607-650.  
