 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
DOI:
10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00597
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Johnstone, T. C., Suntharalingam, K., & Lippard, S. J. (2016). The Next Generation of Platinum Drugs: Targeted
Pt(II) Agents, Nanoparticle Delivery, and Pt(IV) Prodrugs. Chemical Reviews, 116(5), 3436-3486.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00597
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jan. 2026

The Next Generation of Platinum Drugs: Targeted Pt(II) Agents, 
Nanoparticle Delivery, and Pt(IV) Prodrugs
Timothy C. Johnstone, Kogularamanan Suntharalingam, and Stephen J. Lippard
Abstract
The platinum drugs, cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin, prevail in the treatment of cancer,, but 
new platinum agents have been very slow to enter the clinic. Recently, however, there has been a 
surge of activity, based on a great deal of mechanistic information, aimed at developing non-
classical platinum complexes that operate via mechanisms of action distinct from those of the 
approved drugs. The use of nanodelivery devices has also grown and many different strategies 
have been explored to incorporate platinum warheads into nanomedicine constructs. In this 
review, we discuss these efforts to create the next generation of platinum anticancer drugs. The 
introduction provides the reader with a brief overview of the use, development, and mechanism of 
action of the approved platinum drugs to provide the context in which more recent research has 
flourished. We then describe approaches that explore non-classical platinum(II) complexes with 
trans geometry and with a monofunctional coordination mode, polynuclear platinum(II) 
compounds, platinum(IV) prodrugs, dual-treat agents, and photoactivatable platinum(IV) 
complexes. Nanodelivery particles designed to deliver platinum(IV) complexes will also be 
discussed, including carbon nanotubes, carbon nanoparticles, gold nanoparticles, quantum dots, 
upconversion nanoparticles, and polymeric micelles. Additional nanoformulations including 
supramolecular self-assembled structures, proteins, peptides, metal-organic frameworks, and 
coordination polymers will then be described. Finally, the significant clinical progress made by 
nanoparticle formulations of platinum(II) agents will be reviewed. We anticipate that such a 
synthesis of disparate research efforts will not only help to generate new drug development ideas 
and strategies, but also reflect our optimism that the next generation of platinum cancer drugs is 
about to arrive.
1. Introduction
Platinum anticancer agents represent one of the great success stories in the field of medicinal 
inorganic chemistry. They highlight the confluence of serendipity and rational design in 
drug development. Three platinum-containing drugs are approved worldwide for treating 
cancer in humans, namely, cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin (section 3.1). An additional 
three are approved for use in specific countries and they are nedaplatin, lobaplatin, and 
heptaplatin (section 3.1). Despite having been introduced to the market almost 40 years ago, 
platinum complexes remain among the most widely used anticancer chemotherapeutics. One 
important mark of the success of the platinum drugs is the fact that, since the introduction of 
cisplatin into the treatment regimen of testicular cancer patients, cure rates for this disease 
have exceeded 95%.1 The clinical relevance of these drugs is further underscored by the fact 
that carboplatin is listed as a complementary item on the World Health Organization’s 
Model List of Essential Medicines.2 Moreover, in the 2009 Ambulatory Care Drug Database 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Published in final edited form as:
Chem Rev. 2016 March 9; 116(5): 3436–3486. doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00597.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

maintained by the U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention, platinum complexes as a 
class were listed in the medical charts of American patients with a frequency surpassed only 
by five other anticancer drugs (methotrexate, raloxifene, medroxyprogesterone, tamoxifen, 
and leuprolide).3 The clinical trials database maintained by the U.S. National Institutes of 
Health, which lists over 186000 clinical trials in over 180 countries, cites cisplatin as a 
component in more active clinical trials than any other anticancer agent (Figure 1).4 Similar 
trends hold for the European Union Clinical Trial Register, which is maintained by the EMA 
and lists over 25000 trials with a European clinical trials database (EudraCT) protocol,5 as 
well as the International Clinical Trials Registry Platform of the WHO.6 Despite the 
widespread use of these drugs, a new platinum agent has not received worldwide approval in 
over a decade. Research activity into new platinum anticancer agents has remained intense, 
however,7 as this review will demonstrate.
Our discussion begins with a brief description of the mechanism of action of the classical 
platinum drugs. For more comprehensive treatments, the reader is referred to several 
excellent reviews and monographs.7–12 Here we provide sufficient mechanistic background 
information for appreciating the discussions that follow. We then discuss platinum(II) 
complexes that lead to cancer cell death by the same mechanism as the three classical 
platinum drugs but which enjoy enhanced activity owing to molecular targeting. This section 
is followed by coverage of platinum(II) complexes that operate by different mechanisms. 
Because a very large number of complexes have been prepared that fall in these two 
categories, emphasis is given to those having validated targeting properties and/or well 
established mechanism. Coverage of platinum(IV) prodrugs that release cisplatin, 
carboplatin, oxaliplatin, or a close analogue upon reduction in the cell follows next. A subset 
of these complexes not only release an active platinum molecule, but also may also provide 
an additional bioactive substance that may function in a manner orthogonal to that of the 
platinum(II) agent, serving as “dual-threat” drug candidates. A small number of 
platinum(IV) complexes appear to act by mechanisms distinct from that of the prodrug 
family and they are covered next. An extensive treatment of the nanodelivery of platinum 
complexes is then provided, with a focus on two nanoparticulate formulations that have 
shown the greatest progress in clinical trials.13 The organization of this review thus reflects 
the structures and mechanisms of the compounds (Figure 2).
2. Mechanism of Action
The mechanism by which the classical platinum drugs elicit an anticancer effect has been 
the subject of decades of investigation. The synthesis of the multitudes of experiments and 
trials conducted by chemists, biologists, and physicians has produced a consistent 
framework under which we can explain the data that have been obtained from compounds 
analogous to cisplatin.14,15 The analogy extends to include those platinum complexes that 
are neutral and square-planar with cis am(m)ine ligands and cis anionic ligands. The 
am(m)ine ligands can be chelating or non-chelating and are referred to as the “nonleaving 
group ligands” because, as described below, they remain bound to the metal center 
throughout the course of the mechanism. In contrast, the anionic “leaving group” ligand(s), 
which can be monodentate anionic or chelating dianionic fragments, are so called because 
they leave the platinum(II) coordination sphere. We include the caveat that, like any 
Johnstone et al.
Page 2
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

mechanism, the one presented below cannot be proved but rather has so far stood the test of 
time. The generalized mechanism of action involves four key steps (Figure 3): (i) cellular 
uptake, (ii) aquation/activation, (iii) DNA binding, and (iv) cellular processing of DNA 
lesions leading to apoptosis.15
The cellular uptake of cisplatin has long been investigated with oftentimes seemingly 
contradictory results.16 The two pathways by which this molecule is most likely to be taken 
up are passive diffusion through the plasma membrane and active transport mediated by 
membrane proteins. The small size of cisplatin, along with it planar shape, have long been 
cited as support for a passive diffusion mechanism and indeed other properties of its cellular 
accumulation are consistent with uptake via this pathway. For instance, the uptake does not 
saturate with increasing concentration and is proportional to the administered 
concentration.17–19 Moreover, structural analogues of cisplatin do not inhibit uptake of the 
drug.20 Conversely, data have also been obtained that support an active transport 
mechanism. For instance, cisplatin uptake can be specifically stimulated and has been linked 
to expression levels of copper transporters.16,21,22 In a similar manner, oxaliplatin efficacy 
has been linked to expression of organic cation transporters (OCTs).23 Also, reactive 
aldehydes can inhibit cisplatin uptake, presumably by interacting with membrane proteins.24 
The current model posits a combination of both passive and active transport, but the relative 
importance of these pathways and the extent to which they influence each other remains to 
be determined.
The square-planar geometry of cisplatin facilitates associative ligand substitution and, as 
will be discussed in the next section, such substitution is necessary for it to form the DNA 
lesions that characterize its activity. Cisplatin can undergo a ligand substitution event prior 
to DNA binding in which a chloride ligand is replaced with a water molecule. Such aquation 
is suppressed in the bloodstream, where the chloride ion concentration is high (≈100 mM) 
but occurs more readily in the cytoplasm, where the chloride ion concentration drops lower 
than 20 mM.25 In the presence of these lower salt concentrations, the half-life of the 
aquation reaction producing cis-[Pt(NH3)2Cl(H2O)]+ is approximately two hours. The 
positive charge on the platinum complex may help attract it to the negatively charged DNA 
molecule in the nucleus. Carboplatin and oxaliplatin feature chelating ligands opposite the 
firmly bound am(m)ine groups. These chelating ligands are substituted by water much more 
slowly and solutions of these two drugs are stable to aquation over a period of weeks to 
months.26–30
Aquated cisplatin can enter the nucleus and undergo substitution of the water ligand for a 
heterocylic DNA base. The strongest early evidence that confirmed DNA as the primary 
target of platinum drugs was the sensitivity of cells deficient in DNA repair to treatment 
with these compounds.31 Although decades of research have supported the hypothesis that 
nuclear DNA is the functional target of platinum drugs, other interactions, notably those 
with proteins and RNA, have been proposed to play a role as well.32–34 The most 
nucleophilic positions on DNA are the N7 sites of deoxyguanosine residues, and these are 
the residues that are preferentially platinated. 195Pt NMR spectroscopic monitoring 
experiments revealed that cisplatin first forms monofunctional adducts on DNA, that is, it 
forms only one covalent bond to the genomic polymer.35 In a distinct second reaction, the 
Johnstone et al.
Page 3
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

remaining chloride ligand is substituted for a second guanine base, forming a cross-link on 
the DNA. Such cross-links can occur between deoxyguanosines on the same strand or on 
different strands, giving rise to intrastrand and interstrand DNA cross-links, respectively. 
The 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand cross-link is the most prevalent lesion (65%), but 1,2-(ApG) 
(25%) and 1,3-d(GpTpG) (10%) intrastrand cross-links also form along with small amounts 
of GG interstrand cross-links.36,37 Similar cross-links are formed by carboplatin and 
oxaliplatin, although the relative proportions vary.38,39 These DNA adducts distort the 
structure of DNA in a drastic and characteristic manner. Early studies provided evidence of 
bending and unwinding of the double helix upon platination.40 Atomic level details of the 
structures of many of the adducts formed by different platinum anticancer are now known 
(Figure 3).
Cells whose DNA has been damaged in this way arrest at the G2/M transition of the cell 
cycle and attempt to repair this damage.10 Cisplatin lesions are most effectively removed by 
the nucleotide excision repair machinery and enhanced repair of this sort can lead cells to 
resist platinum treatment.42,43 The repair machinery must, however, be able to access the 
damage and binding of proteins to the lesion can shield it from repair. Curiously, the 
distortion that a cisplatin lesion induces in the DNA double helix fortuitously resembles that 
which is recognized by the high-mobility group (HMG) box proteins.44 The HMGB 
proteins, one of the most abundant proteins in the nucleus,45 display a particularly great 
affinity for the 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand cross-link.46 The ability of these proteins to shield 
platinum adducts from repair may contribute to the sensitivity of certain cancer cells to 
cisplatin, but the previously ignored redox state dependence of the platinated DNA-protein 
interaction confounds an interpretation of the results present in the literature.47 Interestingly, 
the ability of cisplatin to cure testicular cancer may be related to the fact that testes cells 
express the HMGB4 isoform of this protein,48 and experiments along this line of 
investigation are ongoing. If the cell is unable to repair platinum-DNA damage, the 
expression of proapoptotic proteins increases, prompting the release of cytochrome c and the 
activation of intracellular caspases.10 These proteases effectively degrade the cell in a 
process of programmed cell death known as apoptosis. One of the main mechanisms by 
which the cell is signaled to trigger apoptosis in response to platinum treatment is the 
inhibition of transcription past platinum lesions.41
The ability of a platinum drug to elicit this ultimate cell-killing response relies on its ability 
to proceed through these mechanistic steps unhindered. In reality, a number of deactivation 
pathways exist that can sequester platinum complexes or otherwise prevent them from 
causing apoptosis (Figure 4).49 Because the current platinum drugs are all administered 
intravenously, blood components can interact with the metal centers. Notably, human serum 
albumin (HSA, the most abundant protein in the human bloodstream, contains a cysteine 
residue that can interact with systemically administered metal complexes.50 In accordance 
with hard-soft acid-base theory, the soft platinum(II) metal center will form stable 
complexes with ligands presenting soft donor atoms, such as sulfur. The main interaction of 
cisplatin with HSA, however, appears to involve sulfur-donors other than cysteine thiols, 
namely the thioether side chains of methionine residues.51
Johnstone et al.
Page 4
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Once inside the cell, sulfur-rich metallothioneins can sequester platinum complexes as can 
glutathione.42 As part of the cellular detoxification program, dedicated export pumps 
removed glutathione adducts from the cytoplasm. Overexpression of these pumps, such as 
ATP7B, has been implicated in cisplatin-resistance.
3. Platinum(II) compounds with a mechanism of action similar to that of 
cisplatin
3.1. Approved platinum drugs
The first experiments showing that platinum complexes could have anticancer activity are 
rooted in the serendipitous observations made by Rosenberg and coworkers when studying 
the influence of electric fields on bacterial cell division.52–55 We refer the interested reader 
to a detailed and highly readable account that Rosenberg compiled of the experiments and 
circumstances that led to the 20th century clinical use of cisplatin (Chart 1),56 a compound 
whose synthesis had been reported over a century earlier.57 These works led to the first 
human patient being treated with cisplatin in 1971 and approval for marketing in 1978, first 
in Canada and soon after in the United States and then elsewhere across the world.58 It is 
currently used primarily to treat testicular, ovarian, and bladder cancers, but has also been 
used in the treatment of head and neck cancers, lung cancer, malignant pleural 
mesothelioma, neuroblastoma, tumors of the brain, and esophageal and cervical cancers.59 
The subsequent discovery of newer platinum complexes that would come to be approved for 
clinical use relied less on serendipity and more on systematic, targeted investigations. It is 
interesting to note that the need for large amounts of precious metal starting materials, a 
situation atypical in traditional medicinal chemistry, led to the involvement of precious 
metal refining companies in the drug discovery process. For instance, the initial clinical 
development of cisplatin was fostered by a collaboration between the National Cancer 
Institute (NCI), Johnson Matthey, and Engelhard Industries, the latter two being precious 
metal companies based in the United Kingdom and Unites States, respectively.56 Johnson 
Matthey continued to pursue a research program into platinum anticancer agents and, in 
collaboration with Bristol-Myers, the Institute for Cancer Research, and the Royal Marsden 
Hospital, developed carboplatin (Chart 1).60 The success of carboplatin, originally known as 
JM8, has largely been driven by its favorable toxicity profile.61 This feature derives directly 
from alteration in reactivity at the metal center because of the chelating nature of the leaving 
group ligand and, potentially, the conformation that this ligand assumes.12 Carboplatin is 
used primarily to treat ovarian cancer but has also found use in treating retinoblastomas, 
neuroblastomas, nephroblastomas, and brain tumors, as well as cancers of the head and 
neck, endometrium, cervix, testes, breast, lung, and bladder.62
The discovery and development of nedaplatin (Chart 1) by Shionogi Pharmaceutical 
Company has been carried out entirely in Japan, and this is the only country in which it has 
regulatory approval, granted in 1995.58,63 This drug, initially referred to as 254-S, features 
cis ammine nonleaving group ligands as in the case of both cisplatin and carboplatin. The 
chelating leaving group ligand is glycolate, which confers greater water solubility (10 mg 
mL−1) than the two chloride ligands of cisplatin (2.5 mg mL−1). Nedaplatin is primarily used 
to treat cancers of the head and neck and esophagus as well as small cell lung cancer and 
Johnstone et al.
Page 5
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

non-small cell lung cancer.13,61 A number of clinical trials exploring the expanded use of 
nedaplatin are ongoing.13,63
Heptaplatin was developed by Sunkyong Industry Research Center in Korea under the name 
SKI 2053R. It was entered into clinical trials in the 1990s and received approval from the 
Korean Food and Drug Administration in 1999. It is marketed under the name SunPla for 
the treatment of gastric cancer and was the first new drug to be developed in Korea. The 
compound features malonate as a chelating leaving group ligand, reminiscent of carboplatin, 
as well as a chelating 2-(1-methylethyl)-1,3-dioxolane-4,5-dimethanamine. The nonleaving 
group ligand forms a seven-membered chelate ring, giving the drug its generic name. The 
two stereocenters in the ligand have R stereochemistry, and although we have not been able 
to find any publications that describe the reason as to why this stereoisomer was chosen, by 
analogy to oxaliplatin (vide infra) the opposite enantiomer and meso compound likely have 
lower activity.
Lobaplatin can be viewed as a derivative of heptaplatin in which a cyclobutane ring is fused 
to the seven-membered chelate ring as opposed to a functionalized dioxolane. Lobaplatin, 
however, is formulated as a racemic mixture of the R, R and S, S enantiomers of the 
nonleaving group ligand. Because only S-lactate is used as the leaving group ligand, 
diastereomers are formed.64 The compound was initially developed by ASTA Medica in 
Germany under the name D-19466, but was later acquired by the German company Zentaris 
AG, a subsidiary of the Canadian biopharmaceutical company Æterna Zentaris. Zentaris 
eventually sold Hainan Tianwang (Chang’an) International Pharmaceutical the rights to 
manufacture and market the drug in China.65 Although clinical trials were initially carried 
out in Europe, the United States, Australia, Brazil, and South Africa examining patients with 
a range of different cancers, regulatory approval was only obtained in China. Lobaplatin is 
approved primarily for the treatment of chronic myelogenous leukaemia but is also used in 
patients suffering from small cell lung cancer and metastatic breast cancer.65 Although 
literature sources and press releases describing the sale of the rights to lobaplatin in 2003 
indicated that, at that time (2003), lobaplatin had already received regulatory 
approval,13,65,66 the Chinese FDA State Food and Drug Administration Database lists the 
approval year as 2010.67
Oxaliplatin is the most recent platinum anticancer drug to have gained international approval 
for marketing.68 This drug, occasionally referred to as l-OHP (note that the “l” refers to the 
use of the levorotatory chiral ligand in the preparation of the drug and is not an “L” 
indicating absolute stereochemistry) was first synthesized in Japan, but was subsequently 
developed in France. First approved in and subsequently in the United States, oxaliplatin is a 
component of the front-line combination chemotherapy treatment for colon cancer.7 
Oxaliplatin features a chelating oxalate leaving group ligand and a chelating R, R-
diaminocyclohexane (DACH) nonleaving group ligand.69 DACH ligands have long been 
investigated as components in platinum anticancer agents.60 In the case of oxaliplatin, 
empirical evidence revealed that the R, R stereoisomer was more effective than the 
enantiomeric S, S isomer or the related meso compound with cis amine groups.70 The origin 
of the greater activity of the R, R isomer came to light in later crystallographic studies that 
revealed this isomer preferentially forms a hydrogen bond between a pseudoequatorial NH 
Johnstone et al.
Page 6
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

hydrogen atom of the R, R-DACH ligand and the O6 atom of the 3′-dG of the platinated 
d(GpG) lesion.71 The exceptional activity of oxaliplatin in colon cancer has been linked to 
the ability of this drug to act as a substrate for the OCTs and the overexpression of these 
membrane proteins is observed in a large proportion of colon cancer patients.23
It can be appreciated that there are many commonalities that exist between the approved 
platinum drugs. Accordingly, the mechanisms by which these complexes induce cancer cell 
death have broad parallels to the general mechanism outlined above.10,11,14 The differences 
in the molecular structures of these drugs induce slight modulations in the mechanism but 
the general path appears to be similar. For example, carboplatin aquates at a rate different 
from that of cisplatin, limiting off target toxicity, and activation by carbonate has been 
implicated in its activity, but {Pt(NH3)2}2+ adducts analogous to those formed by cisplatin 
ultimately lead to transcription inhibition and apoptosis. Oxaliplatin may exploit an 
alternative uptake pathway, viz. active transport by OCTs, but again forms DNA cross-links, 
inhibiting nucleic acid polymerases and initiating apoptosis. The difference in the 
nonleaving group ligand results in a structurally distinct class of DNA adducts that are 
repaired and recognized at different rates, contributing to a distinct spectrum of action, but 
the DNA lesions ultimately trigger the same cell killing pathways.
3.2. The next generation of cisplatin-like platinum(II) complexes
In designing the next generation of platinum anticancer agents, many researchers are seeking 
to make increasingly drastic perturbations to the general molecular framework shared by 
these drugs in the hopes of uncovering novel mechanisms of cell killing, altering the 
spectrum of activity and rendering new cancers susceptible to platinum therapy. Such 
endeavors will be described in subsequent sections of this review. In this section, we will 
describe efforts to create novel platinum(II) complexes that are structurally similar to the 
approved drugs and are expected to operate via a comparable mechanism of action. As 
described above, early medicinal chemistry efforts produced many compounds of the form 
cis-PtA2X2 where the A group is ammine or a substituted ammine and X is an anionic ligand 
or X2 is a chelating dianionic ligand. A comprehensive review of all of these compounds is 
beyond the scope of this review, for indeed the SciFinder search tool maintained by the 
Chemical Abstracts Service lists over 4700 distinct compounds with this general formulation 
that are classified as anti-tumor agents. We suspect that this number is most likely a 
significant underestimate of the true extent of development that has occurred across both 
academia and industry. In one single report, for instance, the products of over 3600 reactions 
that prepared square-planar diam(m)neplatinum(II) complexes were screened for 
transcription inhibition activity using high-throughput methods.72
As described above, the sheer number of cisplatin derivatives precludes a detailed and 
comprehensive discussion of all the strategies that have been explored. We have chosen 
instead to focus in depth on the inclusion of targeting units into a platinum(II) agent of 
known anticancer activity. Such efforts seek to finally realize the magische Kugel that 
Ehrlich sought over 100 years ago.73 This conception of a drug as a magic bullet that seeks 
out its target of its own accord is well-matched with constructs bearing targeting units that 
direct platinum warheads to cancer cells by interacting with receptors that are overexpressed 
Johnstone et al.
Page 7
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

on the surfaces of these cells.74 The concept can be extended to encompass targeting of the 
tumor as a whole instead of cancer cells themselves by seeking proteins expressed on 
angiogenic blood vessels or allowing selective activation within the acidic or hypoxic tumor 
microenvironment.75 Finally, targeting can also take place at the subcellular level, whereby 
platinum can be directed to specific organelles to elicit distinct biological effects. Targeting 
of all of these sorts can also be applied to platinum(IV) complexes and nanoparticle delivery 
devices, as well, which will be discussed in subsequent sections.
3.2.1. Sugar targeting—Carbohydrates can engage in an intricate array of hydrogen 
bonding interactions, a feature of these molecules that is exploited in biological systems to 
achieve high fidelity recognition.76 This recognition has also been proposed as a paradigm 
for drug targeting.77 Another facet of sugar biology can be exploited for drug targeting, 
namely the enhanced uptake of glucose by cancer cells.78 In order to sustain the 
uncontrolled cell division that is characteristic of cancer, malignant cells require much 
greater levels of nutrients, in particular glucose.79 The need for glucose is further 
compounded by the altered metabolic state in which many cancer cells exist, a manifestation 
of the Warburg effect, more details of which are provided in Section 6.80 This enhanced 
uptake of glucose relies on the overexpression of glucose membrane transporters, such as 
GLUT1–4, and has been widely exploited in the use of 18F 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose as 
an agent for positron emission tomography imaging of tumors.81,82 Although many example 
of platinum complexes bound to a variety of sugars are known, as will be described below, 
little evidence has been accumulated to suggest that these carbohydrate motifs have played a 
role in enhancing the activity of the anticancer agent by interacting with a specific receptor.
Using aminosugars, simple analogues of cisplatin were prepared in which the ammine 
ligands are replaced. Early studies demonstrated that complexes featuring coordination of 2-
amino-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranose to platinum could be synthesized, but demonstrated no 
significant anticancer activity.83–87 Using 2,3-diaminosugars, complexes analogous to 
oxaliplatin were formed and found to have promising activity in vitro and in animal models. 
For instance, PtCl2(2,3-diamino-2,3-dideoxy-D-glucose) (Chart 2A) was able to more than 
triple the survival time of mice bearing sarcoma 180 when given as a 50 mg kg−1 i.p. 
injection.88 Although cisplatin can have a similar effect at a much lower dose (8 mg kg−1) 
this latter value approached the MTD (13 mg kg−1). Substitution of the halide leaving group 
ligands in the diaminodideoxyglucose platinum(II) complexes for oxalate or malonate 
produced less active species and studies investigating the reactivity of these compounds with 
dGMP are consistent with the slower rate of reaction expected from a chelating leaving 
group ligand.89 A similar reduction in activity was observed by incorporating the CBDCA 
ligand of carboplatin into the platinum(II) complex of methyl 2,3-diamino-2,3-dideoxy-L-
xylopyranoside.90 Although one of the justifications for pursuing 2,3-diaminoglucose 
complexes is the similarity between the 2,3-diaminoglucose and the 1,2-
diaminocyclohexane of oxaliplatin, it is important to note that the conformation of the D-
glucopyranose ring results in the diamine chelate ring adopting a λ conformation. The 
stereochemistry of the R, R-DACH in oxaliplatin results in a δ conformation of this chelate 
ring.69 This feature of oxaliplatin has been suggested to be the origin of the greater activity 
of complexes of R, R-DACH as opposed to S, S-DACH.70,71,91 Although this discrepancy is 
Johnstone et al.
Page 8
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

noted in passing in one publication,92 its effects are clearly seen, but not discussed, in later 
work.89 We anticipate that the use of L-glucose in the preparation of the diaminoglucose 
would result in a more active platinum complex as a result of its ability to more closely 
mimic oxaliplatin. We note that the use of L-glucose may appear to run contrary to the 
motivation of using a sugar that can be recognized by the cellular uptake machinery, but it 
can be inferred from the results of the experiments presented above and those that follow 
that modifications to the structure of the glucose as drastic as substitution of alcohols for 
amines and their chelation of a metal will most likely inhibit any specific recognition and 
transport to an equivalent or greater extent than the use of the mirror image of the natural 
glucose enantiomer.
We also note briefly that an interesting pair of enantiomeric platinum complexes bearing 
chiral 2,3-diaminocamphore ligands also investigated and one enantiomer was similarly 
found to be significantly more cytotoxic than the other in in vitro assays. The amino 
substituents were, however, arranged cis to one another (R, S; chirality at the camphor 1-
position prevents the cis-diamino compound from being a meso compound) precluding an 
analysis of whether the trend of greater activity for R, R persists in this system as well.93
A linker can also be inserted between the sugar unit and the platinum-binding amine, as in 
the case of cis-dichloro[(2-β-D-glucopyranosidyl)propane-1,3-diamine]platinum(II) (Chart 
2B).94 The glycosylation was found to increase water solubility without compromising 
anticancer activity. In an analogous system, a (2S)-2,3-diamino-1-propanol linker was 
attached to D-glucose (Chart 2C), L-glucose, D-galactose, D-xylose, or D-mannose.95 The 
authors found a distinct difference between the activities of the D and L glucose conjugates 
and suggest that interaction with a specific receptor may play a role in the greater activity of 
the D-glucose conjugate. Despite platinum-sugar conjugates having been explored for 
almost two decades by the time this report95 was published, it appears to be one of the 
earliest instances in which interaction of the sugar moiety with a specific receptor is 
proposed to enhance activity. Linkage through an ethylenediamine was also carried out with 
D-galactose and D-ribose, but the activity of the complexes was not investigated.96
Glucose can alternatively be incorporated into a leaving group ligand such as malonate, 
although in one early study no increase in activity was observed over the analogous 
carboplatin.97,98 A larger set of complexes with a ranges of different sugars similarly 
incorporated into a malonate leaving group ligand were prepared, but the results of the 
biological assays with these complexes have yet to be released.99 For the sake of brevity, the 
remainder of the discussion of sugar conjugates will focus on those complexes for which 
experiments have been done to characterize the mechanism of uptake. The reader interested 
in other platinum-glucose conjugates is referred to a recent excellent review.100
The first experimental evidence that inclusion of a glucose unit actually exploits the glucose 
receptor to enhance cellular uptake was presented for a platinum(II) complex bearing a 
DACH nonleaving group ligand and a glucose-functionalized malonate leaving group ligand 
(Chart 2D).101 In vitro cytotoxicity assays in the presence of phlorizin, an inhibitor of the 
glucose transporter GLUT1, indicated that the inhibitor decreased the efficacy of the 
platinum-glucose conjugate, consistent with a model in which GLUT1 mediates uptake of 
Johnstone et al.
Page 9
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the complex.101 In the studies listed above, glucose was never attached to the platinum 
center through the 6 position, perhaps because of the synthetic difficulty of carrying out this 
modification. Analysis of the crystal structure of a bacterial homologue of GLUT1 bound to 
D-glucose revealed, however, that the hydroxyl group at this position is the only one that 
does not have hydrogen bonding interactions with protein side chains.102 Platinum(II) 
complexes with a DACH nonleaving group ligand and a malonate leaving group ligand 
attached to glucose at the 6 position via a linker of variable length were prepared and shown 
to be taken up selectively by GLUT1 (Chart 2E).103 Studies with different GLUT1 inhibitors 
confirmed that cellular uptake was dependent on glucosylation and directly impacted cell-
killing efficacy. An interesting effect of chain length on uptake via GLUT1 was observed 
and modelling studies indicate that an overly long linker between the glucose and the 
platinum inhibits the ability of the protein to undergo the conformational change required to 
transport the construct across the cell membrane. The organic cation transporters were also 
found to play a role in the uptake and efficacy of the most potent of the glucoconjugates 
prepared.103
3.2.2. Steroid targeting: estrogen and testosterone—Another class of targeted 
platinum(II) complexes comprises those in which a steroid unit has been incorporated into 
the nonleaving group ligand. These steroids can act as targeting units that direct the platinum 
agent to tissues expressing the cognate steroid receptor. The estrogen receptor (ER), for 
instance, is an established oncology target because this protein is overexpressed on the 
surfaces of some cancers, particularly breast cancer, where it stimulates cell 
proliferation.104–107 The monoclonal antibody trastuzumab, also known as Herceptin, binds 
to and interferes with the signaling of this receptor.108 It is important to note that in addition 
to the classical estrogen receptor, now designated ERα, a novel estrogen receptor, ERβ, has 
been more recently discovered.109–111 This ERβ receptor may even play an important role in 
cancer progression by exhibiting antiangiogenic and antiproliferative properties.112 Linkage 
of a steroid unit capable of interacting with the ER to a platinum center can influence the 
anticancer activity of the metal complex by either interfering with the biological function of 
the receptor or by permitting enhanced uptake of the platinum complex, leading to an 
increase in DNA platination and a greater chance of apoptotic cell death. Several recent 
reviews have comprehensively summarized the early developments in this area.74,113,114 
One of the earliest studies that investigated platinum complexes conjugated to steroids 
involved platinum complexes with phosphine nonleaving group ligands and a leaving group 
catecholate ligand functionalized with steroids for use in metalloimmunoassays. Although 
tested in vitro for cell killing activity, they did not fare better than cisplatin.115–117 Although 
dozens of platinum(II) complexes bearing estrogen derivatives at either the leaving group or 
nonleaving group ligands have been reported,113 most have not been tested to ensure that an 
interaction with the ER is operative and leads to enhanced activity via one of the two 
mechanisms described above. In one report that does take such measures, two compounds 
cis-dichloro[N-(4-(17-ethynylestradiolyl)-benzyl)-ethylenediamine]platinum(II) (Chart 3A) 
and cis-diamino[2-(4-(17-ethynylestradiolyl)-benzoylamino)-malonato]platinum(II) (Chart 
3B), were found to agonize the ER at low concentrations, leading to enhanced proliferation, 
but exhibited cytotoxicity at higher concentrations.118 Such a bimodal effect renders these 
particular compounds unsuitable for further investigation as cytotoxic anticancer agents.
Johnstone et al.
Page 10
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A series of estradiol conjugates were prepared that were linked to the platinum center 
through a spacer attached to an N-functionalized 2-aminoalkylpyridyl chelate (Chart 3C). 
Although they did not show any apparent enhanced toxicity in ER+ cells as compared to 
those that are ER−, most compounds in the series bound to ERα with very high 
affinity.119–121 Some members of the series also demonstrated high affinity for ERβ.122 One 
difficulty with this series of complexes is that, as the length of the aliphatic chain that links 
the estradiol and the platinum complex is increased, the solubility of the complexes 
drastically decreases. Use of a poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) chain (Chart 3D), however, 
allows the length to be varied without compromising solubility.123 Enhanced potency in ER
+ cell lines was observed for certain PEG chain lengths and these results were rationalized 
using molecular modeling methods. This steroid-targeting strategy was also applied to 
derivatives of carboplatin and oxaliplatin.124 Recently, this strategy was extended with the 
design and synthesis of a 17β-acetyl-testosterone conjugate linked to the platinum center 
through the 7α position.125 In the same way that estrogen units can target cancer cells 
expressing the ER, testosterone can target platinum to cancer cells expressing the androgen 
receptor (AR). Activity was observed in both androgen receptor AR+ and AR– prostate 
cancer cell lines.125 Mechanistic studies established that the compounds induce S-phase 
arrest and double-stranded DNA breaks. Antitumor studies using a chick chorioallantoic 
membrane xenograft assay confirmed the ability of these compounds to inhibit tumor 
growth.
Before leaving the discussion of estrogen- and testosterone-targeted platinum(II) agents, we 
highlight a study showing that a platinum(II) complex with an ethylenediamine nonleaving 
group ligand functionalized with a ligand for the ER could maintain its ability to interact 
with the estrogen receptor even after binding to a 16-mer DNA duplex (Chart 3E).126 
Although the steroid conjugate binds DNA with lesser facility than an analogue lacking an 
ER ligand, the former is more toxic to cells. Enhanced toxicity was observed in cell lines 
deficient in DNA repair, strongly suggesting that DNA damage is the means by which cell 
death is induced. The authors propose that DNA repair shielding or steroid receptor 
hijacking may be operative.
Non-steroidal estrogen mimics have also been linked to platinum compounds to elicit the 
same effect. The first compounds of this sort to be prepared, a series of seteroisomers of 
dichloro[1,2-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)ethylenediamine]platinum(II), competed with estrogen 
for interaction with the ER, but were toxic to ER+ and ER− cells alike.127 Subsequent 
substitution at the 2 and 6 positions of the two phenyl rings with chlorine atoms, a 
substitution that had been shown to increase the affinity of the ligand for the ER,128 
produced a set of complexes that not only interacted with the ER but also selectively killed 
ER+ mammary carcinoma cells.129 Variations on the substitutions of the nitrogen atoms and 
ring carbon atoms can influence estrogenicity and cytotoxicity, but often in a mutually 
exclusive manner.130
3.2.3. Steroid targeting: bile acids—Platinum(II) complexes have also been conjugated 
to members of the steroid acids known as bile acids in an effort to target compounds to the 
liver because hepatic epithelial cells express a number of transport proteins that take up bile 
salts from the bloodstream.131 The first work in this area appears to be described in a set of 
Johnstone et al.
Page 11
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

papers describing the preparation of a series of platinum(II) complexes bound by a DACH 
ligand and two bile acids (e.g. hyodeoxycholate, Chart 4A).132,133 The lability of 
monodentate carboxylates bound to platinum(II) complexes almost certainly assures that, 
upon dissolution, the complex will very rapidly form a distribution of aquated species in 
dynamic equilibrium. Although activity was observed in these studies, the research does not 
appear to have been pursued further by these authors.
A related series of compounds named Bamet, a portmanteau of bile acid and metal, was 
prepared that also features bile acids attached to a platinum warhead. The first generation 
complex, Bamet-H2 (Chart 4), was simply prepared by allowing sodium cholylglycinate to 
react with tetrachloroplatinate(II). The product, formulated as a sodium salt on the basis of 
conductivity data, was cytostatic against L1210 murine leukemia and demonstrated 
enhanced uptake by the liver as compared to cisplatin.134 The compounds known Bamet-R1 
and Bamet-R2 (Chart 4) were prepared by treating cisplatin with sodium 
cholylglycinate.135–137 The resulting complexes are presumably able to then form cisplatin 
cross-links following cellular uptake and shedding of the bile acid via aquation.138 Although 
active, the potencies of these compounds, and those of the related bis(ursodeoxycholate) 
complex Bamet-UD2 (Chart 4) and [(cis-dichloro(3,3-
amminepropylammine)propyl)glycocholamideplatinum(II)] (Bamet-D3, Chart 4), were less 
than that of cisplatin in cultured cell lines tested in vitro.139,140 Related complexes with 
trans geometry were even less active.141 Given the propensity of bile acids to form 
liposomes, it is not surprising that a liposomal formulation of Bamet-R2 was readily 
prepared.136 In a parallel line of investigation, the ethylenediamine analogues of these 
complexes were studied because they are fluorescent and have increased emission upon 
binding to DNA and release of the leaving group ligands.142–145 The mechanism of action 
and many of the in vivo properties of these compounds, notably those related to their special 
affinity for liver tissue (hepatic organotropism), have been reviewed.146 Early studies with 
rat hepatocytes and isolated rat livers confirmed that Bamet-R2 is taken up by the pathway 
naturally used for bile acid uptake and is secreted into the bile.147 These cholephilic 
characteristics were also observed in experiments with live rats.148 Close to a decade of 
subsequent preclinical experiments have produced a set of results suggesting that these 
compounds may merit clinical investigation for the treatment of hepatic malignancy.146
A bile acid with a chelating dicarboxylate motif bound to a cis-diammineplatinum(II) 
fragment was explored as an orally administered anticancer agent.149 Preliminary in vitro 
assays revealed activity in cultured murine hepatoma cells. A syngeneic orthotopic rat model 
of hepatocellular carcinoma confirmed that the complex had antitumor activity.149 An 
alternative means of linking a bile acid to a platinum(II) center involves conjugation to the 
nonleaving group ligands, a strategy that has afforded complexes demonstrating activity in 
cultured cells via a mechanism of action similar to that of cisplatin.150,151 Other terpenoids, 
the class of molecules to which steroids and bile acids belong, have also been conjugated to 
platinum(II) complexes in an effort to direct the cytotoxic agent to cancer cells,152–155 
although in some instances it remains to be determined whether the enhanced cellular uptake 
observed for these complexes arises from specific interactions with membrane receptors or 
if their inherent lipophilicity simply enhances passive membrane diffusion.
Johnstone et al.
Page 12
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

3.2.4. Steroid-related targeting—The peripheral benzodiazepine receptor, also known 
as TSPO,156 is thought to be involved in regulating the transport of cholesterol and the 
synthesis of steroids, although recent evidence has called this latter role into question.157 
The protein has been suggested as a viable target for directing cancer therapeutics158 and it 
is overexpressed in a number of tumor tissues.159–161 Platinum(II) complexes chelated by a 
functionalized bidentate thiazolylimidazopyridine were found to interact strongly with this 
receptor.162 Although these complexes can be taken up by cultured cancer cells that express 
TSPO, they exhibit weak anticancer activity. Alteration of the thiazolyl ring to generate a 
monodentate ligand and addition of NH3 to the vacated coordination site, produced 
complexes with enhanced potency.163 Radioligand binding assays confirmed the ability of 
the complex to interact with, and presumably be taken up by, TSPO and microscopic studies 
confirmed that treatment with the platinum complex induced apoptosis.
3.2.5. Folate targeting—A number of different cancer cell lines and cells derived from 
the tumors of patients display an overexpression of a glycoprotein that acts as a folate 
receptor (FR)164. Folic acid contains the pteroic acid unit and is vital to a number of central 
biochemical pathways, including those related to DNA synthesis. In order to satisfy rapid 
cell growth, folate uptake is enhanced in cancer cells and the folate motif could conceivably 
be used to target a platinum complex to them.165 In comparison to the use of sugars and 
steroids, however, folates have seen significantly less use as targeting agents of platinum 
complexes. An early study of the interaction of cisplatin with cellular folates involved the 
isolation of the complex that results from substitution of the chloride ligands with 
tetrahydrofolate.166 Although this complex was found to be an inhibitor of dihydrofolate 
reductase and the folate transport system, the lack of labile coordination sites suggests that it 
will not be able to operate as a cytotoxic agent in a manner analogous to that of cisplatin.166 
This proposal is supported by that fact that L1210 cells were treated with concentrations of 
the complex in excess of 200 µM to observed inhibition of folate transport, but no 
significant cell killing was reported. A systematic preparation of a variety of cisplatin and 
carboplatin derivatives bearing a folate unit conjugated to either the nonleaving group 
ligands or the leaving group ligands (Chart 5A) established much of the chemistry required 
to prepared complexes with the capacity to target the FR.167 Unfortunately, the low water 
solubility of these molecules prohibited their use in biological experiments. The use of a 
PEG spacer between a dicarboxylate chelator and a folic acid unit (Chart 5B) affords 
enhanced water solubility and mechanistic studies showed that the conjugate is taken up by 
folate receptor-mediated endocytosis.168 The conjugate was, however, less potent than 
carboplatin, a feature that appears to stem directly from the formation of fewer platinum-
DNA adducts. As will be described in Section 8, folate targeting has been successfully used 
to direct platinum-loaded nanoparticle drug delivery vehicles to FR-expressing cancer cells.
3.2.6. Peptide targeting—The earliest report of a platinum(II)-peptide conjugate 
involved attaching a platinum warhead to derivatives of the minor groove binding agents 
netropsin and distamycin (Chart 6A).169 The peptide was able to enhance platination of 
poly(dA) tracts over poly(dG) tracts, the latter of which are preferentially platinated by 
cisplatin. The ability to explore a much wider range of platinum(II)-peptide conjugates arose 
when synthetic strategies compatible with solid-phase peptide systhesis were 
Johnstone et al.
Page 13
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

developed.170–173 This chemistry involved linking the platinum complex to the peptide via a 
functionalized ethylenediamine nonleaving group ligand. The platinum chemistry could be 
performed on the solid support and the complex survived the deprotection and cleavage 
reactions. This technology was used to screen dozens of platinum(II)-peptide conjugates in 
vitro for anticancer activity, although no significant hits were obtained in this screen.174 
Although these peptide conjugates exhibit a reduced capacity to platinate DNA, and 
consequently reduced potency, the DNA sequence specificity of platination is generally 
unaltered with different peptide sequences.175 We note briefly, however, that use of 
individual charged amino acids, such as ornithine, lysine, or arginine, in place of the 
nonleaving group ligands can alter this specificity.176 Highly complex peptide architectures 
can be conjugated to platinum(II) using these methods, including conjugates octreotide 
analogues.177
Although the opportunities offered by peptide-based targeting are great, instances in which 
targeting has been successfully achieved with platinum(II) conjugates are few. More 
examples exist with platinum(IV) constructs and nanodelivery vehicles as described below. 
One well characterized example involves the use of a malonate nonleaving group ligand 
attached to a PEGylated cyclic peptide via a linker (Chart 6B).178 The cyclic peptide, 
c(CNRGC), presents the Asn-Gly-Arg sequence that targets the CD13 receptor 
overexpressed on the surface of certain cancer cells.179 The targeted complex was more 
toxic to prostate cancer cells expressing CD13 than non-targeted carboplatin and 
competition assays confirmed that the complex is taken up via interaction with CD13. 
Fluorescence microscopy studies and DNA fragmentation assays are consistent with an 
apoptotic mechanism of action.
Another example involves the subcellular targeting of active platinum(II) units to the 
mitochondria. Following work on the anticancer activity of cationic platinum(II) complexes 
with ammine nonleaving group ligands and β-diketonate leaving group ligands,180 an 
analogous complex with a succinylacetonate ligand was prepared. The pedant carboxylate of 
this complex was used to form an amide bond to the N-terminus of a mitochondrial 
penetrating peptide (Chart 6C).181 The decapeptide, r(Fxr)3 where r is D-arginine and Fx is 
L-cyclohexylalanine, is non-toxic, protease resistant, and should localize to mitochondria 
because of its lipophilic and cationic nature.182,183 The conjugation of the platinum complex 
to the peptide was carried out on the solid support and survived trifluoroacetic acid-mediated 
cleavage. Fluorescence microscopy confirmed localization of the conjugate to the 
mitochondria of cultured ovarian cancer cells and PCR amplification studies indicate that, in 
contrast to treatment with cisplatin, mitochondrial DNA is platinated while nuclear DNA is 
not. Even though the location of platination differs, the platinum-peptide conjugate was still 
able to induce apoptosis. Mouse embryonic fibroblasts that are deficient in their 
proofreading of mitochondrial DNA were more sensitive to the treatment, an observation 
consistent with a shift in the target of the platinum complex from nuclear DNA to 
mitochondrial DNA.
Although nucleic acids are not typically used to prepare targeted platinum(II) complexes 
because of the inherent reactivity of the platinum center with the nitrogenous DNA bases, a 
peptide nucleic acid (PNA)-plaintum(II) conjugate has been reported.184 The nucleic acid 
Johnstone et al.
Page 14
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

sequence of the PNA conjugate, which lacks d(GpG) units, can target a complementary 
mRNA sequence in such a way as to present the pendant platinum(II) center to a GpG unit 
on the target mRNA sequence. Evidence supporting cross-linking of the PNA and the target 
mRNA were obtained suggesting that this strategy could be used to enhance antisense 
therapy.
4. Platinum(II) compounds with a mechanism of action different from that of 
cisplatin
Early structure-activity relationship (SAR) studies found that subtle modifications to 
cisplatin geometry led to drastic changes in chemotherapeutic activity. Whereas cisplatin 
displays excellent activity against some cancer types, trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II), 
the trans isomer of cisplatin, lacks activity.60,185 Two major factors are thought to contribute 
to the contrasting activities of the cis and trans stereoisomers. The trans disposition of the 
two chloride ligands in trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) renders them kinetically labile 
in comparison to those of the cis isomer, and thus susceptible to undesirable side reactions 
with extra- and intra-cellular biomolecules.186–189 Additionally, the major cytotoxic DNA 
lesion formed by cisplatin, the 1,2-intrastrand cross-link between adjacent purine bases, is 
stereochemically inaccessible to trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II). Instead, trans-
diamminedichloroplatinum(II) forms 1,3-intrastand cross-links (ca. 28%) and 
monofunctional adducts (ca. 60%), which undergo conversion to interstrand cross-links (ca. 
12%), preferentially between guanine and a complementary cytosine.190 In cells, however, 
very few interstrand cross-links are formed because of the slow transformation of 
monofunctional adducts and 1,3-intrastand cross-links to interstrand cross-links.191 DNA 
adducts formed by trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) do not halt DNA replication as 
efficiently as those formed by cisplatin and are prone to effective DNA repair.192
4.1. Trans complexes
The discrepancy in cisplatin and trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) activity led to the 
early belief that only platinum complexes with cis leaving groups were endowed with 
antitumor activity.60 The development of biologically active trans-
diamminedichloroplatinum(II) analogues, however, has dispelled this notion.186–189 There 
are now several examples in the literature of active trans-platinum complexes. These 
complexes can be divided into the following sub-types; (i) trans-platinum(II) complexes 
with heteroaromatic ligands, (ii) trans-platinum(II) complexes with iminoether ligands, and 
(iii) trans-platinum(II) complexes with asymmetric aliphatic amine ligands.
4.1.1. trans-Platinum(II) complexes with heteroaromatic ligands—Substitution of 
the ammine ligand(s) in trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) with bulky, planar N-donor 
ligands affords trans-platinum(II) complexes with high in vitro cytotoxicity, equivalent to 
their corresponding cis-isomers and cisplatin.193–195 Some analogues, such as trans-
[PtCl2(NH3)L] and trans-[PtCl2L2] where L = pyridine, quinolone, isoquinoline, thiazole, or 
benzothiazole (Chart 7), display therapeutically significant activities in cisplatin- and 
oxaliplatin-resistant cell lines.195,196 According to NCI human tumor panel screening 
studies and COMPARE algorithm197 analyses, trans-platinum(II) complexes of this type 
Johnstone et al.
Page 15
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

exhibit a spectrum of activity that differs significantly from that of any other anticancer 
agent in the NCI database.196 Their unique cytotoxicity profiles are attributed to their 
structural and DNA-binding properties. For instance, the weakly trans-directing aromatic 
heterocyclic ligands reduce the kinetic liability of trans chloride groups and thus prevent 
deactivation by sulfur-rich biomolecules, a common detoxification pathway for cisplatin.186 
Additionally, the type and distribution of DNA lesions induced by such trans-platinum(II) 
complexes is distinctly different from those of cisplatin, trans-
diamminedichloroplatinum(II), and other cis-platinum(II) agents.198,199 The presence of 
bulky planar ligands increases the propensity for monofunctional adduct formation and 
subsequent interstrand cross-linking. Monofunctional adducts formed by members of the 
trans-[PtCl2(NH3)L] series depicted in Chart 7 on short duplex DNA induce conformational 
changes similar to those produced by cisplatin.200 In vitro studies in cultured breast cancer 
cells showed that the complexes formed DNA-topoisomerase I cross-links capable of 
triggering DNA strand breaks and apoptosis.186,201 Such ternary DNA-protein cross-links 
are not observed for cisplatin201 and therefore could explain, in part, the distinctive cellular 
response evoked by trans-platinum(II) complexes with bulky planar ligands.
4.1.2. trans-Platinum(II) complexes with iminoether ligands—trans-
Diamminedichloroplatinum(II) analogues with one or two iminoether ligands exhibit 
promising biological activity.202–204 Iminoether ligands exist as isomers because of different 
possible E and Z configurations about the C=N bond. As a result, iminoether complexes of 
platinum(II) produce not only cis and trans isomers, but also exhibit additional isomersism 
at the coordinated ligand.205,206 The trans-EE-[PtCl2(HN=C(OMe)Me)2] complex was the 
first member of the series to be studied in detail (Chart 8). This complex displays inhibitory 
effects against a panel of cancer cell lines comparable to those of cisplatin.206 Furthermore, 
this compound exhibits no cross-resistance with cisplatin in ovarian cancer cells and 
substantial in vivo activity in P388 leukemia-bearing mice.207,208 The cellular uptake and 
degree of DNA platination was significantly higher for iminoether bearing trans-
platinum(II) complexes compared to cisplatin, and suggested that DNA was the main 
intracellular target.208 The complexes form stable monofunctional adducts with duplex 
DNA,209,210 which bend the DNA backbone axis toward the minor groove.211 As a result of 
this form of conformational distortion, the monofunctional adducts were not recognized by 
HMGB proteins, and thus were readily removed by NER.211 Conversion of the 
monofunctional adducts into DNA-protein cross-links, however, produced lesions that were 
able to bypass NER, inhibit DNA polymerases, and lead to cell death. SAR studies 
established that trans-platinum(II) analogues with one iminoether ligand were less toxic than 
those with two such ligands.204 Within the trans-[PtCl2(HN=C(OMe)Me)(NH3)] series 
(Chart 8), the E configuration exhibited greater inhibitory potency against cancer cells than 
the Z configuration, indicating that iminoether ligand configuration is a major determinant of 
activity. To systematically study the effect of iminoether ligand conformation on trans-
platinum(II) activity, trans-platinum(II) complexes bearing cyclic iminoether ligands 
mimicking the E and Z configuration were prepared. Cyclic ligands avoid complications that 
arise from the isomerization between E and Z configurations encountered in acyclic 
iminoether compounds.212 Mechanistic studies found that, like trans-
diamminedichloroplatinum(II), the trans-[PtCl2(HN=C(OMe)Me)(NH3)] series formed 
Johnstone et al.
Page 16
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

monofunctional adducts that developed into interstrand cross-links between adjacent 
guanine and cytosine bases.204,213 The trans-[PtCl2(HN=C(OMe)Me)(NH3)] lesions have 
been likened to a flexible hinge, inducing different structural effects on DNA than the more 
rigid trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) lesion.204 More recently another generation of 
platinum complexes mimicking iminoether derivatives were investigated. These trans-
platinum(II) complexes bearing one or two ketamine ligands (acetonimine) exhibited 
micromolar toxicity against cancer cells and circumvented cisplatin resistance in ovarian 
cancer cell lines (A2780cisR and 41McisR).214
4.1.3. trans-Platinum(II) complexes with asymmetric aliphatic amine ligands—
Aliphatic amine ligands have been employed to generate asymmetric platinum(II) agents 
such as trans-[PtCl2(isopropylamine)L] where L = dimethylamine, isopropylamine, or 
propylamine (Chart 9), that display potency against cancer cells with multifactorial cisplatin 
resistance and ras oncogene overexpression.215,216 In a similar fashion to trans-
diamminedichloroplatinum(II), trans-[PtCl2(isopropylamine)(dimethylamine)] forms 
interstrand cross-links between guanine and a complementary cytosine but the quantity of 
lesions formed is 3-fold higher for the former.217 The ability of this complex to form 
interstrand cross-links over a relatively short period of time is claimed to be the major 
contribution to overcoming cisplatin and ras-related resistance. trans-Platinum(II) 
complexes with one aliphatic amine ligand, such as trans-[PtCl2(NH3)L] where L = 2-
methyl-butylamine or sec-butylamine, have been prepared with the aim of improving the 
water solubility of the parent di-aliphatic amine complexes.218 The second generation 
complexes retained the cytotoxicity profile of the original series, including the ability to 
form efficient interstand cross-links and bypass cisplatin resistance.
4.2. Polynuclear compounds
Polynuclear platinum agents that share similarities with trans-platinum(II) complexes 
account for another class of pharmacologically active platinum-based anticancer 
agents.219–222 Such compounds contain trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl] units with bridging 
alkanediamine linkers of various lengths, designed to facilitate long-distance, flexible 
intrastrand and interstrand cross-links, which are unattainable by traditional mononuclear 
platinum(II) agents like cisplatin and trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (Chart 10). The 
di-platinum complex trans-[(PtCl(NH3)2)2µ-(H2N(CH2)4NH2)]Cl2 forms 1,2-, 1,3-, and 1,4-
interstand cross-links between guanines on opposite strands.223,224 In 1,3- and 1,4-cross-
links, the guanines are separated by one and two base pairs, respectively, whereas the 1,2-
cross-link is formed between guanines on neighboring base pairs.223 These unconventional 
DNA adducts enable the di-platinum complex to overcome cisplatin resistance in ovarian 
cancer cells.221 In order to improve the DNA binding ability of the di-platinum(II) complex, 
tri-nuclear platinum(II) complexes were prepared by incorporating a third platinum center 
within the alkanediamine linker.225 After systematic SAR studies, [trans-
diamminechloroplatinum(II)][µ-trans-diamminedihexanediamineplatinum(II)] nitrate 
(BBR3464) was selected for preclinical development. BBR3464 is taken up in large 
amounts by cancer cells, and forms characteristic DNA cross-links, which mediate its 
cytotoxic effect.226,227 The major DNA adduct formed is the 1,4-interstand cross-link. This 
lesion induces directional bending of the DNA helical axis and local unwinding of the helix. 
Johnstone et al.
Page 17
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Moreover, this lesion evades removal by NER. The DNA lesions formed by BBR3464 were 
not detected by antibodies raised against cisplatin-modified DNA but were recognized by 
antibodies raised against trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II)-modified DNA, indicating 
that BBR3464 may exhibit greater mechanistic similarities with trans-platinum(II) 
complexes.225 Other studies claim that BBR3464 induces DNA damage by triggering B-to-
Z and B-to-A transitions in DNA conformation.228,229 In vitro and in vivo toxicity studies 
showed that BBR3464 is able to kill cancer cells up to three orders of magnitude better than 
cisplatin, and to overcome cisplatin resistance in several types of cancer.219,226, 230–232 The 
fact that BBR3464 acts independently of p53, a tumor suppressor protein that is mutated, 
defective, or inactivated in several cancers, suggested that it holds great therapeutic 
potential. The major drawback of BBR3464 is its inherent systemic toxicity. Phase I trials in 
humans revealed that the MTD is as little as 0.12 mg m−2 day−1 on a daily, five-dose 
schedule.233 Upon escalating the dose to 0.17 mg m−2 day−1, severe myelosuppression and 
gastro-intestinal toxicity were observed. On the other hand, low urinary excretion and low 
nephrotoxicity were reported. Phase II trials in patients with ovarian cancer, small cell lung 
cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, gastric, and gastro-esophageal adenocarcinoma, 
produced mixed results.234–237 Although BBR3464 displayed a distinct lack of activity in 
gastric and small cell lung cancers, it showed better activity in non-small cell lung cancer 
patients and advanced ovarian cancer patients failing platinum-taxane regimens. In the latter 
case, BBR3464 displayed hints of activity deserving of further evaluation (16 partial 
responses out of 79 patients). The results of two Phase II trials launched over 10 years ago 
by Theradex, for the treatment of patients with locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic 
cancer and small cell lung cancer have yet to be realeased. We would also like to highlight 
that BBR3464 was the most recent novel platinum complex to have begun clinical trials. No 
new small molecule platinum agents have been introduced into clinical trials since 1999.
Non-coordinating multinuclear platinum(II) agents, based on BBR3464, have been reported 
to exhibit strong DNA binding affinity and anticancer activity. These agents were generated 
by replacing the labile chloride ligands on BBR3464 with ammine groups (TriplatinNC) or 
extended amine groups (TriplatinNC-A) (Chart 10).238 X-ray crystallographic studies 
revealed that TriplatinNC and TriplatinNC-A bind non-covalently (via electrostatic and 
hydrogen-bonding interactions) to DNA. The terminal platinum units form discrete amine-
phosphate-ammine binding motifs called “phosphate clamps” within the minor groove, 
which induce B-to-A and B-to-Z conformational changes in canonical DNA 
sequences.238–240 The conformational change cooperatively enhances the interaction of 
minor-groove binders like Hoechst 33258, and remains unperturbed in the presence of 
intercalators, such as ethidium bromide.241,242 Recent work has shown that TriplatinNC and 
TriplatinNC-A can also condense DNA and induce aggregation of small transfer RNA 
molecules, owing to the highly cationic nature of the platinum complexes.243,244 
Furthermore, these agents inhibit topoisomerase-I-mediated relaxation of supercoiled DNA. 
In light of these findings, the biological mechanism of action of TriplatinNC and 
TriplatinNC-A is thought to involve nucleic acid condensation or aggregation, with 
inhibitory effects on topoisomerase-I enzymatic activity.243 Cellular studies showed that 
TriplatinNC and TriplatinNC-A display micromolar toxicity against cisplatin-sensitive and 
cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cells.245 The ability of the agents to overcome cisplatin-
Johnstone et al.
Page 18
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

resistance was accredited to their high cellular accumulation, presumably because of their 
cationic nature, and their unique mode of binding to DNA. Molecular biology assays 
showed that the downstream cellular responses evoked by TriplatinNC and TriplatinNC-A 
in mastocytoma cells were markedly different.246 While TriplatinNC induces caspase-
mediated apoptosis reliant on p53 and BAX (a pro-apoptotic protein) function, in a similar 
manner to cisplatin and BBR3464, TriplatinNC-A induces cell death in a manner that is 
independent of p53- or BAX-status. Given the role of p53 and BAX in cisplatin-mediated 
cell death, TriplatinNC-A could hold significant clinical value if the results can be 
recapitulated with in vivo models.
4.3. Non-covalent binding
Mononuclear platinum(II) compounds that bind to DNA non-covalently have also shown 
promising antineoplastic properties and are gaining increasing support as potential 
alternatives to conventional platinum drugs.247–252 Metallointercalators with π-conjugated 
heterocyclic ligands, such as bipyridine, terpyridine, and phenanthroline, utilise π-π stacking 
and dipole-dipole interactions to intercalate between base pairs in double-stranded 
DNA.253–255 Metallointercalators can unwind, bend, and distort DNA topology, and it is 
their structural effect on DNA that is thought to mediate their antiproliferative properties. 
Systematic studies on charged platinum(II) complexes of general formula [Pt(IL)(AL)]2+, 
where IL is an intercalating ligand and AL is an ancillary ligand, have yielded some of the 
most promising results (Chart 11).251 Combinations of phenanthroline-based ligands (IL), 
and 1,2-diaminocycloalkane ligands (AL) gave impressive cytotoxicities against L1210 
murine leukaemia cells. Detailed SAR studies using different R, R- and S, S-ancillary 
ligands revealed that chirality was a major determinant of toxicity.252 In terms of 
metallointercalators with diaminocyclopentane (DACP) ligands, R, R enantiomers are more 
potent than S, S enantiomers whereas the reverse enantiomeric specificity was observed for 
metallointercalators with DACH ligands.248,252 The latter observation is in stark contrast to 
the activity of clinically administered oxaliplatin, which contains a R, R-DACH ligand.70 
Within the PHENSS/RR series (made up of 1,10-phenanthroline and DACH ligands), the S, 
S enantiomer (PHENSS) exhibited one order of magnitude greater toxicity against 
leukaemia cells than the corresponding R, R enantiomer and cisplatin. Given the 
encouraging biological activity of PHENSS, the compound was evaluated in PC3 xenograft 
mouse models. In vivo studies found that PHENSS was relatively non-toxic, and somewhat 
effective at reducing tumor growth over a period of 20 days as compared to saline 
controls.250 Unfortunately, statically significant results were not obtained because the 
studies were carried out with a small number of mice. More detailed studies are needed to 
determine the complete in vivo potential of PHENSS. Recently, the 56MESS/RR series, 
made up of 5,6-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline and DACH ligands, has emerged as a highly 
promising anticancer candidate. Strikingly, the S, S enantiomer (56MESS) displays nano-
molar toxicity toward leukaemia cells. Although this compound interacts with DNA, the 
significance of DNA as an important cellular target has been questioned.256,257 
Comprehensive mechanistic analysis of 56MESS in Madin Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) 
cells revealed an increase expression of the mitochondria-associated protein labeled by 
MTC02, cell cycle arrest in synchronised and non-synchronised cells, and caspase-
Johnstone et al.
Page 19
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

independent cell death. Collectively these observations suggest that the mechanism of 
cytotoxic action involves mitochondrial and cell cycle proteins rather than DNA.257
The cytotoxic potential of a planar platinum(II) complex bearing a tetradentate ligand, 
BDIQQH, was reported recently.258 In aqueous buffer, the platinum(II) complex 
[Pt(BDIQQ)]Cl (Chart 11), forms aggregates, but in the presence of DNA, the aggregates 
disperse yielding single molecules capable of intercalating between base pairs and 
unwinding DNA. [Pt(BDIQQ)]Cl exhibits selective toxicity for cancer cells over normal 
fibroblast cells, and no cross-resistance with cisplatin in ovarian cancer cells. In a manner 
uncharacteristic of platinum(II) complexes, [Pt(BDIQQ)]Cl acts in a dual-threat manner.259 
As well as attacking DNA in cells, which enriches p53 and BAX levels and subsequently 
induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis, Pt(BDIQQ)]Cl also accumulates in mitochondria 
because of its lipophilic and cationic properties and causes direct mitochondrial damage. 
The latter mechanism proceeds independently of p53 and therefore allows [Pt(BDIQQ)]Cl to 
exhibit equal toxicity in p53-negative and p53-postive cells. Because p53 activity is 
abrogated in many cancers,260 the p53-independence of [Pt(BDIQQ)]Cl is thought to be 
highly desirable in terms of preclinical development.
4.4. Monofunctional complexes
Mononuclear monofunctional platinum(II) complexes represent another class of very 
propitious anticancer agents. These complexes contain only one labile ligand and are expect 
to form only one covalent bond to DNA. Unlike the complexes described above, which can 
form monofunctional adducts as well as bifunctional adducts, the class of compounds 
described here is designed to form at most one bond to DNA. Early studies found 
monofunctional platinum(II) complexes such as [Pt(NH3)3Cl]+ and [Pt(dien)Cl]+ to be 
inactive both in vitro and in vivo.60,261 These results were in agreement with the prevailing 
viewpoint at the time, which stated that only neutral, square-planar platinum(II) complexes 
with a pair of inert ligands in a cis arrangement could have anticancer activity. This belief 
was overturned, in part, by work conducted by Engelhard Industries, which showed that 
monofunctional platinum(II) complexes of the form cis-[Pt(NH3)2(Am)Cl]+, where Am is 
an aromatic N-heterocyclic amine, inhibited tumor cell growth in vitro and in L1210 and 
P388 mouse leukemia models.262 Two platinum(II) complexes, cis-[Pt(NH3)2(9-
aminoacridine)Cl]+ and cis-[Pt(NH3)2(chloroquine)Cl]+, capable of binding to DNA both in 
a monofunctional covalent manner and via intercalation were prepared following these 
studies,263 but unfortunately murine sarcoma 180 ascites (S180a) screens found both 
complexes to have high dose-limiting toxicity (5 mg kg−1), and any useful antineoplastic 
activity was masked by this systemic toxicity. The in vivo properties of these complexes 
were not investigated further.
Further studies with cis-[Pt(NH3)2(Am)Cl]+ complexes investigated the possibility that an 
ammine or Am group could be lost upon DNA binding, allowing bifunctional 
coordination.264 Careful analysis of NMR spectra and enzymatic digestion data on the 
products of the reaction of these complexes with d(GpG) and dG revealed the formation of 
monofunctional adducts only with no evidence for the release of the ammine or Am 
groups.264 This result was supported by the fact that monoclonal antibodies capable of 
Johnstone et al.
Page 20
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

detecting bifunctional DNA lesions did not recognize cis-[Pt(NH3)2(Am)Cl]+ induced DNA 
adducts. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that the adducts induced by cis-
[Pt(NH3)2(N3-cytosine)Cl]+ had minimal structural effects, in fact, the DNA helix remained 
rod-like after treatment.265 Subsequent studies on the interaction of a structurally similar 
complex, cis-[Pt(NH3)2(4-bromopyridine)Cl]+ with supercoiled DNA revealed that 
monofunctional adducts not only bent DNA less but also unwound DNA less than traditional 
bifunctional complexes.266 A further vindication of the differing structural effects of 
monofunctional and bifunctional adducts was shown by the ability of HMGB proteins to 
recognize cisplatin modified DNA but not cis-[Pt(NH3)2(N3-cytosine)Cl]+ platinated 
DNA.267
In spite of the aforementioned work on monofunctional platinum(II) complexes, no notable 
results of experiments with these compounds were reported for almost two decades, until a 
re-examination of these cationic monofunctional platinum(II) complexes arose unexpectedly 
from studies on the role of OCTs in the cellular uptake and activity of oxaliplatin.23,268 
These studies uncovered the fact that cis-[Pt(NH3)2(pyridine)Cl]+ (pyriplatin, Chart 12), a 
monofunctional, cationic platinum(II) compound, displayed excellent substrate compatibility 
with organic cationic transporters 1 and 2.269 Cells with high OCT expression were more 
sensitive to pyriplatin treatment than those with low OCT expression. Moreover, the 
differential toxicity in pairs of cell lines with high and low OCT expression was up to 137-
fold for pyriplatin as compared to toxicity enhancements of up to 53-fold for oxaliplatin.269 
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that monofunctional DNA adducts formed by 
pyriplatin did not significantly unwind duplex DNA. Structural determination of a DNA 
dodecamer duplex site-specifically platinated with pyriplatin at the N7 site of a 
deoxyguanosine residue also revealed minimal perturbations to the structure of the DNA 
double helix. In fact, hydrogen bonding between the platinated guanine base and the 
complementary cytosine base was completely intact.269 In vitro studies in HOP-62 lung 
adenocarcinoma cells revealed that pyriplatin damages DNA, blocks cell cycle progression 
at the G2/M phase, and prompts apoptotic cell death.270 Monofunctional lesions formed by 
pyriplatin are repaired by NER, however, not with the same fidelity as bifunctional 
lesions.271 NCI cytotoxicity screening studies revealed that pyriplatin exhibits a novel 
spectrum of activity compared to other platinum agents in the NCI database. The poor 
potency of this compound relative to conventional platinum-based drugs, however, 
motivated a search for more active analogues. Elucidation of the X-ray crystal structure of 
RNA polymerase II stalled at a monofunctional pyriplatin-DNA adduct directed the strategy 
for making improved analogues.272 This crystal structure indicated that larger N-
heterocyclic ligands could more effectively block the progression of RNA polymerase II, 
leading to improved transcription inhibition and cytotoxicity. The pyridine in pyriplatin was 
therefore rationally substituted for more expansive N-heterocycles. This process eventually 
led to the development and discovery of cis-[Pt(NH3)2(phenanthridine)Cl]+ 
(phenanthriplatin, Chart 12).273
According to the NCI cytotoxicity screening assay, phenanthriplatin exhibited a unique 
cancer cell-killing profile compared to all other platinum agents held in the NCI archives.273 
Unlike pyriplatin, the potency of phenanthriplatin toward cultured cancer cells is 
Johnstone et al.
Page 21
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

therapeutically relevant and significantly higher than that of cisplatin. Upon loss of the 
chloride ligand, phenanthriplatin forms monofunctional adducts with simple guanine bases 
as well as duplex DNA. Phenanthriplatin-DNA adducts introduce steric hindrance within the 
major groove and thus stall RNA polymerase II. Kinetic studies on site-specifically 
platinated DNA showed that the insertion of CTP opposite the platinated guanine by RNA 
polymerase II occurs in an error-free manner, but further mRNA synthesis along the 
template DNA strand is halted.274 Phenanthriplatin-DNA adducts also inhibit DNA 
polymerases. DNA polmerase η, a translesion synthase capable of bypassing 1,2-intrastand 
cross-links formed by cisplatin, is able to insert the correct nucleotide opposite the 
phenanthriplatin-bound guanine, but is unable to proceed any further.275 The detailed 
mechanism of DNA polmerase η inhibition was inferred from X-ray crystallographic data, 
which suggested that the diastereoselectivity imposed on the adduct by the phenanthridine 
ring may play a significant role in blocking polymerase progression.275,276 Studies with 
Escherichia coli resembling those conducted by Rosenberg, showed that akin to cisplatin 
treatment, phenanthriplatin induced filamentous cell growth.277 Monofunctional 
platinum(II) complexes with little biological activity in cultured cancer cells were not able to 
replicate this result. Phenanthriplatin-mediated filamentous E. coli growth resulted from the 
bacterial SOS response, indicative of DNA damage. So far, data acquired for 
phenanthriplatin in cultured systems suggest that its anticancer activity is exerted through 
interaction with DNA.
Platinum(II) complexes with tethered acridine units represent another important class of 
DNA-targeting anticancer agents. Such complexes contain a platinum moiety capable of 
forming monofunctional-DNA adducts and a planar acridine motif capable of intercalating 
between base pairs (Chart 12).278–280 A semi-rigid linker is usually employed to promote 
platination of DNA bases directly adjacent to the intercalation site. An early example of this 
series, Pt-ACRAMTU, [PtCl(ethane-1,2-diamine)(ACRAMTU)] where ACRAMTU=1-[2-
(acridin-9-ylamino)ethyl]-1,3-dimethylthiourea, contains a chloride leaving group and an 
ACRAMTU group coordinated via a Pt-S bond, disposed cis to each other.279 This 
arrangement was hypothesised to enable rapid DNA adduct formation without the need for 
rate-limiting aquation. The NMR solution structure of a site-specifically modified octamer 
containing a Pt-ACRAMTU adduct, revealed that platination of a guanine within the major 
groove did not result in large structural changes. Intercalation of the appended acridine unit, 
however, did lengthen (6.62 Å) and unwind (twist, 15.4°) DNA.281 The authors propose that 
rapid intercalation precedes platination, and that this mechanism is responsible for moving 
platinum away from DNA sites targeted by conventional platinum(II) agents. Clonogenic 
growth and cell proliferation studies showed that Pt-ACRAMTU and its derivatives were 
very active and display sub-micromolar IC50 values against several cancer cell lines.282–287 
Polymerase stop assays and flow cytometric assays showed that the hybrid adducts inhibited 
RNA polymerase II and DNA synthesis.285,286,288 Inhibition of DNA synthesis led to S 
phase cell cycle arrest as opposed to G2/M phase cell cycle arrest, as is customary following 
cisplatin treatment.288 Although Pt-ACRAMTU maintained sub-micromolar activity in cell 
lines with aberrant p53 and k-ras expression, because of their inability to stop tumor growth 
in corresponding tumor mouse models, preclinical development was halted and other Pt-
ACRAMTU analogues have been subsequently investigated.289 The most promising second 
Johnstone et al.
Page 22
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

generation derivative was developed by replacing the thiourea donor on Pt-ACRAMTU with 
an amidine nitrogen.290,291 This modification accelerated DNA binding, increased cancer 
cell toxicity by two orders of magnitude (nanomolar IC50 values), and inhibited tumor 
growth in vivo.290,291 Studies in non-small cell lung cancer cells (NCI-H460) suggest that 
their impressive cytotoxicities can be attributed to rapid intracellular accumulation, DNA 
adduct formation, and less efficient removal of the DNA adducts. Unfortunately the 
amidine-based complexes exhibit extremely high systemic toxicity in vivo; the maximum 
tolerated dose determined for one of the most potent complexes being 0.5 mg kg−1. It is 
possible that the development of delivery agents could allow for safe delivery while 
maintaining potency.
4.5. Other examples
Bone and other calcified tissues show a great propensity to take up bisphosphonates, a 
property that has been exploited in the design of a number of drugs that target bone 
diseases.292–294 The ability of the bisphosphonate unit to chelate calcium confers this 
targeting ability. In an effort to develop cisplatin analogues that selectively target bone 
tissue, a series of platinum(II) complexes were prepared with the chelating 2-
amino(m)ethylpyridine ligand functionalized at the amine with a bisphosphonate unit.295 In 
vitro cytotoxicity assays reveal that these complexes are less active than cisplatin. Flow 
cytometric studies suggest that cisplatin and the bisphosphonate complexes differentially 
influence the membrane permeability that is assayed to probe apoptosis. In conjunction with 
a lack of observed DNA binding, the authors interpret these results to mean that an 
alternative cell killing mechanism may be operative. It is also possible to load platinum 
complexes with bisphosphonate leaving group ligands on a solid matrix for implantation and 
release at the site of disease. Many of the developments in this area have recently been 
reviewed.296
A series of platinum complexes with pyrophosphate ligands in place of the traditional 
nonleaving group ligands afforded complexes that did not bind to DNA but in some cases 
were more active that the parent drug from which they were derived.297 The authors 
accumulate evidence highlighting the distinctions between the biological effects of the 
classical platinum drugs and the pyrophosphate complexes, but no mechanistic model has 
yet to be proposed.298
Platinum(II) complexes with diethyl[(methylsulfinyl)methyl]phosphonate as the non-leaving 
group ligands demonstrate low potency killing but in addition to DNA binding, as revealed 
by replication mapping experiments, these complexes were also found to be potent inhibitors 
of matrix metalloproteinases.299 Similarly, inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase 3 
(MMP-3) was observed with other platinum complexes in which three labile ligands are 
present in the platinum coordination sphere. The authors present evidence indicating that the 
platinum binds to a key histidine residue of the enzyme.300 A crystal structure of matrix 
MMP-3, also known as stromelysin-1, confirmed binding to this histidine.301
Johnstone et al.
Page 23
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

5. Platinum(IV) prodrugs that release classical platinum(II) anticancer 
agents
The anticancer potential of platinum(IV) agents has been recognized since the discovery of 
the medicinal potential of cisplatin,55 but their clinical significance has only been realized 
more recently. The physicochemical properties of platinum(IV) agents differ greatly from 
their platinum(II) counterparts. Unlike square-planar platinum(II) complexes, platinum(IV) 
complexes generally adopt octahedral geometries (Figure 5). The saturated coordination 
sphere of platinum(IV) is more resistant to ligand substitution than four-coordinate 
platinum(II) centers, and thus limits unwanted side reactions with biomolecules prior to 
DNA binding. The two extra ligands afforded by the low-spin d6 platinum(IV) center 
provide a means to impart and fine-tune desirable biological properties such as lipophilicity, 
redox stability, specific targeting, orthogonal bioactivity, and improved cellular uptake. The 
additional ligands also facilitate attachment to nanoparticles and other forms of carriers 
systems, a detailed discussion of which will be provided later.
Interpretation of the reactivity of platinum(IV) complexes with DNA and other biomolecules 
requires consideration of their rates of substitution and reduction. Although platinum(IV) 
complexes can platinate DNA in their oxidized form, the formation of cytotoxic lesions via 
ligand substitution requires weeks.303 Given that platinum agents are typically cleared from 
the body in a matter of hours, direct platinum(IV)-biomolecule coordination is unlike to be 
of clinical importance.304 Reduction of the platinum(IV) center to platinum(II), in concert 
with the loss of two ligands, is thought to be essential for the anticancer activity of these 
agents. Specifically, the canonical mechanism of reduction involves the loss of the two axial 
ligands (Figure 5). The resulting divalent form, usually cisplatin or a related derivative, 
binds to DNA, inhibits transcription and replication, and induces apoptosis. The reduction 
process is dependent on the composition of the platinum(IV) agents as well as the biological 
reducing agent involved. A convenient measure of reduction can be obtained from 
voltammetric experiments, but because the platinum(IV)-to-platinum(II) reduction is 
irreversible, a standard redox potential cannot be obtained as the mid-point potential from a 
typical cyclic voltammogram. Instead, the peak potential, Ep, for the cathodic wave obtained 
in a cyclic voltammetric measurement is typically quoted. Care must be taken in interpreting 
these values, however, because the cathodic peak potential of an irreversible process is not 
dictated solely by the thermodynamics of reduction, but also by the heterogeneous charge 
transfer rate constant at the electrode surface and is influenced by the scan rate.305 The 
relative cathodic peak potentials of structurally related complexes are, however, typically 
correlated to the relative facility with which the metal center is reduced and have been 
correlated with reduction rates in solution.306 Early quantitative SAR studies showed that 
the nature of the axial ligands has a stronger influence on reduction rates than the equatorial 
ligands.307 Within the cis-[Pt(en)Cl2X2] series where X is an anionic axial ligand, the 
chloride species (Ep = −4 mV) is much more susceptible to reduction than the carboxylate 
(Ep = −250–350 mV) or hydroxide (Ep = −664 mV) derivatives.308,309 On the other hand, 
systematic variation of equatorial amine ligands in complexes of general formula cis-
[PtCl4(NHR2)2] where R = alkyl and aromatic hydrocarbons, did not have a considerable 
effect on the reduction rates.310 Platinum(IV) reduction by small biomolecules such as 
Johnstone et al.
Page 24
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

ascorbate and glutathione can occur by inner- or outer-sphere electron-transfer 
mechanisms.311–314 The reduction path taken is highly dependent on the nature of the 
ligands coordinated to the metal. Because inner-sphere electron-transfer requires the 
formation of a chemical bridge between the participating species, platinum(IV) agents with 
halide or hydroxide ligands trans to a good leaving group are particularly suited to undergo 
reduction by this mechanism.313 Differences in ability to form such bridges can even 
override trends in reduction rate expected on the basis of differences in ligand-to-metal 
electron donating ability.315 Bimolecular outer-sphere electron-transfer processes are 
generally slower than inner-sphere electron-transfers but can provide a viable reduction 
mechanism for platinum(IV) agents in which ligands that are capable of forming a bridge to 
an electron transfer agent are trans to firmly bound ligands.
Ormaplatin (also known as tetraplatin), tetrachloro(trans-1,2-
diaminocyclohexane)platinum(IV) (Chart 13) was one of the first platinum(IV) agents to 
undergo clinical trials. Ormaplatin is rapidly reduced to the corresponding 
dichloro(trans-1,2-diaminocyclohexane)platinum(II) form in tissue culture medium (t1/2 = 
5–15 min) and undiluted rat plasma (t1/2 = 3 s).316 The active platinum(II) species is similar 
to oxaliplatin, however, it contains both R, R and S, S isomers. Ormaplatin displayed in vitro 
and in vivo activity against some cisplatin-resistant cancers and was taken forward to 
clinical trials commissioned by NCI and UpJohn.317–321 Various doses, dose patterns, and 
modes of administration (intravenous and intraperitoneal) were investigated in six Phase I 
clinical trials, however, no Phase II clinical trials have been planned.321–323 Ormaplatin was 
found to induce severe neurotoxicity at the MTD, and in some cases a safe MTD could not 
be determined. Toxicity is thought to arise from fast reduction to the active platinum(II) 
form as a consequence of the axial chloride ligands.
Another notable platinum(IV) complex to have undergone clinical trials is iproplatin (also 
known as JM9 and CHIP), cis, trans, cis-
dichlororidodihydroxidobis(isopropylamine)platinum(IV) (Chart 13).324 Iproplatin is 
structurally similar to ormaplatin in the sense that it contains two equatorial chloride groups 
which are cis to each other. Carbon-14 labelling studies showed that the mechanism of 
action of iproplatin involves the reduction of the platinum(IV) center to platinum(II) 
followed by covalent bond formation with DNA.325 Iproplatin is less prone to reduction and 
deactivation by biological reducing agents than ormaplatin, presumably because of the 
presence of hydroxide axial ligands, allowing less hindered distribution throughout the body. 
Another advantage of iproplatin is its very high water solubility (44.1 mM), which allows 
simpler formulation and administration. Iproplatin is one of the most clinically studied 
platinum agents to have not been approved for marketing, with 38 clinical trials ranging 
from Phase I to III having been concluded, many of which were commissioned by Johnson 
Matthey and Bristol Myers. Phase I studies revealed that the dose-limiting toxic effect was 
myelosuppression, which, in one study involving children, was partly correlated with the 
amount of prior therapy chemo- and radiotherapy received.326 The same study 
recommended intravenous doses of 324 mg m−2 over 2 h every 3–4 weeks for Phase II trials 
in children. Other studies proposed doses of 45–65 mg m−2 and 95 mg m−2 for patients 
treated on a five-times daily schedule every three weeks and a four-times weekly schedule 
Johnstone et al.
Page 25
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

with two-week break periods, respectively.327 Phase II trials were carried out in patients 
with a variety of different cancer types328–332 and Phase III trials were conducted in ovarian 
cancer patients and those with metastatic epidermoid carcinoma of the head and neck.333,334 
The ultimate conclusion of these studies was that iproplatin did not exhibit overall 
effectiveness that surpassed that of cisplatin or carboplatin and no further trials were 
undertaken.
Satraplatin, trans, cis,cis-bis(acetato)amminecyclohexylaminedichloroplatinum(IV) (Chart 
13) was the first orally active platinum agent to be reported.335,336 Satraplatin was rationally 
designed such that the lipophilicity and stability were suitable for oral administration. The 
half-life of reduction of satraplatin by 5 mM ascorbate is 50 min, which is an adequate time 
for absorption by the gastrointestinal mucosa in the platinum(IV) form once ingested.337 
Upon entry into the bloodstream, satraplatin undergoes reduction to give six distinct 
platinum(II) species. Ammine(cyclohexylamine)dichloroplatinum(II), derived from the loss 
of two acetate ligands, is the major metabolite and also exhibits the most potent anticancer 
activity.338 In preclinical studies, satraplatin exhibited a better toxicity profile than cisplatin, 
and showed activity in cisplatin-resistant human tumor cell lines.335 Similarly to cisplatin, 
satraplatin acts through the formation DNA cross-links, DNA distortion, and subsequent 
inhibition of DNA transcription and replication. The ability of satraplatin to overcome 
cisplatin resistance is thought to arise from the asymmetric nature of the DNA lesions, 
which unlike cisplatin adducts, can evade recognition by DNA repair proteins.339–341 In 
vivo studies in mice bearing murine ADJ/PC6 plasmacytoma, which we note was the same 
model used to identify carboplatin as a viable alternative to cisplatin,342 showed satraplatin 
to exhibit markedly superior antitumor efficacy relative to cisplatin, carboplatin, and 
ormaplatin.335 Furthermore, in four ovarian carcinoma xenograft models of varying cisplatin 
and carboplatin resistance, satraplatin displayed activity similar to that of cisplatin and 
carboplatin, which were administered intravenously, and far superior to intraperitoneal 
administration ormaplatin. In rodents, the dose-limiting toxicity of satraplatin was 
myelosuppression. Encouragingly, less hepatotoxicity and fewer gastrointestinal effects 
were observed as compared to treatment with cisplatin or carboplatin. The favorable toxicity 
profile and preclinical antitumor activity of satraplatin prompted several development 
companies to begin Phase I clinical trials. In the first Phase I study, satraplatin was 
administered at doses ranging from 60–170 mg m−2 as a single oral dose.343,344 The 
pharmacokinetics data suggested that gastrointestinal absorption was being saturated, 
preventing the MTD from being reached. To improve absorption into the bloodstream, 
patients were treated on a five-times daily schedule with lower doses (30–140 mg m−2).345 
The dose-limiting toxicities were thrombocytopenia and neutropenia and in about 10% of 
the patients treated, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea were also observed. Based on the Phase I 
studies, doses of 100–120 and 45–50 mg m−2 were recommended for repeated daily dosing 
for 5 and 14 days, respectively, in Phase II/III trials.346–348 Several Phase II/III trials have 
been carried out to determine the efficacy of satraplatin alone and in combination other 
active agents. A Phase II study on metastatic NSCLC patients, in which satraplatin was 
administered as single daily 120 mg m−2 doses for 5 days on 3 week cycles failed to provide 
any objective responses.349 Nevertheless 46% of the patients were noted to express some 
palliation. A more advanced Phase II study on patients with small-cell lung cancer and 
Johnstone et al.
Page 26
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

squamous cell head and neck cancer, with escalated doses of satraplatin produced a response 
rate of 38%, similar to that observed with cisplatin.343 Encouragingly this study found no 
signs of severe neurotoxicity or nephrotoxicity. Other Phase II studies in patients with 
relapsed ovarian cancer and advanced/recurrent squamous cancer of the cervix, produced 
clinically beneficial or partial rates of response in several patients.350,351 The former study 
noted that the most common form of toxicity was neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. 
Satraplatin has also been heavily studied as a potential second-line chemotherapeutic for 
patients with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC).352,353 Treatment with 
120 mg m−2 satraplatin daily for 5 days, used in patients with CRPC that had undergone 
front-line hormone therapy, resulted in 62% of patients expressing stable disease or partial 
response. Follow-up Phase III trials commissioned by Bristol-Myers Squibb, assessed the 
capability of satraplatin as a front-line chemotherapeutic in combination with prednisone.354 
This study was terminated after only 50 of the intended cohort of 380 patients were treated 
because satraplatin in combination with prednisone was found to be less efficacious than 
prednisone alone. Following this setback, satraplatin was acquired by GPC Biotech, who set 
up a multicenter, multinational, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase III trial called 
Satraplatin and Prednisone Against Refractory Cancer (SPARC) with 950 patients.355,356 
The aim of the trial was to compare treatments of satraplatin and prednisone against placebo 
and prednisone, as second-line therapy for patients who had received a cytotoxic agent, 
which in some cases was docetaxel. The study found that the satraplatin/prednisone 
combinations led to a 36% decrease in pain progression and an improvement in progression 
free survival rates. The positive outcome of the SPARC trial prompted GPC Biotech to file 
for FDA approval, however, this claim was rejected on the grounds that overall survive was 
not significantly improved and that more than half the patients in the study had received 
prior docetaxel treatment.357,358
6. Dual-threat platinum(IV) prodrugs that release classical platinum(II) 
anticancer agents
In all of the examples discussed above, the platinum(IV) agent undergoes intracellular 
reduction to produce an active platinum(II) species and two biologically innocent groups. 
The inclusion of one or two biologically active ligands within the platinum(IV) scaffold can 
produce dual-threat platinum(IV) agents. The biologically active ligands are typically 
chosen to have non-DNA targets to limit cross-resistance with the DNA-targeting 
platinum(II) species released.
Ethacraplatin comprises a cisplatin equatorial core axially coordinated to two ethacrynic 
acid ligands through their carboxylic acid groups (Chart 14).359,360 Ethacrynic acid and its 
glutathione adduct are a potent inhibitors of glutathione-S-transferase (GST), an enzyme 
which aids the detoxification of platinum agents by catalyzing their conjugation to 
glutathione.361 Upon intracellular reduction, ethacraplatin releases cisplatin and two 
equivalents of ethacrynic acid. Ethacrynic acid inhibits GST and reverses platinum drug 
resistance, enabling ethacraplatin to inhibit the growth of cisplatin-resistant breast, lung, and 
colon cancer cells more effectively than cisplatin alone. The platinum(IV) divalproate 
complex (VAAP) is another example of a dual-threat agent (Chart 14).362 Upon reduction, 
Johnstone et al.
Page 27
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

VAAP generates cisplatin and two equivalents of valproic acid, a potent histone deacetylase 
(HDAC) inhibitor which stimulates differentiation and apoptosis in cancer cells. VAAP 
displays strong synergistic cytotoxicity, up to two orders of magnitude higher than cis, cis, 
trans-diaminedichlorodihydroxoplatinum(IV) alone or in combination with valproic acid. 
Furthermore, VAAP-loaded poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(caprolactone) nanoparticles 
(see Section 8) display pharmacologically relevant blood circulation times, with high tumor 
accumulation and significant inhibitory effects in lung adenocarcinoma xenograft mouse 
models. More recently, platinum(IV) derivatives of oxaliplatin with one or two valproate 
axial ligands have been prepared with the aim of developing VAAP derivatives with more 
favorable toxicity and tolerability profiles.363
Normal cells generate energy within the mitochondria, in the form of ATP, via the citric acid 
cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Under the hypoxic conditions present in many tumor 
tissues, however, cancer cells obtain a larger proportion of their energy by aerobic 
glycolysis. This phenomenon is known as the Warburg effect.80 The difference in metabolic 
pathways operational in normal and cancer cells has been exploited by mitaplatin, a 
platinum(IV) complex designed to selectively kill cancer cells over non-malignant cells 
(Chart 14).364 Mitaplatin consists of two dichloroacetate (DCA) ligands appended to a 
cisplatin core. Upon reduction in cancer cells, DCA inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 
(PDK), which in turn, reduces the flux of metabolites through aerobic glycolysis and 
restores normal mitochondrial function. This process promotes apoptosis by releasing 
cytochrome c from mitochondria and translocating apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) to the 
nucleus. At the same time, free cisplatin induces DNA damage in the usual manner and 
prompts apoptotic cell death. The concerted action of cisplatin and DCA allows mitaplatin 
to kill lung carcinoma cells (A549) more readily than normal lung fibroblasts (MRC5) in co-
cultured in vitro systems. Subsequent work showed that this mechanism of action was able 
to overcome cisplatin-resistance in human epidermoid adenocarcinoma and hepatoma cancer 
cells.365 Detailed biophysical studies investigating the aqueous chemistry of mitaplatin and 
related platinum(IV) complexes with axial haloacetate ligands, found that, contrary to the 
typical dogma that platinum(IV) prodrugs are inert to ligand substitution, these the axial 
ligands of these complexes can be substituted for hydroxide under biologically relevant 
conditions.366 Isotopic labelling studies revealed that the hydrolysis proceeds via the attack 
of a hydroxide ion on the platinum(IV) center, and not at the carbonyl of the haloacetate. 
Importantly, at physiological pH, however, the half-life of hydrolysis is much longer than 
the rate at which mitaplatin is cleared from the blood of rodents367 and so this process likely 
has little influence on the in vivo effects of this compound.
One of the major disadvantages of mitaplatin is the widely differing effective doses of the 
reduced products, DCA and cisplatin, which alone exhibit their characteristic activities at 
millimolar and micromolar concentrations, respectively. In order to achieve a better match 
in activity between the intracellular reduction products, DCA was replaced with a vitamin E 
analog, α-tocopherol succinate (α-TOS).368 α-TOS inhibits the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 
and Bcl-xL in the micromolar range, thereby inducing mitochondria-mediated apoptotic cell 
death at comparable concentrations to cisplatin. Platinum(IV) complexes comprising 
cisplatin attached to one or two α-TOS ligands were prepared. The di-substituted derivative 
Johnstone et al.
Page 28
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

was non-toxic, presumably because of its high lipophilicity and susceptibility to entrapment 
inside the cell membrane. Contrastingly, the mono-substituted derivative (Chart 15A) 
exhibited potency 7–25 times greater than that of cisplatin across several tumor cell lines. 
Mechanistic studies revealed that this complex induces nuclear DNA damage and 
simultaneous mitochondrial membrane depolarization because of inhibition of Bcl-xL-Bax 
protein-protein interactions.
In ER+ breast cancer cells, addition of estrogen increases HMGB1 expression. HMGB1 
inhibits repair of cisplatin-induced DNA lesions by preventing DNA repair proteins from 
accessing the site of damage.369 Thus, co-treatment of unconjugated estrogen and cisplatin 
enhances the activity of cisplatin.370 Incorporation of two axially coordinated estrogen 
moieties into cisplatin enabled the preparation of cisplatin-estrogen conjugates capable of 
concurrently releasing both groups (Chart 15B).371 Given that the estrogen units were 
modified with ester groups, hydrolysis to generate free estradiol is a prerequisite for activity. 
ER+ MCF-7 cells treated with the platinum(IV)-estrogen complex displayed an increase in 
HMGB1 expression to a degree similar to that observed following treatment with estradiol. 
The activity of the estradiol potentiates the activity of cisplatin. As predicted based on the 
construct design, HMGB1 levels in ER− HCC-1937 cells were less affected and the IC50 
values were comparatively higher (up to 1.8-fold).
Platinum(IV) agents with axially coordinated bioactive peptides have been designed and 
prepared with the aim of targeted drug delivery to tumors. Several mono- and di-
functionalized platinum(IV) complexes with tri- and pentapetides capable of binding to αvβ3 
and αvβ5 integrins and aminopeptidase N (APN) on the surface of cancer cells have been 
prepared.372 Integrins and APN are highly expressed in tumor-induced angiogenesis, and 
thus the platinum(IV) conjugates are able to selectively target angiogenic tumor cells over 
primary proliferating endothelial cells. The anti-proliferative effect of the platinum(IV)-
peptide conjugates decreased upon co-incubation with αvβ3- and αvβ5-specific peptides and 
transfection with β3 integrin siRNA, confirming that their activity was mediated by the 
recognition of specific integrins on the cancer cell membrane surface. A very recent report 
describes the enhancement that can be obtained by using an axial ligand that displays 
multiple units of the cyclic c(RGDfK) integrin-targeting peptide.373 In this work, a 
picoplatin prodrug displaying a tertrameric c(RDGfK) motif was able to accumulate in cells 
overexpressing αVβ3 and αVβ5 integrins resulting in a 10-fold enhancement in cytotoxicity 
over cells that do not express these membrane proteins. A cyclic RGD motif was also used 
in the construction of a theranostic platinum(IV) complex capable of targeting αVβ3 
integrins, releasing cisplatin upon reduction, and reporting on the activation of apoptosis 
using an aggregation-induced emission fluorophore conjugated to a caspase-3 sensitive Asp-
Glu-Val-Asp (DEVD) peptide.374 The two different peptides were attached to the two axial 
positions of a cisplatin prodrug.
Platinum(IV) complexes with analogues of neurotensin and somatostatin have also been 
reported with the aim of targeting cancer cell lines expressing the corresponding 
receptors.375 Cytotoxicity studies revealed that, although potency was improved compared 
to the non-targeting platinum(IV) precursor, cellular uptake was non-specific, presumably 
because the receptors were unable to recognize the peptides once tethered to platinum(IV). 
Johnstone et al.
Page 29
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fusion of cell penetrating peptides (CPPs) such as a TAT (Trans-acting Activator of 
Transcription) protein fragment with platinum(IV) centers has yielded very active 
conjugates. The oxaliplatin-TAT monoconjugate displays 39-fold higher potency against 
cultured cancer cells than the corresponding platinum(IV) analogue with no targeting 
peptide(s).376 Large peptides like chlorotoxin (CTX) have also been attached to 
platinum(IV) in a 1:1 ratio for targeting purposes.377 CTX, a 36-amino-acid peptide found in 
the venom of the deathstalker scorpion,378 binds to functional proteins like matrix 
metalloproteinase 2 (MMP2), annexin A2, and chloride ion channels, which are 
overexpressed on certain cancer cell surfaces. The platinum(IV)-chlorotoxin conjugate 
exhibits higher in vitro toxicity against human cervical HeLa cells than the non-targeted 
platinum(IV) building block. The difference in potency is attributed to the targeting of 
annexin A2 and chloride ion channels present on the cell surface of HeLa cells.
7. Platinum(IV) complexes with non-cisplatin-like mechanisms of action
Before it became established that most anticancer-active platinum(IV) complexes function 
as prodrugs that undergo reduction to release active platinum(II) agents, alternative 
mechanisms of action for platinum(IV) were envisioned. Because of the steric restraints 
imposed by the DNA double helix, it seemed unlikely that DNA cross-linking of the 
cisplatin type was operative,15 although modelling studies suggest that such adducts may be 
able to form.379 Monofunctional adducts could also conceivably form,380,381 but the 
generally slow kinetics of ligand substitution at platinum(IV) argue against this process 
being of great biological relevance. A series of studies have, however, appeared describing 
the platinum(IV)-mediated oxidation of guanine to 8-oxo-guanine. The first report of this 
reactivity came from the observation that incubation of Pt(DACH)Cl4 with GMP or dGMP 
led to the formation of Pt(DACH)Cl2.382 The oxidation of guanine was confirmed as was 
the ability of the oxidation to occur with guanine bases in double-stranded oligonucleotides. 
The reactions typically occurred on the order of days and theoretical calculations suggest 
that the reaction proceeds via a cyclic 5′,8-phosphodiester intermediate.383,384 Analysis of 
kinetic data revealed that platinum(II) centers can catalyze the reaction, which is initiated by 
intermolecular nucleophilic attack, e.g. by phosphate.385,386 The platinum(IV) complex 
cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)2] was reported to cleave double-stranded DNA but this 
reactivity was subsequently shown to arise from molecules of H2O2 that co-crystallized with 
the platinum(IV) complex.387,388
Photoactivated chemotherapy offers temporal and spatial control over drug activation and 
has shown potential for the treatment of several cancers including those of the skin, lung, 
brain, and esophagus. The activated toxic species is produced by irradiation only where it is 
required, allowing tumors to be targeted specifically. This approach is advantageous over 
other therapies such as surgery, radiotherapy, and conventional chemotherapy because, 
ideally, normal tissue is not affected and the treatment can be repeated as often as required. 
In an attempt to increase selectivity and lower systemic toxicity of platinum agents, 
photoactivatable platinum(IV) prodrugs have been developed.389,390 Two main classes of 
photoactivatable platinum(IV) have been reported in the literature thus far, diiodo- and 
diazido-platinum(IV) complexes.
Johnstone et al.
Page 30
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The first generation of photoactivatable platinum(IV) complexes were based on iodide as the 
reducing ligand and ethylenediamine as the nonleaving group (Chart 16).391,392 A bidentate 
ligand was chosen to prevent photo-induced isomerisation, which could lead to the 
formation of thermodynamically stable but potentially inactive trans congeners. cis-
Diiodoplatinum(IV) complexes exhibit dissociative LMCT/d-d excited states that can be 
populated by excitation from visible light. It was postulated that population of these states 
could trigger photoreduction and photosubstitution at the platinum(IV) center. The resulting 
platinum(II) species were then expected to coordinate to DNA bases and induce apoptosis. 
The first diiodo-platinum(IV) complex reported was prepared with axial chloride ligands.391 
Although this complex was able to irreversibly platinate DNA upon irradiation at 375 nm, a 
similar effect was also observed in the dark, probably because of facile reduction owing to 
the poor ability of chloride ligands to stabilize the 4+ oxidation state of the metal. In order to 
prevent chemical reduction in the dark, hydroxide-, acetate- and methysulfonate-based 
ligands were introduced at the axial position.392 As anticipated, the modified platinum(IV) 
complexes had better dark-stability, the methylsulfonate complex being the most stable with 
a half-life of 72h. Upon irradiation at 375 nm, the complexes underwent photoreduction, 
giving platinum species with differing DNA platination propensities. Photolysis of the 
platinum(IV)-acetate complex generated the highest number of platinum-DNA adducts. 1D- 
and 2D-NMR experiments indicated that photoreduction to the corresponding platinum(II) 
species was necessary for DNA binding.393 In vitro studies with TCCSUP bladder cancer 
cells with and without 1.5 h of irradiation showed that the photolysis products were more 
cytotoxic that the parent platinum(IV) complexes, however, the toxicity differential was not 
as high as expected.391,392 A statistically significant difference between dark and light IC50 
values was only observed for the platinum(IV)-acetate complex. To understand the 
underlying reasons for the high toxicity of the diiodo-platinum(IV) complexes in the dark, 
biophysical studies were conducted with sulfur-rich biomolecules.394 NMR analysis showed 
that glutathione and N-acetylcysteine rapidly reduced the complexes to the reactive 
platinum(II) form via an inner-sphere mechanism similar to ormaplatin reduction. Given 
their fast reduction rates in the presence of biologically relevant thiols, diiodo-platinum(IV) 
complexes were deemed unsuitable for development as photoactivable drugs.
Because several transition metal azide complexes are known to be light-sensitive and 
undergo photosubstitution and photoreduction reactions, the iodide ligands in the 
aforementioned complexes were substituted for azide ligands to prepare a second generation 
of photoactivatable platinum(IV) prodrugs. The earliest example was trans-
[Pt(N3)2(CN)4]2−, which upon irradiation into the 302 nm LMCT band led to trans 
elimination of the azide ligands via azidyl radical formation and reduction to 
platinum(II).395 The two radicals can rapidly decompose in aqueous solution to produce 
molecular nitrogen. This process prevents re-oxidation of the platinum center, unlike 
halogen-based radicals that do not decompose in water and instead interact with the metal 
center to regenerate the starting material. Early biologically active platinum(IV)-diazide 
complexes were prepared with the aizde ligands disposed cis to one another, trans to 
ammine or ethylenediamine non-leaving groups, and cis to axially-coordinated hydroxide 
ligands (Chart 17).396 Unlike the diiodo-platinum(IV) complexes, the azide-bearing 
complexes were stable toward hydrolysis for up to 90 days and did not react readily with 
Johnstone et al.
Page 31
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

glutathione, in the dark, over the course of several weeks. Sophisticated NMR and 
biophysical experiments showed that photoreduction was dependent on the non-leaving 
groups present and the wavelength of light used for irradiation.397,398 Irradiation with blue 
and UV light triggered the formation of many platinum(II) and platinum(IV) species, 
indicating that photoreduction was not the sole photochemical process taking place. Indeed, 
in this system, irradiation is thought to promote photosubstitution, photoisomerisation, and 
photoaquation. Cytotoxicity studies with 5637 human bladder cancer cells showed that 
irradiation significantly enhanced the potency of the complexes, from > 300 µM to ca. 50 
µM.397 Experiments with cisplatin-resistant 5637 cells indicated that the diazido-
platinum(IV) complexes displayed no cross-resistance with cisplatin. Although in vitro 
assays indicate that the diazido-platinum(IV) complexes can bind DNA upon irradiation and 
inhibit RNA synthesis,399 fluorescence microscopy studies showed none of the typical signs 
of apoptosis. This finding implies that the irradiated diazido-platinum(IV) complexes may 
induce cell death in a manner different from cisplatin.
Diazido-platinum(IV) complexes containing azide ligands in a trans arrangement displayed 
more favorable electronic properties than their cis congeners (Chart 17).398,400 For instance, 
within the [Pt(N3)2(OH)2(NH3)2] series, the LMCT band was shifted toward the visible 
region for the trans isomer, allowing activation with tissue-penetrating light. Also, 
trans,trans,trans-[Pt(N3)2(OH)2(NH3)2] is stable under biological conditions and upon 
irradiation with red light binds readily to DNA bases and induces toxicity in human HaCaT 
keratinocytes to a degree similar to cisplatin. Impressive phototoxicity was also observed 
against cisplatin-resistant cell lines. More recently, diazido-platinum(IV) complexes with 
higher photocytotoxicity have been prepared by replacing one or two NH3 ligands with 
pyridine, methylamine, or thiazole (Chart 17).401–403 These complexes are resistant to 
hydrolysis and reduction in the dark and only become active upon irradiation with UVA or 
blue light. The photolysis products are highly toxic toward cancer cells and display no cross-
resistance with cisplatin in ovarian carcinoma cells. Toxicity is attributed to the formation of 
a novel combination of mono- and bi-functional DNA adducts, primarily with guanine and 
cytosine, that unwind DNA. In depth biophysical studies showed that the trans,trans,trans-
[Pt(N3)2(OH)2(methylamine)(pyridine)] complex induced oxidation of guanine upon 
irradiation.404 This unexpected result is thought to arise from the reaction of singlet oxygen 
and platinum-nitrene intermediates. Extensive fluorescence experiments ruled out singlet 
oxygen generation from dissolve dioxygen or water. The most plausible source of singlet 
oxygen was the axially coordinated hydroxide groups. Guanine oxidation is a form of 
mutagenic DNA damage and so this process could be a contributing factor in the mechanism 
of action of trans-diazido-platinum(IV) complexes. As singlet oxygen generation and 
subsequent guanine oxidation do not require any exogenous source of oxygen in this system, 
it could be applied to target cancer cells that reside in hypoxic niches.
8. Nanodelivery of platinum(IV) complexes
As described above, one prominent paradigm in the design of platinum(IV) anticancer 
agents is that of a prodrug bearing equatorial ligands identical to those of a platinum(II) 
complex with established anticancer activity and axial ligands chosen to either modulate the 
physicochemical properties of the compound or confer additional biological activity. The 
Johnstone et al.
Page 32
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

main impetus for altering the physicochemical properties of the complex is the attendant 
change that occurs in pharmacological activity. An alternative motive that guides the 
development of some platinum(IV) prodrugs is the desire to incorporate the complex into a 
drug delivery device, particularly those with nanoscale dimensions.
Nanodelivery of biologically active agents is a blossoming field at the intersection of 
materials science, engineering, medicine, and chemistry. The advantages to be gained from 
any drug delivery system, macroscopic or nanoscale, include the ability to reduce the 
systemic dose but increase the amount of active agent that reaches the target site. A needle 
used to inject a drug intratumorally is an example of a macroscopic drug delivery system. 
Broadly defined, nanoscale drug delivery is the use of any object with dimensions in the 
nanometer regime to transport pharmaceutically active agents. Nanoparticles can often be 
engineered to have properties such as sustained circulation, affording any cargo that they 
transport an enhanced retention in the bloodstream.405 In the nanodelivery of anticancer 
agents, the main advantages of using nanoparticles relates to their ability to target tumor 
tissue in either an active or passive manner.406,407 Active targeting can be realized in a 
manner similar to that described above for small molecules. If the surface of the nanoparticle 
is decorated with a ligand for a receptor expressed selectively on the surface of cancer cells, 
then the particle is more likely to be taken up by those cells via receptor-mediated 
endocytosis.408 Multivalent effects that arise from the presence of multiple targeting unit on 
the surface of a nanoparticle can also enhance this mode of uptake.409 Passive targeting 
arises directly from the ability of nanoscale object in sustained circulation to accumulate in 
tumor tissue over time. This phenomenon, known as the enhanced permeation and retention 
(EPR) effect, occurs because the tumor vasculature is inherently leaky and the tumor tissue 
is poorly irrigated by the lymphatic system (Figure 6).410 As a result, nanoparticles with 
dimensions in the 50–200 nm range can readily extravasate into the tumor interstitial space 
(permeation) and remain there (retention) releasing their contents into the extracellular space 
of the tumor microenvironment or being taken up by cancer cells.
One broad strategy in the nanodelivery of platinum anticancer agents involves the use of 
platinum(IV) synthons similar to those used to conjugate platinum(IV) centers to peptides or 
bioactive small molecules, as described above. In particular, cisplatin prodrugs with axial 
succinate ligands have enabled the functionalization of a variety of nanoscale objects using 
simple ester- and amide-bond forming reactions. A range of different platinum(IV) 
complexes and nanomaterials have been used for this purpose.405,409,412 The following is a 
review of the sytems that have appeared in the peer-review literature grouped according to 
the nanomaterial that is used as the delivery vector.
8.1. Carbon-based materials
Carbon nanotubes have been extensively investigated as drug delivery vehicles and a 
number of platinum(IV) prodrug-containing constructs have been prepared.413 One early 
example of such platinum(IV) prodrug delivery was the use of single walled carbon 
nanotubes (SWCNTs) to ferry a cytotoxic platinum payload into cancer cells.414 The 
SWCNTs were rendered biocompatible and water dispersible via the non-covalent binding 
of phospholipid-PEG-amine groups. The phospholipid interacted with the nanotube surface, 
Johnstone et al.
Page 33
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

the PEG chain acted as a spacer, and the pendent amine functional group provided a reactive 
handle through which to couple the pendent carboxylic acid of cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OEt)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] via an amide-bond forming reaction (Chart 18). 
An average of 65 platinum centers could be conjugated to each SWCNT. Fluorescence 
microscopy was used to confirm that cultured testicular cancer cells take up the SWCNTs 
conjugated to both the platinum(IV) prodrug and a fluorescent reporter molecule, and trap 
the nanotubes within endosomes. The platinum is then released into the rest of the cell. 
Subsequent studies with this nanotube system used the disuccinate complex, cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] to allow conjugation to not only the functionalized 
carbon nanotube, but also a targeting unit, folic acid (Chart 18).415 A number of human 
cancer cells, including those forming tumors in patients with ovarian, breast, lung, kidney, 
and colon cancer, overexpress the folate receptor. Indeed, immunohistochemical methods 
were used to establish that < 90% of ovarian cancers overexpress the folate receptor;416 a 
result which was more recently confirmed using a quantitative radioligand binding assay.417 
Inclusion of the targeting unit was able to selectively direct the platinum-bearing SWCNT 
longboats to FR+ human choriocarcinoma (JAR) and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (KB) cells 
as opposed to FR− human testicular carcinoma cells, which typically display marked 
sensitivity to cisplatin.415
In addition to conjugation to the nanotube surface, the internal cavities of these structures 
provide attractive opportunities for drug delivery. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs), which typically have larger internal diameters than SWCNTs, were loaded 
with the hydrophobic cisplatin prodrug cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CC6H5)2] via nano-
extraction over a period of multiple days (Chart 18).418,419 After extensive washing, the 
surface of the nanotubes bore no platinum, as confirmed by energy dispersive X-ray 
spectroscopy, but the tubes had been loaded with the platinum complex to a degree 
quantified by atomic emission spectroscopic measurements of incinerated samples. The 
construct did not release any platinum unless a reducing agent was present. Ascorbic acid, 
for instance, is capable of reducing the prodrug, reversing its hydrophobicity and allowing 
release of cisplatin. The activity of this construct was further enhanced by functionalizing 
the surface of the nanoparticle with a fluorescent rhodamine dye prior to loading with the 
prodrug.420 This dye served as a targeting agent, directing the nanotubes to mitochondria. 
Although unloaded rhodamine-functionalized multi-walled nanotubes had little effect on the 
viability of cultured cells and did not appear to disrupt mitochondrial function, 
coencapsulation of the cisplatin prodrug with axial benzoate ligands and 3-bromopyruvate, a 
compound used to perturb the altered metabolism of cancer cells,421 afforded enhanced 
anticancer activity in vitro. A decrease in the mitochondrial membrane potential was 
observed. In vivo studies of the biodistribution of the platinum-loaded multi-walled 
nanotubes without any surface modification revealed that, in mice, the platinum(IV)-loaded 
construct decreased levels of platinum in the liver and kidney as compared to treatment with 
cisplatin.422 Accumulation in the lungs, however, was increased. Analysis of histological 
slices and cytokine levels indicate that no inflammation or abnormal immune response 
occurred.
Johnstone et al.
Page 34
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

As mentioned above, multi-walled nanotubes were chosen for these encapsulation-based 
constructs because they typically have larger internal cavities than SWCNT. The explicit 
dependence of platinum(IV) prodrug release on the diameter of the MWCNTs was recently 
probed.423 Smaller MWCNTs, once loaded with the prodrug, release platinum more slowly, 
as expected given the smaller size of the opening through which it must diffuse in order to 
escape. In addition to delivering a prodrug that only releases cisplatin, dual-threat prodrugs 
can also be loaded into MWCNTs. A prodrug was designed that is capable of releasing one 
equivalent of doxorubicin for every equivalent of cisplatin released (Chart 18).424 This feat 
was achieved by forming an amide bond between the amine group of doxorubicin and the 
succinate of cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CC6H5)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)]. The final complex 
is sufficiently hydrophobic to be encapsulated within the nanotubes and importantly releases 
the two chemotherapeutic agents at relative concentrations close to those administered 
during combination chemotherapy. The integrin-targeting peptide c(RGDfK) was used to 
functionalize the nanotubes to provide an active targeting mechanism. One potential 
complication observed by the authors is that reduction of the platinum(IV) center does not 
release doxorubicin, but rather the succinyl amide derivative of the drug, which alters it 
subcellular distribution.
Carbon nanoparticles are a recent addition to repertoire of carbon-based nanoscale objects. 
This fluorescent material was first isolated as a side product in the arc-discharge synthesis of 
SWCNTs,425 but subsequent studies have led to their production by a variety of methods 
including the hydrothermal treatment of orange juice426 and nitric acid digestion of candle 
soot.427 Upon surface passivation, these materials exhibit striking photophysical 
properties428 and they have been exploited for a variety of biological applications.429 Very 
recently, the photoactivatable platinum(IV) azide complex cis, trans, cis-
[Pt(N3)2(OH)2(NH3)(3-NH2py)] was conjugated to a carboxylate-functionalized carbon 
nanoparticle (Chart 18).430 Folic acid was also conjugated to the particle via a 
diaminoethane linker. These surface modifications did not alter the structure of the 
nanoparticles as revealed by transmission electron microscopy and photoelectron 
spectroscopy confirmed the elemental composition of the construct. UV irradiation leads to 
photoreduction of the platinum(IV) species, which was proposed to arise not just from direct 
population of the excited state of the platinum complex, but also via photoinduced electron 
transfer from the carbon nanoparticles. In vitro studies exploited the inherent luminescence 
of these nanoparticles to monitor preferential cellular uptake by FR+ cells. Cytotoxicity 
assays confirmed the capacity of this construct to kill cultured cancer cells upon irradiation 
with UV light.
A related carbon-based nanoparticle delivery system comprised PEGylated nanosized 
graphene oxide conjugated to cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] and an 
apoptosis sensing peptide.431 One motivation for using nanosized graphene oxide as the 
delivery platform was the established ability of this material to absorb near-IR light and 
release the energy as heat, a property that has been explored for photothermal therapy 
applications.432,433 In vivo studies involving a murine breast cancer xenograft model 
confirmed that near-IR irradiation of tumors following intravenous administration of the 
construct completely inhibited tumor growth.
Johnstone et al.
Page 35
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

8.2. Gold nanoparticles
Gold nanoparticles provide another nanodelivery platform to which platinum(IV) prodrugs 
can be covalently conjugated. The pendent carboxylate of a platinum(IV)-succinate complex 
similar to those described above can be conjugated via amide-bond-forming reactions to 
gold nanoparticles that are functionalized with thiolated, dodecylamine-terminated 28-mer 
oligonucleotides.434 The specific platinum complex delivered was cis,cis,trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] (Chart 19A) and the characteristic surface plasmon 
visible absorption band of the nanoparticles was used to confirm that they remained 
dispersed and did not aggregate. Fluorescence microscopy was used in conjunction with 
fluorescently labelled nanoparticles to monitor the progression of the constructs from 
vesicles to the cytosol. The R-C18 antibody, which was raised against the 1,2-d(GpG) 
intrastrand DNA cross-link,435 was then used to detect the formation of this cytotoxic 
adduct, confirming that the platinum released from the nanoparticle construct is able carry 
out the steps of the cell killing mechanism of cisplatin.
Another system employing gold nanoparticles involved the use of a cisplatin prodrug 
functionalize with an axial ligand bearing a terminal adamantly unit capable of interacting 
with β-cyclodextrin. Using this characteristic non-covalent interaction, cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2C(O)NHCH2(C10H14))] (Chart 19C) was loaded onto gold 
nanoparticles that had been surface-functionalized with thiolated β-cyclodextrin.436 The 
host-guest interaction was studied in solution using NMR spectroscopy but in vitro 
cytotoxicity studies revealed that the nanoconstruct was less active than cisplatin itself, 
perhaps reflecting an inhibition of the platinum(IV) reduction event that is required for 
cyctoxicity.
Glutathione-stabilized gold nanoparticles were used to prepare a platinum-bearing, targeted 
drug delivery system. The use of glutathione as the surface passivating agent of the 
nanoparticles allow for conjugation to the pendent reactive groups of this tri-peptide. The 
cisplatin prodrug cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] (Chart 19B) was 
conjugated to the surface, as was the neuropilin-1 receptor-targeting peptide, CRGDK. In 
vitro studies confirmed that delivery was enhanced in cells that express high levels of the 
neuropilin-1 receptor as compared to those that express low levels of it.
Gold nanorods, particles with one dimension significantly longer than those of gold 
nanoparticles, have also been investigated for their drug delivery capabilities.437 The 
cisplatin prodrug cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] (Chart 19A) was 
conjugated to the surface of PEGylated gold nanorods, whose PEG chains were terminally 
modified with amine groups.438 The conjugation afforded a stable construct, as determined 
by probing the surface plasmon electronic absorption, and provided enhanced cellular 
uptake and cytotoxicity in cultured cancer cells. Subsequent studies showed that this 
nanoparticle delivery strategy circumvents resistance that arises from lowered expression 
levels of the copper transporter CTR1 and decreases the interaction of the platinum 
complexes with biological deactivation agents, such as metallothionein and glutathione.439
Johnstone et al.
Page 36
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

8.3. Inorganic nanoparticles
Conjugation of a platinum(IV) prodrug to a nanoparticle can provide benefits that extend 
beyond those simply related to delivery. The photoactivatable trans platinum(IV) complexes 
described above are often limited by the need to absorb high energy light in order to be 
activated, although as described earlier, advancements have been made in this regard 
through judicious ligand choice. In an alternative strategy, trans, trans, trans-[Pt(N3)2(NH3)
(py)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] (Chart 20A) was conjugated to a core-shell upconversion 
nanoparticle.440 These nanoparticles, composed of a core of NaYF4 doped with 
ytterbium(III) and thulium(III) surrounded by a shell of NaGdF4 doped with ytterbium(III), 
are capable of absorbing 980 nm laser light and emitting radiation with wavelengths of 291, 
346, and 363 nm. Irradiation of buffered suspensions of the platinum-bearing, PEGylated 
nanoparticle construct for only 30 min was able to release approximately half of the 
conjugated platinum. In vitro cyctotoxicity studies confirmed that the platinum released by 
980 nm irradiation is competent to kill cancer cells. In a mouse xenograft model of murine 
hepatocarcinoma, tumor-bearing mice received an intratumoral injection of the nanoparticle 
construct. The tumor site was then irradiated with no light, UV-light, or 980 nm light. The 
UV light is capable of activating the platinum complex but has weaker tissue penetration 
than the near-IR light, which is able to activate the platinum(IV) complex via upconversion 
luminescence. Consequently, the tumors in the mice irradiated with UV light grew to a 
greater extent than those irradiated with 980 nm light. In fact, the average tumor size in the 
latter group did not increase, even over the course of two weeks. In a related system, silica-
coated upconversion nanoparticles of NaYF4 doped with ytterbium(III) and thulium(III) 
were conjugated to trans, trans, trans-[Pt(N3)2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)(py)2] (Chart 20B), 
through a bridging peptide, as well as a fluorescent apoptosis-sensing peptide.441 Near-IR 
irradiation of this construct was able to activate the platinum(IV) prodrug and induce 
apoptosis in cultured cancer cells that were both cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-resistant.
Platinum(IV) prodrugs with cis or trans azide ligands are designed to exhibit photoreactivity, 
which has been exploited in the constructs described above. It is widely known, however, 
that many platinum(IV) complexes without azide or iodide ligands are sensitive to 
photodecomposition. In order to exploit this reactivity as a route toward photoactivation of 
general platinum(IV) prodrugs, quantum dots were investigated as photosensitizers. 
Quantum dots, semi-conductor nanoparticles, have exceptional electronic properties that 
vary with the size of the nanostructure and have been extensively explored as 
photosensitizers for photodynamic therapy.442 In a proof-of-concept study, PtCl4(bpy), 
where byp is 2,2′-bipyridine, was suspended in organic solvent with CdSe/ZnS core-shell 
quantum dots and irradiated with 530 nm light.443 PtCl2(bpy) was released as monitored by 
electronic absorption spectroscopy. 1H NMR spectroscopic measurements indicate that the 
hydrophobic platinum complex interacts with the hydrophobic surface of the quatum dots 
and the authors suggest that this interaction facilitates a photoinduced electron transfer from 
the dot to the platinum complex.
To render the system more biologically relevant, micelles packed with the CdSe/ZnS 
quantum dots were prepared by addition of phospholipids and PEG2000.444 The 
photosensitized reduction of a more relevant prodrug, namely cis, cis, trans-
Johnstone et al.
Page 37
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] (Chart 20C), was investigated. As in the earlier study, 
NMR spectroscopic measurements revealed an interaction between the prodrug and the 
quantum dots. When a colloidal suspension of the self-assembled micellar structures in an 
aqueous solution of the prodrug was irradiated with either 480 or 630 nm light, the 
platinum(IV) complex was reduced with loss of the two axial ligands. Control studies 
confirmed that the presence of the quantum dots was required for efficient photoreduction 
and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic studies of the platinum 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 peaks 
confirmed that after irradiation the platinum was pesent in the 2+ oxidation state. In vitro 
cytotoxicity assays showed that neither the prodrug (IC50 ≈ 500 µM) nor the quantum dot-
filled micelles alone displayed significant toxicity but that nanomolar concentrations of the 
dots combined with irradiation led to an IC50 of 25 µM. Extensive theoretical calculations 
were carried out to probe the mechanism photoactivation of cisplatin prodrugs by quantum 
dots. The results were consistent with a model in which the platinum(IV) complex interacts 
with the nanoparticle surface and computation of the electronic coupling between the donor 
and acceptor indicates that the electrons injected into the platinum(IV) complex produce an 
excited state that leads specifically to dissociation of the succinate ligands.445
Although we have not found any reports of platinum(IV) prodrugs conjugated to quantum 
dot drug-delivery vehicles, we anticipate that such a development is forthcoming. The 
authors of these quantum dot photoactivation studies, have however, prepared a lanthanide 
upconversion nanoparticle construct in which cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] (Chart 20C) is conjugated to a phospholipid-
functionalized PEG chain. This platinated polymer was used to prepare stable aqueous 
suspensions of thulium(III)-doped NaYF4:Yb(III) upconversion nanoparticles that are 
functionalized with the platinum(IV) complex.446 Irradiation of this construct with 980 nm 
light not only led to release of succinate, as expected because of the photolabilization of the 
axial ligands, but also reduced all of the platinum centers to the platinum(II) oxidation state 
as determined by XPS.
Upconversion nanoparticles have also been used as a nanodelivery vehicle in which the 
lanthanide-based luminescence is not implicated in the release or activity of the platinum 
agent. A cisplatin-releasing platinum(IV) prodrug was conjugated to the surface of a 
poly(ethyleneimine)-coated NaYF4 nanoparticle doped with ytterbium(III) and erbium(III) 
via a succinate axial ligand.447 The nanoparticle was further functionalized with a folic acid 
targeting group. Cellular uptake of the nanoparticles was monitored using the inherent 
luminenscent properties of the nanoparticles and cisplatin was released upon intracellular 
reduction.
Hydrophobic iron oxide nanoparticles can be encapsulated in gelatin to enhance their water 
solubility. The amine functionalities on gelatin allowed the platinum (IV) prodrug cis, cis, 
trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] (Chart 20C) to be conjugated to the surface along 
with a fluorescent marker, fluorescein isothiocyanate.448 Release of platinum was not 
explicitly measured but rather was inferred from the photometrically quantitated release of 
the fluorophore. The release could be enhanced by the presence of an undefined pancreatic 
enzyme, which we suppose to be trypsin. The superparamagnetic properties of the 
Johnstone et al.
Page 38
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

nanoparticles could be used to generate T2-weighted magnetic resonance images showing 
contrast in the tumor region following intratumoral injection.
Layered double hydroxides are inorganic materials in which positively charged layers are 
interspersed with loosely associated charge-balancing anions.449 These anions in the 
interlayer space can often be readily exchanged. Indeed, cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2] (Chart 20C) was loaded into layered double hydroxide 
nanoparticles of the formula [Mg2+0.66Al3+0.34(OH)2][Cl− 0.34]·2.7H2O simply by 
incubating the material in an pH 8 aqueous solution of the prodrug for one day. Platinum 
loading did not change the morphology of the particles, although it did cause an approximate 
doubling in the average diameter of the particles as determined by dynamic light scattering. 
Platinum incorporation was measured using atomic absorption spectroscopy and a slight 
decrease in the zeta potential of the material was taken as corroborating evidence of the 
inclusion of the negatively-charged succinate-bearing prodrug into the material. The 
nanoparticle construct was more effective at killing cancer cells than cisplatin alone and the 
former demonstrated reduced toxicity in non-cancerous immortalized cell lines. Mechanistic 
studies confirmed that the construct acted via a mechanism analogous to that of cisplatin.
8.4. Coordination Polymers
In an alternative strategy, the disuccinate complex described above in the preparation of the 
folate-targeted SWCNT was used to create coordination polymers that precipitated from 
solution as nanoparticles.450 The unit cross-linking the carboxylate functional groups of 
different platinum complexes was the Tb3+ ion (Chart 21A). ICP-MS and thermal 
gravimetric analysis measurements confirmed that the empirical formula of the coordination 
polymer was Tb2(PtIV)3(H2O)12 where PtIV represents cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2]. The stability of the nanoparticles in suspension could 
be significantly enhanced with a silica shell coating. Moreover, a silyl-derived c(RGDfK) 
could be grafted to the silica surface of the coated nanoparticles, which targeted the 
construct to cells that express the αVβ3 integrin, such as HT-29, preferentially over those 
that do not, such as MCF-7.
A variation on this theme appeared in the report of nanoscale coordination polymers formed 
from platinum(IV) prodrugs bearing pendent phophonates and Zn2+ ions.451 The 
platinum(IV) prodrugs featured either a cisplatin or oxaliplatin equatorial core and axial 
phosphonylcarbamate ligands. The phosphonate moiety permits self-assembly with Zn2+ to 
form the extended coordination polymer network which precipitates from solution in 
nanoparticulate form (Chart 21B). The particles were stabilized and rendered biocompatible 
by PEGylation using a phospholipid, cholesterol, and a PEGylated phospholipid. 
Fluorescently labelled analogues of these particles were observed to enter into the cell by 
fluorescence microscopy and in vitro experiments with cultured cancer cells confirmed the 
ability of the construct to induce the DNA damage characteristic of the parent platinum 
drugs and trigger apoptosis. Further in vitro studies with inhibitors of endocytosis and 
fluorescent dyes that selectively localize to endosomal and lysosomal compartments 
confirmed that uptake occurred through energy-dependent endocytotic processes. 
Pharmacokinetics studies in mice revealed that the nanoparticle formulation provided blood 
Johnstone et al.
Page 39
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

circulation times that were more than 40-fold greater than those of the parent drugs. In 
mouse xenograft models of non-small cell lung cancer and pancreatic cancer, these 
constructs were able to inhibit tumor growth significantly more than the parent platinum(II) 
drugs. In a very recent development in this delivery platform, the cisplatin-delivering 
nanoconstruct was prepared using an alternative lipid to afford nanoparticles with an overall 
positive charge concentrated near the surface of the particle but below the surface of the 
outer PEG layer.452 Negatively charged siRNAs were then loaded into the particle via 
electrostatic interactions. Three distinct genes were targeted by the siRNAs for silencing: 
survivin, bcl-2, and p-gp. The construct demonstrated the ability to release active platinum 
agents and the siRNAs in a controlled fashion, all of which were able to carry out their 
intended biological functions in vitro. In a mouse xenograft model of ovarian cancer, the co-
delivery enhanced the anticancer activity of the platinum agent as evidence by inhibition of 
tumor growth, reduced expression of the silenced proteins in tumor tissue, and increased 
evidence of apoptosis in tumor cells.
8.5. Metal-organic frameworks
As an extension of the Pt-Tb coordination polymer work that was described above, platinum 
conjugates of nanosized metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) were prepared.453 In these 
instances, the platinum complex does not act as a structural component of the coordination 
polymer, which is instead formed from a first-row transition metal and an amino-
functionalized terephthalate. The non-platinum metal center combines with the aromatic 
dicarboxylate to form the extended 3-dimensional MOF structure. Iron was used to form a 
nanoparticulate MOF and the same platinum-(IV) prodrug used to for the initial SWCNT 
conjugates, cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OEt)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)], was attached to the 
pendent amine following activation with 1,1-carbonyldiimidazole.454 As with the Pt-Tb 
coordination polymer, aqueous stability of the nanoparticles was enhanced with a coating of 
amorphous silica, although an alternative chemistry using Na2SiO3 as the silica source 
needed to be employed to avoid decomposition of the particles. The silica shell also 
provided a more controlled release of platinum from the particle. No significant 
enhancement in activity was obtained, however, in in vitro cytotoxicity tests. In a 
subsequent iteration of this drug-delivery strategy, a zirconium(IV) containing MOF from 
the UiO series was prepared using aminotriphenyldicarboxylate.455 The similarity of the 
organic bridging ligands to the amino-functionalized terephthalate in the system above, 
would suggest that the nanoscale MOF could be post-synthetically modified with cis, cis, 
trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OEt)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] using amide bond forming reactions, but the 
authors instead simply incubate the platinum complex with the MOF to load the 
nanostructure through non-covalent interactions. This mode of encapsulation was confirmed 
using 1H NMR spectroscopy. The survivin/Bcl-2/P-gp siRNA cocktail described above was 
also loaded into the nanoscale MOF and the encapsulation was proposed to proceed through 
coordination of the sugar-phosphate backbone to the zirconium centers. Protection of the 
encapsulated siRNAs from degradation by nucleases was observed and the combined 
delivery of the platinum agent and the siRNAs provided a chemotherapeutic enhancement of 
over 10-fold in in vitro cytotoxicity assays.
Johnstone et al.
Page 40
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

8.6. Polysiloxane
One research effort that seeks to maintain the philosophy of using the platinum(IV) prodrug 
as an integral constituent of the polymer that forms the nanoparticle, while improving upon 
the stability of the systems that feature the nanoscale coordination polymers, involves the 
preparation of polysilsesquioxane nanoparticles.456 These nanoparticles are formed from the 
anionic reverse microemulsion base-catalyzed sol-gel polymerization of platinum(IV) 
prodrugs bearing axial ligands with pendent trialkoxysilanes (Chart 22). The nanoparticles 
functioned as effective controlled-release agents of oxaliplatin, releasing 80% of the 
encapsulated payload over the course of two days upon incubation with cysteine. 
PEGylation was used to enhance biocompatibility of the nanoparticles, which were further 
functionalized with anisamid to target the sigma receptor. This opioid receptor is 
overexpressed on the surfaces of many types of cancers cells.457 An integrin-targeting RGD 
unit could also be attached to the nanoparticle surface. These targeting agents were 
successful in enhancing efficacy both in vitro and in vivo. A cisplatin-delivering analogue of 
this construct was also developed and tested for its ability to improve upon cisplatin-
mediated tumor growth inhibition when administered in conjunction with radiation 
therapy.458 In vitro and in vivo studies, the latter in a xenograft model of non-small cell lung 
cancer, suggest that this cisplatin-delivering polysilsesquioxane nanoparticle can offer 
significant improvements over conventional chemoradiation therapy using cisplatin.
8.7. Polymeric micelles
A highly successful platform that has been exploited in the nanodelivery of platinum(IV) 
prodrugs comprises polymeric micellar nanoparticles that are formed from the self-assembly 
of amphiphilic block copolymers. When an organic solution of such polymers, which 
contain a hydrophobic block and a hydrophilic block, is added to water, the hydrophobic 
portions of the chains cluster to form a hydrophobic core, which is surrounded by a shell 
formed from the hydrophilic portions of the copolymer chains. If this self-assembly process 
occurs in the presence of a hydrophobic drug-like molecule, it can be encapsulated within 
the core of the nanoparticle, which then serves as a controlled-release drug delivery device. 
As opposed to the constructs described above, in which the axial ligands of the platinum(IV) 
prodrug were chosen so as to permit covalent conjugation, the axial ligands of the prodrug 
can be used to tune hydrophobicity, a key parameter in nanoencapsulation. An alternative 
strategy, more akin to that used in the delivery devices described in previous subsections, 
involves covalent conjugation of the platinum(IV) complex to the polymer backbone and 
subsequent nanoparticle formation. Examples of these two strategies will now be treated 
sequentially.
8.7.1. Polymer micelles: Non-covalent encapsulation—One copolymer system that 
has been extensively investigated is poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)-block-poly(ethylene 
glycol) or PLGA-PEG (Chart 23), in which the statistical copolymer PLGA serves as the 
hydrophobic block and PEG as the hydrophilic block. PLGA is a biocompatible, 
biodegradable polymer that is approved for use by the FDA for a variety of biomedical 
devices.459 The safety of PEG has long been investigated and the FDA has declare that it is 
generally recognized as safe.460,461 PLGA nanoparticles have been widely explored for drug 
delivery applications459 and the current popularity of the PLGA-PEG block copolymer has 
Johnstone et al.
Page 41
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

led a number of commercial vendors to offer PLGA-PEG with a variety of block sizes and 
variations in the relative ratio of lactic acid to glycolic acid in the PLGA block. These 
parameters influence the properties of the nanoparticles formed from the polymer and recent 
work has even investigated the influence that the ordering of the lactic acid and glycolic acid 
units within the PLGA block.462,463
The platinum(IV) prodrug cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CH2 CH2CH3)2] (Chart 
23A), which bears an equatorial cisplatin core and axial hexanoate ligands, was successfully 
encapsulated within the hydrophobic core of a nanoparticle formed from PLGA-PEG-
COOH. This polymer is a derivative of PLGA-PEG in which the exposed end of the PEG 
chain is functionalized with a carboxylic acid. This pendent carboxylic acid was then used to 
conjugate a targeting unit to the surface of the platinum-loaded nanoparticle. An RNA 
aptamer that could recognize the prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) was used and 
provided selective targeting of the construct to LNCaP prostate cancer cells that abundantly 
express this membrane protein. PSMA is highly expressed in many prostate tumors, 
particularly in the metastatic and hormone-refractory forms.464 Fluorescence microscopy 
confirmed that the construct was taken up by endocytosis and immunofluorescence imaging 
using the R-C18 antibody confirmed formation of 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand DNA cross-links. 
The construct exhibited sub-micromolar IC50 values in cultured human prostate cancer cells. 
Subsequent studies with Swiss albino mice and Sprague Dawley rats demonstrated that this 
prodrug-loaded nanoparticle construct has enhanced pharmacokinetics, biodistribution, and 
tolerability as compared to cisplatin.465 Using a murine model of prostate cancer in which 
BALB/c nude mice were injected with cultured LNCaP cells to form a subcutaneous 
xenograft, the nanoparticle construct was able to provide an equivalent degree of reduction 
in tumor size as a three-fold higher molar dose of cisplatin. The enhanced activity was 
attributed to a combination of passive targeting of tumor tissue via the EPR effect, active 
targeting of the PMSA expressing LNCaP cells by the aptamer conjugated to the surface, 
and prolonged residence of the platinum species in the blood. This nanoparticle platform 
was also used to prepare platinum-loaded constructs that were functionalized with the cyclic 
pentapeptide c(RGDfK).466 This unit allowed the nanoparticles to target angiogenic blood 
vessels in an orthotopic breast cancer xenograft model. In this model, the nanoparticle was 
more efficacious and better tolerated than cisplatin.
A series of complexes of the form cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2C(CH2)nCH3)2] (Chart 
23A), of which the hexanoate complex described above is a member, was prepared to 
systematically investigate the effect of the length of the methylene chain of the alkyl 
carboxylate axial ligands on nanoencapsulation.467 This study revealed that increasing the 
length of the chain increases platinum loading into the nanoparticle but also increases the 
propensity for aggregation and macroscopic precipitation. An optimal balance was struck 
using a 4:6 w/w mixture of the PLGA-PEG polymer and the decanoate complex 
cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2C(CH2)8CH3)2]. This complex was then used as the prodrug 
component of a nanoparticle platform designed to deliver cisplatin and siRNAs capable of 
suppressing the function of REV1 and REV3L, which are involved in the process of error-
prone translesion DNA synthesis.468 Such translesion synthesis can contribute to cisplatin 
resistance in tumors.469 The nanoparticle construct was formed from an interaction of 
Johnstone et al.
Page 42
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

PLGA-PEG, a cationic lipid, the platinum prodrug, and the siRNA. The PLGA block 
interacted with the cationic lipid to form a polymer matrix in which the prodrug was 
suspended and the PEG block provided an outer shell. The nanoparticles were formulated 
using a double emulsion strategy (vide infra) that allowed the PLGA-lipid matrix to 
surround an aqueous core in which the siRNA molecules were dissolved. Sustained release 
of the platinum and RNA was achieved and the released siRNAs were able to decrease 
expression of their target genes both in vitro and in vivo. In a LNCaP xenograft model, 
inclusion of the siRNA was able to successfully render the tumors more susceptible to 
platinum-based therapy.
A platform for preparing platinum(IV) prodrugs that can be readily conjugated to another 
chemical moiety using strain-promoted azide-alkyne cycloaddition, one of the so-called 
“copper-free click chemistries,” was recently developed.470 As a proof of principle, a 
platinum(IV) prodrug with axial ligands displaying pendent azide units was coupled to a 
functionalized azadibenzocyclooctyne (ADIBO) (Chart 23D). The significant increase in 
lipophilicity upon reaction with the strained cyclooctyne prompted the authors to investigate 
the nanoencapsulation of this complex in PLGA-PEG-based nanoparticles. The ADIBO-
functionalized cisplatin prodrug encapsulated far better than the unmodified, azide-
terminated platinum complex. This platform also holds significant promise with regards to 
conjugation of platinum prodrugs to a variety of other nanodelivery devices, targeting units, 
bioactive molecules, and reported beacons. Indeed, coupling of the platinum(IV) azide-
bearing complex to a cyclooctyne-modified triphenylphosphonium salt afforded a 
platinum(IV) prodrug that targets the mitochondria.471 This complex was then encapsulated 
with a PLGA-PEG nanoparticle which was itself functionalized with a 
triphenylphosphonium salt. In vitro studies confirmed the ability of this construct to 
accumulate in the mitochondria of cultured cancer cells, disrupt their altered mitochondrial 
metabolism, and induce cell death. The ability of the triphenylphosphonium-derivatized 
nanoparticles to penetrate the blood-brain barrier led the authors to investigate the potency 
of this construct in neuroblastoma cells and they found that it was approximately 17-fold 
more active than cisplatin.
Instead of using synthetic high polymers, nanoparticles formed from polymers of natural 
origin have also been explored for the delivery of platinum(IV) prodrugs. The association of 
platinum(IV) complexes with discrete folded proteins will be dealt with below. Silk fibroin 
(Chart 23) is the fibrous protein component of the silk made by spiders, silkworks, and other 
insects. This biocompatible, biodegradable material has been successfully employed in a 
range of biomedical applications from sutures to three-dimensional tissue scaffolding,472,473 
and silk fibroin can be formed into nanoparticles for drug delivery.474 In order to improve 
upon an initial nanoparticle design in which cisplatin was loaded into silk fibroin 
nanoparticles via coordination of the platinum(II) complex to the polymer,475 a new 
construct was very recently reported in which the hydrophobic prodrug cis,cis,trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CC6H5)2] (Chart 23G) was encapsulated within such nanoparticles.476 
Unlike many of the other polymer-based delivery systems described here, the platinum 
loading is not accomplished simultaneously with nanoparticle formation, but rather a dried 
sample of preformed nanoparticles are suspended in DMSO solution of the platinum 
Johnstone et al.
Page 43
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

complex to load the prodrug into the nanoparticles. TEM images support the internalization 
of the nanoparticle constructs and in vitro assay indicate that the construct is effective at 
killing cultured cancer cells. Flow cytometric methods were used to carry out cell cycle 
analyses and propidium iodide straining assays that confirm a mechanism of action similar 
to that of cisplatin is operative.
Although increasing the lipophilicity of a platinum(IV) prodrug by increasing the 
hydrophobic character of the axial ligands is an effective way to influence 
nanoencapsulation, this strategy may not be applicable to dual-threat complexes in which the 
axial ligands, selected to elicit a particular biological response, render the complex 
hydrophilic. For instance, mitaplatin (Chart 23A) is relatively water soluble and does not 
readily encapsulate within PLGA-PEG using conventional nanoprecipitation techniques. 
Moreover, changing any of the ligands to increase lipophilicity could compromise the 
activity of the platinum(II) or DCA species released. Instead, an alternative encapsulation 
strategy, which had previously been employed to encapsulate hydrophilic species like 
proteins, was investigated.477 Using a water-in-oil-in-water double-emulsion solvent 
evaporation strategy, mitaplatin could be encapsulated within nanoparticles formed from 
PLGA-PEG.367 This nanoencapsulation formulation afforded mitaplatin an increased 
residence time in the bloodstream and decreased accumulation in the kidneys without 
negatively impacting anticancer activity in a mouse xenograft model of triple-negative 
breast cancer.
It is possible that a dual-threat complex may fortuitously have properties such that the axial 
ligands permit facile incorporation within the hydrophobic core of a polymeric micelle. Such 
is the case for canthaplatin (Chart 23B),478 a cisplatin prodrug in which the axial ligands are 
derivatives of the protein phosphatase 2A inhibitor demethylcantharidin.479 The Boc-
protected pipirazinyl groups on the axial canthaplatin-derived ligands allow the prodrug to 
be readily encapsulated in PLGA-PEG nanoparticles affording a construct that is taken up 
via endocytosis, decreases the efficiency of DNA repair by inhibiting protein phosphatase 
2A, and releases cisplatin. The enhancement of the efficacy of the cisplatin as a result of the 
inhibited DNA repair was confirmed in vitro and in vivo with a mouse xenograft model of 
lung cancer.
In another instance, a cisplatin prodrug in which a paclitaxel derivative was installed at one 
axial position through a platinum-coordinated glutaric acid (Chart 23F), but no significant 
enhancement over co-treatment with the un-encapsulated species was observed.480 The 
platinum(IV) prodrug VAAP (see Section 8) was encapsulated within the a 
poly(caprolactone)-PEG polymeric nanoparticle (Chart 23E).362 The hydrophobic valproate 
axial ligands not only permit encapsulation, but upon reductive release are capable of acting 
as histone deacetylase inhibitors. This enzyme inhibitory activity, which can potentiate the 
activity of cisplatin,481 was observed in in vitro experiments using VAAP, as described 
above. In mice, the nanoparticle formulation significantly enhanced retention of platinum in 
the bloodstream. Murine xenograft studies with a human lung cancer model, did not reveal 
any significant enhancement in tumor reduction in the nanoparticle-treated branch as 
compared to tumor-bearing animals treated with un-encapsulated VAAP, but encapsulation 
Johnstone et al.
Page 44
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

did result in enhanced platinum accumulation in the tumor and reduced kidney toxicity, as 
assessed by histological analysis of renal tissue.
8.7.2. Polymer micelles: Covalent conjugation—Instead of relying on non-covalent 
interactions to associate a platinum complex with a polymer nanoparticle, the axial ligands 
of a platinum(IV) prodrug can be covalently linked to a polymer chain using well-
established coupling chemistry. The first example of covalent conjugation of a platinum(IV) 
complex to a polymer chain for subsequent formation of a polymeric micelle exploited the 
ability of a cisplatin prodrug with axial levulinate ligands to react with the end group of a 
hydrazine-terminated poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(L-lactic acid) (PLA-PEG).482 The 
hydrazine group caps the hydrophobic block and in the resulting platinated polymer the 
complex is linked to the macromolecule through a hydrazone. The polymer chains can self-
assemble into micelles with the platinum buried in the hydrophobic core. The rate of 
platinum release from the nanoparticle construct varied with pH because of the acid-lability 
of the hydrazone linkage and efficacy was demonstrated in vitro using cultured cancer cells.
In a very recent variant on this theme, the termini of the hydrophobic blocks of a PLA-PEG 
copolymer were cross-linked via esterification with the succinate ligands of cis, cis, trans 
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2].483 These conjugates formed micelles in aqueous 
solution that were observed to undergo a thermoreversible sol-gel transition, forming 
hydrogels at 37 °C. These semi-solids were capable of releasing platinum in a controlled 
fashion, without an initial burst, over the course of two months. The platinum is mainly 
released in a micellar form, which was shown to be taken up by endocytosis and 
demonstrates enhanced toxicity in cultured cancer cells as compared to cisplatin.
The use of platinum(IV) complexes with succinate axial ligands to conjugate prodrugs to the 
polymer backbone via ester- or amide-forming reactions is a recurring theme within this 
class of constructs. In the first report of this strategy, cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)
(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] was conjugated to a PLA derivative bearing pendent hydroxyl 
functional groups.484 Using hydrodynamic flow focusing,485 nanoparticles comprising a 
blend of this platinated polymer and PLGA-PEG-COOH were formed. If the nanoparticle 
formation was carried out in the presence of docetaxel, then this molecule was encapsulated 
within the hydrophobic core of the nanoparticles, affording a construct that can deliver two 
chemotherapeutics via orthogonal release mechanisms. The docetaxel is released by passive 
diffusion from the nanoparticle, whereas the stable covalent bond of the platinum complex 
to the polymer chain permits release of the platinum only upon reduction of the metal center. 
Surface modification of the assembled nanoparticle with a PSMA-targeting aptamer allowed 
for enhanced uptake by cultured prostate cancer cells. A similar construct was developed in 
which the drug delivered along with the platinum was irinotecan.486 A particularly low 
polydispersity among the nanoparticles was again achieved by carrying out the 
nanoprecipitation using microfluidic devices. Targeting with the PSMA aptamer, again 
allowed for enhanced cellular uptake in cells expressing this antigen. Inclusion of irinotecan 
in the particles provided an enhancement over nanoparticles containing only the cisplatin 
prodrug.
Johnstone et al.
Page 45
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A similar covalent conjugation strategy was used to prepare a nanoparticle construct that 
delivers the monofunctional complex phenanthriplatin.487 A platinum(IV) derivative of 
phenanthriplatin bearing a single pendent carboxylate was prepared and conjugated to the 
hydroxyl-modified PLA. Standard nanoprecipitation techniques were used to prepare 
nanoparticles of this platinated polymer blended with PLGA-PEG. Using in vitro assays, 
this nanoparticle construct was shown to protect the platinum species from deactivation by 
biological nucleophiles. In a mouse xenograft model of prostate cancer, the construct 
outperformed both treatment with an equimolar dose of a double-emulsion nanoparticle 
formulation of the parent platinum(II) complex, i.e. unmodified phenanthriplatin, and 
treatment with a 10-fold higher molar dose of cisplatin.
In the study described above in which PLGA-PEG particles were designed to release both 
cisplatin and docetaxel, the cisplatin prodrug was covalently conjugated to the polymer 
backbone and the docetaxel was non-covalently encapsulated within the nanoparticle core. 
In an alternative strategy, two separate polymer chains were covalently modified with 
different anticancer agents, an oxaliplatin prodrug bearing a pendent carboxylate and 
daunomycin.488 The former can be released by reduction and the latter by hydrolysis. The 
novel amphiphilic block copolymer used for this study was poly(lactide-co-2-methyl-2-
carboxyl-propylene carbonate)-block-poly(ethylene glycol). Composite nanoparticles were 
formed from combinations of the two polymer chains, with the ratio of the two anticancer 
agents tuned by changing the relative amounts of the two modified chains during 
nanoparticle formation. Facile variation of this ratio allowed the authors to readily 
interrogate synergistic effects in vitro and in vivo. A similar construct was investigated in 
which the platinum agent was a cisplatin prodrug and the second anticancer agent was a 
paclitaxel conjugate.489 This polymer platform was also be used to prepare a conjugate with 
cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCHCl2)], a platinum(IV) prodrug designed to release 
cisplatin and DCA, much like mitaplatin. This strategy provides an alternative to the double 
emulsion strategy described above to permit nanodelivery of the hydrophilic complex.490
Using the same poly(lactide-co-2-methyl-2-carboxyl-propylene carbonate)-block-
poly(ethylene glycol), a nanoparticle construct was prepared in which the platinum(IV) 
prodrug conjugated to the polymer backbone displays the photoactivatable cis-diazide 
motif.491 Fluorescence microscopy studies were used to confirm that the nanoparticles were 
taken up via endocytosis and the authors emphasize that this route of cellular uptake 
provides a means of circumventing resistance related to expression levels of copper 
transporters, proteins whose role in the activity of and resistance to cisplatin has been 
extensively studied.21 The particles, which are stable in the dark, exhibit fast release of 
platinum upon irradiation with UV light. A variety of pharmacokinetic parameters were 
evaluated in Chinese KM mice, which indicated that treatment with the nanoparticle 
construct followed by UV irradiation resulted in much lower systemic toxicity that treatment 
with cisplatin.
In addition to the diblock copolymers described above, a triblock amphiphilic copolymer 
was also developed to deliver platinum(IV) prodrugs as micellar nanoparticles. This 
polymer is non-toxic and biodegradable, comprising a methoxy-terminated poly(ethylene 
glycol) block, a poly(ε-caprolactone) block, and a poly(L-lysine) block.492,493 This polymer 
Johnstone et al.
Page 46
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

can be platinated with cis,cis,trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] through amide 
bond forming reactions with the lysine side chains and the platinated polymer self-assembles 
into micellar nanoparticles. These particles can release platinum(IV) complexes upon 
exposure to acidic conditions or platinum(II) complexes upon reduction. In vitro assays 
confirmed that the nanoparticles are taken up via endocytosis affording enhanced 
intracellular platinum accumulation and cytotoxicity. A series photoactivatable platinum(IV) 
complex with cis azide ligands trans to either cis amines or a chelating R, R-
diaminocyclohexane (DACH) were also conjugated to the polymer.494 These constructs 
were stable in the dark, but upon irradiation with UV light they released cytotoxic 
platinum(II) species. Following studies with cultured cancer cells that verified the light-
induced cytotoxic activity of the construct, the nanoparticle functionalized with cis,trans-
[Pt(DACH)(N3)2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)], the most active compound from the in vitro 
studies, was carried forward for testing in a xenograft model of murine hepatocarcinoma. 
Enhanced tumor growth inhibition was observed when mice were injected intratumorally 
with the construct and the tumor was irradiated with UV light for 1 h. An additional hour of 
UV irradiation was carried out 5 day post-injection. The combination of nanoparticle 
treatment and UV irradiation was found to cause less of an effect on body weight than 
treatment with an equivalent dose of oxaliplatin.
Using this same polymer system, a nanoparticle construct was developed that is capable of 
releasing carboplatin upon reduction of the platinum(IV) center.495 The carboplatin prodrug 
was attached to the polymer backbone through an axial succinate ligand. In the same report, 
an alternative method of nanoparticle-mediated co-delivery of cisplatin and DCA was 
described. As opposed to mitaplatin, which bears axial DCA ligands, a platinum(IV) 
complex was prepared by hydrogen peroxide oxidation of cis-[Pt(NH3)2(DCA)2]. 
Subsequent derivatization afforded an axial succinate, through which the complex could be 
tethered to the polymer backbone using amide bond forming reactions. An enhancement in 
the activity is reported as compared to the carboplatin delivering polymer or co-treatment 
with unencapsulated carboplatin and DCA, but this result is unsurprising given the great 
kinetic inertness of the chelating cyclobutanedicarboxylate ligand of carboplatin as 
compared to the monodentate carboxylate DCA. Dinulcear platinum complexes, analogous 
to those described in Section 4,496 were also delivered via covalent conjugation of the 
corresponding platinum(IV) prodrugs to the polymer backbone.497 Compounds with both 
ammine and R, R-DACH non-leaving group ligands were prepared bearing axial 
carboxylates. Coupling to the polymer was achieved though amide bond forming reactions 
with the lysine amines.
Very recently, another construct based on this polymer was reported.498 Camplatin, a 
platinum(IV) prodrug derived from oxidized cisplatin and camphoric anhydride, was 
conjugated to the pendent amine groups of the poly(L-lysine) block. Quantification of the 
mRNA levels of Bcl-2 and Bax, revealed that treatment with the nanoparticle encapsulated 
camplatin decreased production of these proteins in culture ovarian cancer cells.
Although micellar nanoparticles formed from amphiphilic block copolymers of the types 
described above appear to be stable enough to maintain their structural integrity and elicit 
characteristic biological responses, particularly in vivo, the classical theory of micelles states 
Johnstone et al.
Page 47
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

that in solution an equilibrium is present between the self-assembled structure and de-
assembled unimers. Chemical cross-linking of the polymer chain within the core or the shell 
can be carried out to improve micellar stability.499 Overly stable micelles, however, can 
prevent efficient release of encapsulated active agents, and so stimuli-responsive cross-
linked micelles have been developed that are able to release a cytotoxic payload upon, for 
instance, entry into the acidic microenvironment of the tumor.500 A platinum-delivering 
polymeric micelle based on a poly[(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl methacrylate)-co-(N-
methacryloxy-3-azidopropylamide)]-block-poly(N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide) 
block copolymer was prepared.501 The pendent azide groups were functionalized with both 
a platinum(IV) prodrug, cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CONHCH2CCH)], 
and a near-IR dye, cypate, for combination platinum/photothermal therapy. The attachment 
of the warheads to the polymer backbone was accomplished using Cu-catalyzed alkyne-
azide cycloaddition. The authors of the study described above in which strain-promoted 
alkyne-azide cycloaddition was used to functionalize platinum(IV) complexes noted that 
their use of the strain-promotion strategy was because of the propensity for Cu-catalyzed 
click reactions to reduce the platinum(IV) centers. In this instance, the successful use of the 
latter coupling strategy may stem from the use of pentamethyldiethylenetriamine as a Cu-
chelating agent. Chemical cross-linking of the cores of the micelles formed from these 
functionalized polymers was carried out using a cystamine cross-linker, producing a 
construct that is sensitive to reducing environments, such as the cytoplasm of cancer cells. In 
vitro studies confirmed the ability of the construct to release its cargo in a controlled fashion 
and elicit chemotherapy/photothermal therapy synergy.
The platinum complex itself can act as the chemical cross-linking agent. Following 
functionalization of the axial succinate ligands of cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CONHCH2CCH)2] with ethylenediamine, the platinum complex 
was used to cross-link the cores of polymeric micelles formed from poly(oligo(ethylene 
glycol)methyl ether methacrylate)-block-poly(styrene-co-3-isopropenyl-α,α-dimethylbenzyl 
isocyanate).502 The facile reaction between the isocyante groups on the polymer and the 
pendent amine groups of the platinum complex afforded controlled-release nanoparticles. 
The same complex was used without ethylenediamine functionalization to cross-link the 
core of the biodegradable polymer monomethoxyl poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(L-
lysine) via reaction of the lysine amine groups with the carboxylic acids of the prodrug.503 
Analogously, the core-cross-linked micelles formed from the triblock copolymer 
monomethoxyl poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly(ε-caprolactone)-block-poly(L-lysine) were 
also prepared.504
As a variation on tethering a platinum(IV) complex to a polymer backbone, the metal 
complex can itself act as a monomer for polymerization. In one instance, cis, cis, trans-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CONHCH2CCH)2] was used as a monomer for condensation 
polymerization with ethylenediamine or piperazine.505 The corresponding condensation 
with diols proved unfruitful, but reaction of cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)2] with a 
bifunctional anhydride, such as cyclobutane tetraacetic anhydride, was able to give 
polyesters that could be furthers PEGylated to greatly enhance water solubility. The lack of 
blocky character in these polymers precluded their self-assembly into micellar nanoparticle 
Johnstone et al.
Page 48
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

structures. Another example of this strategy was the use of a cisplatin prodrug with pendent 
norbornenyl units at the axial positions that could serve to cross-link norbornene-terminated 
PEG chains, some of which were functionalized with either camptothecin or doxorubicin.506 
The linkages to the three drug-derivatives were all chosen so as to release their payload 
under different circumstance, viz. reduction, hydrolysis, or UV-irradiation. The platform 
design also readily allows for variation in the relative amounts of the three different 
chemotherapeutics.
A less common motif for platinum(IV) delivery using polymer nanoparticles is that in which 
the platinum complexes are not buried within the particle, but rather are displayed on the 
surface in a manner somewhat analogous to that exhibited by the non-polymeric constructs 
described in this section (e.g. SWCNTs, gold nanoparticles, etc.). Conjugation of cis, cis, 
trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)2] to the succinate terminus of the amphiphilic molecule α-
tocopheryl-PEG1000-succinate, which is conceptually identical to conjugation of cis, cis, 
trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] to the hydrophilic portion of α-tocopheryl-
PEG1000, produces a polymer that can self-assemble into micelles that will present the 
platinum(IV) complex on its surface. As observed in many other systems, even though the 
platinum center is putatively attached to the nanostructure through a stable covalent linkage, 
a substantial burst release is observed followed by a longer period of more sustained 
controlled release. In a subsequent development, this nanoparticle platform was stabilized by 
addition of α-tocopheryl-PEG1000-succinylpoly(lactic acid). Inclusion of α-tocopheryl-
PEG1000-succinate in the formulation provides surface-exposed carboxylic acids to which 
the monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin) could be conjugated.507 This targeted 
nanoparticle, perhaps because of the difference in nanoparticle formation, shows a much 
more controlled release profile than its predecessor. The nanoparticle could also be prepared 
with docetaxel encapsulated. In in vitro assays the combination-delivering nanoparticle was 
more efficacious than either of the drugs in isolation.
8.8. Other supramolecular systems
The cisplatin-releasing platinum(IV) prodrug cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(OH)
(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] was conjugated to a phosphorylated oligopeptide that can act as a 
substrate for phosphatases.508 The molecule is designed to remain monomeric in circulation 
but upon entering the tumor, whose cells overexpress various phosphatases, enzyme-
catalyzed dephosphorylation will trigger self-assembly into supramolecular nanofibers. This 
self-assembly process is proposed to enhance retention of the prodrug at the site of disease. 
In vitro studies of the construct confirmed its ability to self-assemble into β-sheet-like 
structures following action of alkaline phosphatase. The hydrogel formed by these 
nanofibers provided controlled release of active platinum(II) species upon incubation with 
chemical reductants. In vitro cytotoxicity studies confirmed that the compound can kill 
cultured murine and human cancer cells via induction of apoptosis. Mouse xenograft studies 
with subcutaneously grown murine breast cancer tumors demonstrated that the construct 
exhibited enhanced tumor accumulation, comparable tumor growth inhibition, and lower 
systemic toxicity as compared to treatment with cisplatin.
Johnstone et al.
Page 49
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Supramolecular cages formed from metal center vertices and rigid organic linkers have long 
been investigated as for their interesting chemical properties.509 These constructs are related 
to the MOFs described above, but form discrete structures as opposed to extended networks. 
An octahedral hexanuclear cage was formed from six platinum(II) ethylenediammine units 
and four 2,4,6-tris(2-pyridyl)-s-triazine molecules (Figure 7). The metal centers form the 
vertices of octahedron and the triazine units cover four faces of the polyhedron. The 
remaining four faces are open and provide access to the interior of the structure. The 
platinum(IV) prodrug cis, cis, trans-[PtCl2(NH3)2(OC(O)NHC10H15)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)] 
(Figure 7) was designed to have one axial adamantyl unit and one trans succinate in order to 
act as a guest for the cage because four adamantyl groups can be loaded into the cage 
through the four open faces.510 The succinate ligand extends to the solvent and may provide 
enhanced water solubility and a reactive handle for further functionalization, although such 
functionalization was not explored in this proof-of-principle study. The host-guest complex 
exhibited significantly enhanced intracellular accumulation and DNA platination as 
compared to the un-encapsulated prodrug.
8.9. Proteins
In addition to the peptide targeting systems described in Section 6, entire proteins have been 
used as drug delivery devices. The α-helical right handed coiled coil (RHCC) is a 20 kDa 
portion of the tetrabrachion surface complex of Staphylothermus marinus.511 This 
extremophile colonizes exceedingly harsh environments, and the RHCC is correspondingly 
able to withstand extreme pH, boiling temperatures, high pressures, and high salt 
concentrations.512 The hydrophobic pockets of this tetramer were found to bind cisplatin 
and this platinum-loaded sell-assembled polypeptide structure was investigated as a drug-
delivery vehicle.513 The protein-based construct did not elicit a significant immune response 
in mice, but the short half-life of the construct posed a significant challenge to further 
development. The authors subsequently investigated the ability of platinum(IV) species to 
be delivered by this tetramer.514 The chemical identity of the platinum species used is not 
indicated in the paper but it is referred to as “PtCl4” and we surmise that it is cis-
[Pt(NH3)2Cl4] as an extension of the earlier cisplatin work. The construct is taken up by 
clathrin-mediated endocytosis and shown to be effective in propagated cell lines and in 
primary glioblastoma cells obtained from adult glioblastoma patients. Immunoblotting 
analyses indicated that apoptotic pathways were triggered by the construct. As compared to 
treatment with the un-encapsulated platinum(IV) complex, intratumoral injection of the 
construct was better able to inhibit the growth of subcutaneous xenograft and intracerebral 
orthotopic tumors in mice.
Serum albumin is the most abundant protein in human blood and any intravenously 
administered drug will inevitably encounter it. In many cases this interaction may serve to 
sequester and deactivate the compound. In an effort to capitalize on the ability of human 
serum albumin (HSA) to act as a drug delivery vehicle, a platinum(IV) prodrug was 
designed to mimic the form of the fatty acids that this protein is known to bind. The 
complex cis, cis, trans-[Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)(OC(O)NH(CH2)15)CH3] interacts 
with HSA in a non-covalent, well-defined manner (Figure 8).515 A 1:1 complex of the 
platinum(IV) prodrug and HSA forms spontaneously on mixing and is sufficiently robust 
Johnstone et al.
Page 50
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

that is can be purified by fast protein liquid chromatography. Fluorescence quenching and 
modelling studies suggest that the complex is buried beneath the surface of the protein and 
this encapsulation inhibits reduction by ascorbic acid. Significant enhancement in blood 
stability as compared to cisplatin or satraplatin was consequently realized.
9. Nanodelivery of platinum(II)
A great number of nanoconstructs designed to deliver platinum(II) complexes have also 
been described. These have recently been reviewed extensively by a number of different 
authors74,114,516–522 and so we will not give an exhaustive account of such constructs here. 
We would be remiss, however, if in a review of the next generation of platinum anticancer 
drugs we did not provide an overview of the significant clinical progress that has been made 
with certain macromolecular or self-assembled construct that directly incorporate 
platinum(II) species.
9.1. ProLindac
A number of platinated polymers have been prepared in which the leaving group ligands of 
either cisplatin/carboplatin or oxaliplatin have been replace by a chelating motif attached to 
the polymer backbone.520 In one such construct, the chloride ligands of cisplatin were 
replaced by an O-N chelate from the pendent tetrapeptide arms of a functionalized poly(N-
(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide) (HPMA), a hydrophilic, non-toxic, non-immunogenic 
polymer that persists for extended periods of time in circulation.523 The resulting platinum-
conjugate, AP5280, was enrolled in a Phase I clinical trial by Access Pharmaceuticals, but 
the lack of significant response led the company to discontinue its development.524 AP5346, 
also known as ProLindac, is the oxaliplatin analogue of this construct in which the platinum 
is chelated by an amidomalonate attached to the HPMA via a triglycine spacer.525 Following 
promising preclinical studies,526 ProLindac was used in a Phase I clinical trial in which 
treatment was tolerated well and patients experienced no significant impact on blood cell 
counts.527 A subsequent Phase I/II trial in patients with advanced ovarian cancer showed 
that ProLindac treatment was again tolerated well and able to elicit an effect similar to that 
of oxaliplatin alone.526 In the ProLindac treated patients, no signs of acute neurotoxicity 
were observed, a significant finding given that this toxicity is dose-limiting in most 
oxaliplatin regimens. A Phase II trial in which ProLindac and pactitaxel are together used 
the second-line treatment of pre-treated advanced ovarian cancer began in 2010.526 The 
complete results of this study have not yet been released.
9.2. Lipoplatin
Liposomes are self-assembled vesicular structures composed of a lipid bilayer. They are 
attractive vehicles for drug delivery because they can encapsulate hydrophilic compounds in 
their aqueous lumen or hydrophobic compounds within the bilayer itself.528 Surface 
functionalization with PEG can produce so-called Stealth® liposomes,529 which 
demonstrate enhanced circulation by avoiding clearance from the bloodstream. The typical 
size of liposomes, approximately 100 nm diameters, suggests that these objects can 
accumulate in tumor tissue via the EPR effect.530 Clinical validation of the liposomal drug 
delivery strategy was realized with the approval of a liposomal formulation of doxorubicin. 
Johnstone et al.
Page 51
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

More recently, a liposomal formulation of vincristine also received approval for use in the 
United States. The first liposomal formulation of cisplatin to be tested in clinical trials was 
initially developed by SEQUUS Pharmaceuticals. The earliest preclinical data for the 
construct, referred to either as SPI-77 or SPI-077, appear in a press release from 1996 and 
the first published clinical data appeared in 1998.531–533 The data acquired in Phase I and 
Phase II clinical trials, concluding in 2001, showed a lack of improved efficacy as compared 
to treatments using standard cisplatin.521 In that same year, however, another liposomal 
cisplatin preparation with a different formulation began clinical trials. Known as lipoplatin, 
this 110 nm diameter nanoparticle has an aqueous core loaded with cisplatin that is 
contained by a liposomal vesicle comprising soy phosphatidyl choline, cholesterol, 
dipalmitoyl phosphatidyl glycerol, and methoxy-poly(ethylene glycol)-distearoyl 
phosphatidylethanolamine (Figure 9).534
Lipoplatin was first validated in preclinical models and subsequently in a range of clinical 
studies including three Phase III trials. Lipoplatin has been used in a clinical setting on non-
small cell lung cancer but has also been investigated in cancers of the breast, pancreas, and 
head and neck. A recent review by the developers of lipoplatin provides a comprehensive 
overview of the clinical progress that this investigational drug has made.534 Most recently, 
the results of a Phase III clinical trial with 202 patients were analysed and the authors 
concluded that lipoplatin in combination with paclitaxel produces a response rate in non-
squamous NSCLC patients that statistically greater than treatment with cisplatin and 
paclitaxel. Moreover, nephrotoxicity, the dose-limiting toxicity of cisplatin, was greatly 
reduced. Regulon, the company developing lipoplatin has announced that the EMA has 
granted it approval to launch a Phase III clinical trial with 884 patients testing the efficacy of 
lipoplatin and pemetrexed versus cisplatin and pemetrexed as a first-line therapy against 
non-squamous non-small cell lung cancer. Two other Phase III trials are underway in 
Europe. One, started in 2006, is comparing lipoplatin and paclitaxel versus cisplatin and 
paclitaxel as front line treatment of advanced epithelial ovarian cancer. The other, launched 
in 2012, is investigating lipoplatin and gemcitabine versus gemcitabine as a first-line 
treatment in inoperable, locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer. With the progress 
that lipoplatin has already made, it seems poised on the brink of becoming the next platinum 
drug and could serve as an excellent validation and motivation for those researchers and 
companies seeking to develop nanodelivery devices to enhance platinum-based anticancer 
therapy. The trajectory of satraplatin, however, provides a cautionary tale highlighting that 
even encouraging progress made during clinical trials does not guarantee regulatory 
approval.
10. Summary and outlook
In this review we have highlighted the work done to generate the next generation of 
platinum drugs. Although the scientific literature presents evidence that a significant effort 
continues in the area of preparing cisplatin derivatives that are expected to function via a 
similar mechanism of action, the research efforts of the community have been turning 
steadily towards the development of molecules that deviate increasingly in structure and 
mechanism. The efforts we have highlighted here include the incorporation of targeting 
agents into the molecular scaffolds of classical platinum(II) complexes, non-classical 
Johnstone et al.
Page 52
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

platinum(II) scaffolds that elicit biological effects distinct from those of the approved 
platinum drugs, and oxidation of active the platinum(II) complexes to platinum(IV) 
prodrugs that can be reductively released. The axial ligands of the platinum(IV) prodrug can 
be chosen so as to tune physico-chemical properties, unleash an orthogonal biological 
response, or facilitate incorporation into a drug delivery device. The use of nanoscale drug 
delivery devices is a particularly explosive area of research. Liposomes were one of the 
earliest nanoscale platforms to be developed for drug delivery, and the clinical approval of 
doxorubicin and vincristine liposomal formulations validates these research efforts. 
Lipoplatin, a liposomal formulation of cisplatin, has also progressed well in clinical trials 
and may indeed become the next platinum-based drug. We anticipate that the renewed 
interest in developing platinum agents, particularly in nanoparticle formulations, by 
researchers around the world will generate an increased flow of these platinum drug 
candidates into the development pipeline, ushering in the next generation of platinum drugs.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NCI grant XX. Y.-R. Zheng is thanked for his assistance is navigating the Chinese 
FDA Database.
References
1. Howlader, N.; Noone, AM.; Krapcho, M.; Neyman, N.; Aminou, R.; Waldron, W.; Altekruse, SF.; 
Kosary, CL.; Ruhl, J.; Tatalovich, Z.; Cho, H.; Mariotto, A.; Eisner, MP.; Lewis, DR.; Chen, HS.; 
Feuer, EJ.; Cronin, KA. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2012. 
2. World Health Organization. WHO Model List of Essential Medicines. 2013
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Accessed: 2015] Ambulatory Care Drug Database 
System. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ahcd/ahcd_database.htm
4. National Institutes of Health. [Accessed: 2015] www.clinicaltrials.gov
5. Haug C, Gøtzsche PC, Schroeder TV. N Engl. J. Med. 2005; 353:2811–2812. [PubMed: 16382070] 
6. W. H. Organization. [Accessed: 2015] International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP). 
<http://www.who.int/ictrp/en/>
7. Kelland L. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2007; 7:573–584. [PubMed: 17625587] 
8. Jamieson ER, Lippard SJ. Chem. Rev. 1999; 99:2467–2498. [PubMed: 11749487] 
9. Kelland, LR.; Farrell, N. Platinum-Based Drugs in Cancer Therapy. Totowa, N.J.: Humana Press; 
2000. 
10. Wang D, Lippard SJ. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2005; 4:307–320. [PubMed: 15789122] 
11. Jung Y, Lippard SJ. Chem. Rev. 2007; 107:1387–1407. [PubMed: 17455916] 
12. Dabrowiak, JC. Metals in Medicine. Hoboken: Wiley; 2009. p. 109-147.
13. Wheate NJ, Walker S, Craig GE, Oun R. Dalton Trans. 2010; 39:8113–8127. [PubMed: 20593091] 
14. Dhar S, Lippard SJ. Platinum and Other Heavy Metal Compounds in Cancer Chemotherapy. 
2009:135–147.
15. Johnstone TC, Suntharalingam K, Lippard SJ. Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A. 2015; 373:20140185.
16. Gately DP, Howell SB. Br. J. Cancer. 1993; 67:1171–1176. [PubMed: 8512802] 
17. Gale GR, Morris CR, Atkins LM, Smith AB. Cancer Res. 1973; 33:813–818. [PubMed: 4735238] 
18. Ogawa M, Gale GR, Keirn SS. Cancer Res. 1975; 35:1398–1401. [PubMed: 1131815] 
19. Binks SP, Dobrota M. Biochem. Pharmacol. 1990; 40:1329–1336. [PubMed: 2206139] 
20. Andrews, PA.; Mann, SC.; Velury, S.; Howell, SB. Platinum and Other Metal Coordination 
Compounds in Cancer Chemotherapy. Nicolini, M., editor. Vol. 54. Springer US: 1988. p. 
248-254.
Johnstone et al.
Page 53
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

21. Howell SB, Safaei R, Larson CA, Sailor MJ. Mol. Pharmacol. 2010; 77:887–894. [PubMed: 
20159940] 
22. Abada P, Howell SB. Met.-Based Drugs. 2010; 2010:317581. [PubMed: 21274436] 
23. Zhang S, Lovejoy KS, Shima JE, Lagpacan LL, Shu Y, Lapuk A, Chen Y, Komori T, Gray JW, 
Chen X, Lippard SJ, Giacomini KM. Cancer Res. 2006; 66:8847–8857. [PubMed: 16951202] 
24. Dornish JM, Pettersen EO. Biochem. Pharmacol. 1990; 39:309–318. [PubMed: 2302256] 
25. Reishus JW, Martin DS Jr. J Am. Chem. Soc. 1961; 83:2457–2462.
26. Frey U, Ranford JD, Sadler PJ. Inorg. Chem. 1993; 32:1333–1340.
27. Jerremalm E, Videhult P, Alvelius G, Griffiths WJ, Bergman T, Eksborg S, Ehrsson H. J Pharm. 
Sci. 2002; 91:2116–2121. [PubMed: 12226839] 
28. Di Pasqua AJ, Goodisman J, Kerwood DJ, Toms BB, Dubowy RL, Dabrowiak JC. Chem. Res. 
Toxicol. 2006; 19:139–149. [PubMed: 16411667] 
29. Junker A, Farinotti R. Ann. Pharmacother. 2009; 43:390–391. [PubMed: 19193594] 
30. Di Pasqua AJ, Kerwood DJ, Shi Y, Goodisman J, Dabrowiak JC. Dalton Trans. 2011; 40:4821–
4825. [PubMed: 21461444] 
31. Brouwer J, van de Putte P, Fichtinger-Schepman AMJ, Reedijk J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
1981; 78:7010–7014. [PubMed: 7031665] 
32. Casini A, Reedijk J. Chem. Sci. 2012; 3:3135–3144.
33. Mezencev R. Curr. Cancer Drug Targets. 2014; 14:794–816. [PubMed: 25431081] 
34. Osborn MF, White JD, Haley MM, DeRose VJ. ACS Chem. Biol. 2014; 9:2404–2411. [PubMed: 
25055168] 
35. Bancroft DP, Lepre CA, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 1990; 112:6860–6871.
36. Fichtinger-Schepman AMJ, van der Veer JL, Den Hartog JHJ, Lohman PHM, Reedijk J. 
Biochemistry. 1985; 24:707–713. [PubMed: 4039603] 
37. Kartalou M, Essigmann JM. Mutat. Res. 2001; 478:1–21. [PubMed: 11406166] 
38. Blommaert FA, van Dijk-Knijnenburg HCM, Dijt FJ, den Engelse L, Baan RA, Berends F, 
Fichtinger-Schepman AMJ. Biochemistry. 1995; 34:8474–8480. [PubMed: 7599137] 
39. Woynarowski JM, Chapman WG, Napier C, Herzig MCS, Juniewicz P. Mol. Pharmacol. 1998; 
54:770–777. [PubMed: 9804612] 
40. Cohen GL, Bauer WR, Barton JK, Lippard SJ. Science. 1979; 203:1014–1016. [PubMed: 370979] 
41. Todd RC, Lippard SJ. Metallomics. 2009; 1:280–291. [PubMed: 20046924] 
42. Rabik CA, Dolan ME. Cancer Treat. Rev. 2007; 33:9–23. [PubMed: 17084534] 
43. Graf N, Ang WH, Zhu G, Myint M, Lippard SJ. Chem Bio Chem. 2011; 12:1115–1123.
44. Bianchi ME, Beltrame M, Paonessa G. Science. 1989; 243:1056–1059. [PubMed: 2922595] 
45. Thomas JO, Travers AA. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2001; 26:167–174. [PubMed: 11246022] 
46. Pil PM, Lippard SJ. Science. 1992; 256:234–237. [PubMed: 1566071] 
47. Park S, Lippard SJ. Biochemistry. 2011; 50:2567–2574. [PubMed: 21355578] 
48. Park S, Lippard SJ. Biochemistry. 2012; 51:6728–6737. [PubMed: 22901013] 
49. Johnstone TC, Wilson JJ, Lippard SJ. Inorg. Chem. 2013; 52:12234–12249. [PubMed: 23738524] 
50. Esposito BP, Najjar R. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2002; 232:137–149.
51. Ivanov AI, Christodoulou J, Parkinson JA, Barnham KJ, Tucker A, Woodrow J, Sadler PJ. J Biol. 
Chem. 1998; 273:14721–14730. [PubMed: 9614070] 
52. Rosenberg B, Vancamp L, Krigas T. Nature. 1965; 205:698–699. [PubMed: 14287410] 
53. Rosenberg B, Van Camp L, Grimley EB, Thomson AJ. J Biol. Chem. 1967; 242:1347–1352. 
[PubMed: 5337590] 
54. Rosenberg B, Renshaw E, Vancamp L, Hartwick J, Drobnik J. J Bacteriol. 1967; 93:716–721. 
[PubMed: 5335970] 
55. Rosenberg B, VanCamp L, Trosko JE, Mansour VH. Nature. 1969; 222:385–386. [PubMed: 
5782119] 
56. Rosenberg, B. Cisplatin: Chemistry and Biochemistry of a Leading Anticancer Drug. Lippert, B., 
editor. Zürich: Verlag Helvetica Chimica Acta; 1999. p. 1-27.
Johnstone et al.
Page 54
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

57. Peyrone M. Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1844; 51:1–29.
58. Lebwohl D, Canetta R. Eur. J. Cancer. 1998; 34:1522–1534. [PubMed: 9893623] 
59. US National Library of Medicine. [Accessed: 2015] Cisplatin Injection. <http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a684036.html>
60. Cleare MJ, Hoeschele JD. Bioinorg. Chem. 1973; 2:187–210.
61. Alberts DS, Dorr RT. Oncologist. 1998; 3:15–34. [PubMed: 10388081] 
62. US National Library of Medicine. [Accessed: 2015] Carboplatin Injection. <http://
www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a684036.html>
63. Shimada M, Itamochi H, Kigawa J. Cancer Manage. Res. 2013; 5:67–76.
64. Welink J, Boven E, Vermorken JB, Gall HE, van der Vijgh WJF. Clin. Cancer Res. 1999; 5:2349–
2358. [PubMed: 10499604] 
65. Drugs in R & D. 2003; 4:369–372. [PubMed: 14584968] 
66. , 2003. 
67. Chinese State Food and Drug Administration. [Accessed: 2015] State Food and Drug 
Administration Database: Lobaplatin. <sfda.gov.cn>
68. Graham J, Muhsin M, Kirkpatrick P. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2004; 3:11–12. [PubMed: 14756144] 
69. Johnstone TC. Polyhedron. 2014; 67:429–435.
70. Kidani Y, Inagaki K, Iigo M, Hoshi A, Kuretani K. J Med. Chem. 1978; 21:1315–1318. [PubMed: 
722741] 
71. Spingler B, Whittington DA, Lippard SJ. Inorg. Chem. 2001; 40:5596–5602. [PubMed: 11599959] 
72. Ziegler CJ, Silverman AP, Lippard SJ. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2000; 5:774–783. [PubMed: 
11129005] 
73. Strebhardt K, Ullrich A. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2008; 8:473–480. [PubMed: 18469827] 
74. Wang X, Guo Z. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013; 42:202–224. [PubMed: 23042411] 
75. Tannock IF, Rotin D. Cancer Res. 1989; 49:4373–4384. [PubMed: 2545340] 
76. Dam TK, Brewer CF. Glycobiology. 2009; 20:270–279. [PubMed: 19939826] 
77. Vyas SP, Singh A, Sihorkar V. Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carrier Syst. 2001; 18:76.
78. Storr T, Thompson KH, Orvig C. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2006; 35:534–544. [PubMed: 16729147] 
79. Shaw RJ. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 2006; 18:598–608. [PubMed: 17046224] 
80. Heiden MGV, Cantley LC, Thompson CB. Science. 2009; 324:1029–1033. [PubMed: 19460998] 
81. Lindholm P, Minn H, Leskinenkallio S, Bergman J, Ruotsalainen U, Joensuu H. J Nucl. Med. 
1993; 34:1–6. [PubMed: 8418248] 
82. Delbeke D. J Nucl. Med. 1999; 40:591–603. [PubMed: 10210218] 
83. Thiel G, Beck W. Z Naturforsch. 1983; 38B:1081–1093.
84. Nagel Y, Beck W. Z Naturforsch. 1985; 40B:1181–1187.
85. Kuduk-Jaworska J, Jeżowska-Trzebiatowska B. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 1986; 123:209–212.
86. Haroutounian SA, Georgiadis MP, Bailar JC. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 1986; 124:137–139.
87. Pill T, Polborn K, Beck W. Chemische Berichte. 1990; 123:11–17.
88. Tsubomura T, Yano S, Kobayashi K, Sakurai T, Yoshikawa S. J Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun. 
1986; 459
89. Berger I, Nazarov AA, Hartinger CG, Groessl M, Valiahdi S-M, Jakupec MA, Keppler BK. Chem 
Med Chem. 2007; 2:505–514. [PubMed: 17340670] 
90. Hanessian S, Wang J. Can. J. Chem. 1993; 71:886–895.
91. Kidani Y, Inagaki K, Tsukagoshi S. Gann. 1976; 67:921–922. [PubMed: 1021513] 
92. Tsubomura T, Ogawa M, Yano S, Kobayashi K, Sakurai T, Yoshikawa S. Inorg. Chem. 1990; 
29:2622–2626.
93. Montaña ÁM, Bernal FJ, Lorenzo J, Farnós C, Batalla C, Prieto MJ, Moreno V, Avilés FX, Mesas 
JM, Alegre M-T. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2008; 16:1721–1737. [PubMed: 18036822] 
94. Chen Y, Heeg MJ, Braunschweiger PG, Xie W, Wang PG. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 1999; 
38:1768–1769.
Johnstone et al.
Page 55
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

95. Mikata Y, Shinohara Y, Yoneda K, Nakamura Y, Brudziñska I, Tanase T, Kitayama T, Takagi R, 
Okamoto T, Kinoshita I, Doe M, Orvig C, Yano S. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2001; 11:3045–
3047. [PubMed: 11714607] 
96. De Almeida MV, Cesar ET, Fontes APS, Felício EdCA. J Carbohydr. Chem. 2000; 19:323–329.
97. Möker J, Thiem J. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2009; 2009:4842–4847.
98. Möker J, Salge-Bartels U, Thiem J. J Carbohydr. Chem. 2012; 31:702–710.
99. Möker J, Thiem J. Carbohydr. Res. 2012; 348:14–26. [PubMed: 22196927] 
100. Hartinger CG, Nazarov AA, Ashraf SM, Dyson PJ, Keppler BK. Curr. Med. Chem. 2008; 
15:2574–2591. [PubMed: 18855680] 
101. Liu P, Lu Y, Gao X, Liu R, Zhang-Negrerie D, Shi Y, Wang Y, Wang S, Gao Q. Chem. 
Commun. 2013; 49:2421–2423.
102. Sun L, Zeng X, Yan C, Sun X, Gong X, Rao Y, Yan N. Nature. 2012; 490:361–366. [PubMed: 
23075985] 
103. Patra M, Johnstone TC, Suntharalingam K, Lippard SJ. Manuscript in preparation. 2015
104. Knight WA, Livingston RB, Gregory EJ, McGuire WL. Cancer Res. 1977; 37:4669–4671. 
[PubMed: 922747] 
105. Slamon DJ, Godolphin W, Jones LA, Holt JA, Wong SG, Keith DE, Levin WJ, Stuart SG, Udove 
J, Ullrich A, Press MF. Science. 1989; 244:707–712. [PubMed: 2470152] 
106. Anzick SL, Kononen J, Walker RL, Azorsa DO, Tanner MM, Guan XY, Sauter G, Kallioniemi 
OP, Trent JM, Meltzer PS. Science. 1997; 277:965–968. [PubMed: 9252329] 
107. Carlsson J, Nordgren H, Sjostrom J, Wester K, Villman K, Bengtsson NO, Ostenstad B, 
Lundqvist H, Blomqvist C. Br. J. Cancer. 2004; 90:2344–2348. [PubMed: 15150568] 
108. Scott AM, Wolchok JD, Old LJ. Nat. Rev. Cancer. 2012; 12:278–287. [PubMed: 22437872] 
109. Gustaftson J-Å. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2003; 24:479–485. [PubMed: 12967773] 
110. Koehler KF, Helguero LA, Haldosén L-A, Warner M, Gustafsson J-Å. Endocr. Rev. 2005; 
26:465–478. [PubMed: 15857973] 
111. Dahlman-Wright K, Cavailles V, Fuqua SA, Jordan VC, Katzenellenbogen JA, Korach KS, 
Maggi A, Muramatsu M, Parker MG, Gustafsson J-Å. Pharmacol. Rev. 2006; 58:773–781. 
[PubMed: 17132854] 
112. Hartman J, Lindberg K, Morani A, Inzunza J, Strom A, Gustafsson JA. Cancer Res. 2006; 
66:11207–11213. [PubMed: 17145865] 
113. Gust R, Beck W, Jaouen G, Schönenberger H. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2009; 253:2742–2759.
114. Gabano E, Ravera M, Osella D. Curr. Med. Chem. 2009; 16:4544–4580. [PubMed: 19903151] 
115. Gandolfi O, Cais M, Dolcetti G, Ghedini M, Modiano A. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 1981; 56:127–133.
116. Gandolfi O, Blum J. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 1983; 80:103–106.
117. Gandolfi O, Blum J, Mandelbaum-Shavit F. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 1984; 91:257–261.
118. Gabano E, Cassino C, Bonetti S, Prandi C, Colangelo D, Ghiglia A, Osella D. Org. Biomol. 
Chem. 2005; 3:3531–3539. [PubMed: 16172691] 
119. Descôteaux C, Provencher-Mandeville J, Mathieu I, Perron V, Mandal SK, Asselin É, Bérubé G. 
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2003; 13:3927–3931. [PubMed: 14592477] 
120. Gagnon V, St-Germain M-È, Descôteaux C, Provencher-Mandeville J, Parent S, Mandal SK, 
Asselin E, Bérubé G. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2004; 14:5919–5924. [PubMed: 15501069] 
121. Perron V, Rabouin D, Asselin É, Parent S, Gaudreault RC, Bérubé G. Bioorganic Chemistry. 
2005; 33:1–15. [PubMed: 15668178] 
122. Descôteaux C, Leblanc V, Belanger G, Parent S, Asselin E, Bérubé G. Steroids. 2008; 73:1077–
1089. [PubMed: 18572212] 
123. Provencher-Mandeville J, Descôteaux C, Mandal SK, Leblanc V, Asselin É, Bérubé G. Bioorg. 
Med. Chem. Lett. 2008; 18:2282–2287. [PubMed: 18356047] 
124. Saha P, Descôteaux C, Brasseur K, Fortin S, Leblanc V, Parent S, Asselin É, Bérubé G. Eur. J. 
Med. Chem. 2012; 48:385–390. [PubMed: 22209414] 
125. Fortin S, Brasseur K, Morin N, Asselin É, Bérubé G. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2013; 68:433–443. 
[PubMed: 23994871] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 56
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

126. Kim E, Rye PT, Essigmann JM, Croy RG. J Inorg. Biochem. 2009; 103:256–261. [PubMed: 
19054566] 
127. Wappes B, Jennerwein M, Von Angerer E, Schoenenberger H, Engel J, Berger M, Wrobel KH. J 
Med. Chem. 1984; 27:1280–1286. [PubMed: 6481764] 
128. Hartmann RW, Heindl A, Schwarz W, Schoenenberger H. J Med. Chem. 1984; 27:819–824. 
[PubMed: 6330356] 
129. Karl J, Gust R, Spruss T, Schneider MR, Schoenenberger H, Engel J, Wrobel KH, Lux F, 
Haeberlin ST. J Med. Chem. 1988; 31:72–83. [PubMed: 3336035] 
130. Gust R, Niebler K, Schönenberger H. J Med. Chem. 2005; 48:7132–7144. [PubMed: 16279771] 
131. Trauner M, Boyer JL. Physiol. Rev. 2003; 83:633–671. [PubMed: 12663868] 
132. Maeda M, Suga T, Takasuka N, Hoshi A, Sasaki T. Cancer Lett. 1990; 55:143–147. [PubMed: 
2265413] 
133. Maeda M, Tanaka S, Ida H, Takasuka N, Uehera N, Hoshi A. Cancer Lett. 1993; 70:57–64. 
[PubMed: 8330302] 
134. Criado JJ, Herrera MC, Palomero MF, Medarde M, Rodriguez E, Marin JJG. J Lipid Res. 1997; 
38:1022–1032. [PubMed: 9186919] 
135. Criado JJ, Domínguez MF, Medarde M, Fernández ER, Macías RIR, Marín JJG. Bioconjugate 
Chem. 2000; 11:167–174.
136. Briz O, Serrano MA, Macias RIR, Marin JJG. Int. J. Cancer. 2000; 88:287–292. [PubMed: 
11004682] 
137. Criado JJ, Macias RIR, Medarde M, Monte MJ, Serrano MA, Marin JJG. Bioconjugate Chem. 
1997; 8:453–458.
138. Marin JJG, Macias RIR, Criado JJ, Bueno A, Monte MJ, Serrano MA. Int. J. Cancer. 1998; 
78:346–352. [PubMed: 9766570] 
139. Martinez-Diez MC, Larena MG, Serrano MA, Macias RIR, Izco-Basurko I, Marin JJG. 
Anticancer Res. 2000; 20:3315–3321. [PubMed: 11062759] 
140. Larena MG, Martinez-Diez MC, Macias RIR, Dominguez MF, Serrano MA, Marin JJG. J Drug 
Targeting. 2002; 10:397–404.
141. Almendral-Parra MJ, Alonso A, Criado JJ, Manzano JL, Rodríguez-Fernández E. Inorg. Chim. 
Acta. 2011; 376:651–654.
142. Criado JJ, Fernández ER, Manzano JL, Alonso A, Barrena S, Medarde M, Pelaez R, Tabernero 
MD, Orfao A. Bioconjugate Chem. 2005; 16:275–282.
143. Alonso A, Almendral MJ, Curto Y, Criado JJ, Rodríguez E, Manzano JL. J Fluoresc. 2007; 
17:390–400. [PubMed: 17557196] 
144. Pérez-Andrés M, Benito JJ, Rodríguez-Fernández E, Corradetti B, Primo D, Manzano JL, Orfao 
A, Criado JJ. Dalton Trans. 2008; 6159
145. González M, Bartolomé R, Matarraz S, Rodríguez-Fernández E, Manzano JL, Pérez-Andrés M, 
Orfao A, Fuentes M, Criado JJ. J Inorg. Biochem. 2012; 106:43–45. [PubMed: 22112838] 
146. Marin JJG, Romero MR, Vallejo M, Monte MJ. Cancer Ther. 2005; 3:57–64.
147. Macias RIR, Monte MJ, El-Mir MY, Villanueva GR, Marin JJG. J Lipid Res. 1998; 39:1792–
1798. [PubMed: 9741691] 
148. Macias R. J Controlled Release. 1999; 57:161–169.
149. Barbara C, Orlandi P, Bocci G, Fioravanti A, Di Paolo A, Natale G, Del Tacca M, Danesi R. Eur. 
J. Pharmacol. 2006; 549:27–34. [PubMed: 16978599] 
150. Paschke R, Kalbitz J, Paetz C. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 2000; 304:241–249.
151. Paschke R, Kalbitz J, Paetz C, Luckner M, Mueller T, Schmoll H-J, Mueller H, Sorkau E, Sinn E. 
J Inorg. Biochem. 2003; 94:335–342. [PubMed: 12667704] 
152. Schobert R, Biersack B, Dietrich A, Grotemeier A, Müller T, Kalinowski B, Knauer S, Voigt W, 
Paschke R. J Med. Chem. 2007; 50:1288–1293. [PubMed: 17328536] 
153. Bernhardt G, Biersack B, Bollwein S, Schobert R, Zoldakova M. Chem. Biodivers. 2008; 5:1645–
1659. [PubMed: 18729100] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 57
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

154. Biersack B, Dietrich A, Zoldakova M, Kalinowski B, Paschke R, Schobert R, Mueller T. J Inorg. 
Biochem. 2011; 105:1630–1637. [PubMed: 22071088] 
155. Emmerich D, Vanchanagiri K, Baratto LC, Schmidt H, Paschke R. Eur. J. Med. Chem. 2014; 
75:460–466. [PubMed: 24561674] 
156. Papadopoulos V, Baraldi M, Guilarte TR, Knudsen TB, Lacapere J-J, Lindemann P, Norenberg 
MD, Nutt D, Weizman A, Zhang M-R, Gavish M. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 2006; 27:402–409. 
[PubMed: 16822554] 
157. Morohaku K, Pelton SH, Daugherty DJ, Butler WR, Deng W, Selvaraj V. Endocrinology. 2014; 
155:89–97. [PubMed: 24174323] 
158. Galiegue S, Tinel N, Casellas P. Curr. Med. Chem. 2003; 10:1563–1572. [PubMed: 12871127] 
159. Miettinen H, Kononen J, Haapasalo H, Helen P, Sallinen P, Harjuntausta T, Helin H, Alho H. 
Cancer Res. 1995; 55:2691–2695. [PubMed: 7780986] 
160. Maaser K, Grabowski P, Sutter AP, Hopfner M, Foss HD, Stein H, Berger G, Gavish M, Zeitz M, 
Scherubl H. Clin. Cancer Res. 2002; 8:3205–3209. [PubMed: 12374690] 
161. Veenman L, Levin E, Weisinger G, Leschiner S, Spanier I, Snyder SH, Weizman A, Gavish M. 
Biochem. Pharmacol. 2004; 68:689–698. [PubMed: 15276076] 
162. Margiotta N, Ostuni R, Ranaldo R, Denora N, Laquintana V, Trapani G, Liso G, Natile G. J Med. 
Chem. 2007; 50:1019–1027. [PubMed: 17286392] 
163. Margiotta N, Denora N, Ostuni R, Laquintana V, Anderson A, Johnson SW, Trapani G, Natile G. 
J Med. Chem. 2010; 53:5144–5154. [PubMed: 20568783] 
164. Weitman SD, Lark RH, Coney LR, Fort DW, Frasca V, Zurawski VR, Kamen BA. Cancer Res. 
1992; 52:3396–3401. [PubMed: 1596899] 
165. Sudimack J, Lee RJ. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2000; 41:147–162.
166. Vitols KS, Montejano Y, Duffy T, Pope L, Grundler G, Huennekens FM. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 
1987; 26:17–27. [PubMed: 3673704] 
167. Gabano E, Ravera M, Cassino C, Bonetti S, Palmisano G, Osella D. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 2008; 
361:1447–1455.
168. Aronov O, Horowitz AT, Gabizon A, Gibson D. Bioconjugate Chem. 2003; 14:563–574.
169. Lee M, Simpson JE, Burns AJ, Kupchinsky S, Brooks N, Hartley JA, Kelland LR. Medicinal 
Chemistry Research. 1996; 6:365–371.
170. Robillard MS, Valentijn ARPM, Meeuwenoord NJ, van der Marel GA, van Boom JH, Reedijk J. 
Angewandte Chemie. 2000; 39:3096–3099. [PubMed: 11028044] 
171. Robillard MS, van Alphen S, Meeuwenoord NJ, Jansen BAJ, van der Marel GA, van Boom JH, 
Reedijk J. New J. Chem. 2005; 29:220.
172. van Zutphen S, Stone E, van Rijt S, Robillard M, van der Marel G, Overkleeft H, den Dulk H, 
Brouwer J, Reedijk J. J Inorg. Biochem. 2005; 99:2032–2038. [PubMed: 16099049] 
173. Damian MS, Hedman HK, Elmroth SKC, Diederichsen U. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2010; 2010:6161–
6170.
174. Robillard MS, Bacac M, van den Elst H, Flamigni A, van der Marel GA, van Boom JH, Reedijk 
J. J Comb. Chem. 2003; 5:821–825. [PubMed: 14606811] 
175. Robillard MS, Davies NP, van der Marel GA, van Boom JH, Reedijk J, Murray V. J Inorg. 
Biochem. 2003; 96:331–338. [PubMed: 12888268] 
176. Rijal K, Bao X, Chow CS. Chem. Commun. 2014; 50:3918.
177. Barragán F, Moreno V, Marchán V. Chem. Commun. 2009:4705–4707.
178. Ndinguri MW, Solipuram R, Gambrell RP, Aggarwal S, Hammer RP. Bioconjugate Chem. 2009; 
20:1869–1878.
179. Colombo G, Curnis F, De Mori GMS, Gasparri A, Longoni C, Sacchi A, Longhi R, Corti A. J 
Biol. Chem. 2002; 277:47891–47897. [PubMed: 12372830] 
180. Wilson JJ, Lippard SJ. J Med. Chem. 2012; 55:5326–5336. [PubMed: 22606945] 
181. Wisnovsky SP, Wilson JJ, Radford RJ, Pereira MP, Chan MR, Laposa RR, Lippard SJ, Kelley 
SO. Chem. Biol. 2013; 20:1323–1328. [PubMed: 24183971] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 58
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

182. Fonseca SB, Pereira MP, Mourtada R, Gronda M, Horton KL, Hurren R, Minden MD, Schimmer 
AD, Kelley SO. Chem. Biol. 2011; 18:445–453. [PubMed: 21513881] 
183. Horton KL, Pereira MP, Stewart KM, Fonseca SB, Kelley SO. ChemBioChem. 2012; 13:476–
485. [PubMed: 22238158] 
184. Dodd DW, Damjanovski S, Hudson RHE. Nucleosides, Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2011; 
30:257–263. [PubMed: 21623539] 
185. Cleare MJ, Hoeschele JD. Platinum Metals Rev. 1973; 17:2–13.
186. Farrell N. Met. Ions Biol. Syst. 1996; 32:603–639. [PubMed: 8640533] 
187. Pérez JM, Fuertes MA, Alonso C, Navarro-Ranninger C. Crit. Rev. Oncol. Hemat. 2000; 35:109–
120.
188. Coluccia M, Natile G. Anti-Cancer Agents Med. Chem. 2007; 7:111–123.
189. Aris SM, Farrell NP. Eur. J. Inorg. Chem. 2009; 2009:1293–1302. [PubMed: 20161688] 
190. Brabec V, Leng M. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1993; 90:5345–5349. [PubMed: 8506383] 
191. Bernal-Mendez E, Boudvillain M, Gonzalez-Vilchez F, Leng M. Biochemistry. 1997; 36:7281–
7287. [PubMed: 9200676] 
192. Leng M, Brabec V. IARC Sci. Publ. 1994:339–348. [PubMed: 7806323] 
193. Farrell N, Ha TTB, Souchard JP, Wimmer FL, Cros S, Johnson NP. J Med. Chem. 1989; 
32:2240–2241. [PubMed: 2795596] 
194. Farrell N, Kelland LR, Roberts JD, Van Beusichem M. Cancer Res. 1992; 52:5065–5072. 
[PubMed: 1516063] 
195. Kelland LR, Barnard CF, Mellish KJ, Jones M, Goddard PM, Valenti M, Bryant A, Murrer BA, 
Harrap KR. Cancer Res. 1994; 54:5618–5622. [PubMed: 7923207] 
196. Murphy N RFF, Aguila A, Okada M, Balis FM, Fojo T. Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res. 2005; 
46:4109.
197. Paull KD, Shoemaker RH, Hodes L, Monks A, Scudiero DA, Rubinstein L, Plowman J, Boyd 
MR. J Natl. Cancer Inst. 1989; 81:1088–1092. [PubMed: 2738938] 
198. Zakovska A, Novakova O, Balcarova Z, Bierbach U, Farrell N, Brabec V. Eur. J. Biochem. 1998; 
254:547–557. [PubMed: 9688265] 
199. Brabec V, Neplechova K, Kasparkova J, Farrell N. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2000; 5:364–368. 
[PubMed: 10907747] 
200. Brabec V. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 2002; 71:1–68. [PubMed: 12102553] 
201. Farrell N, Povirk LF, Dange Y, DeMasters G, Gupta MS, Kohlhagen G, Khan QA, Pommier Y, 
Gewirtz DA. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2004; 68:857–866. [PubMed: 15294448] 
202. Coluccia M, Nassi A, Loseto F, Boccarelli A, Mariggio MA, Giordano D, Intini FP, Caputo P, 
Natile G. J Med. Chem. 1993; 36:510–512. [PubMed: 8474104] 
203. Coluccia M, Boccarelli A, Mariggio MA, Cardellicchio N, Caputo P, Intini FP, Natile G. Chem. 
Biol. Interact. 1995; 98:251–266. [PubMed: 8548863] 
204. Intini FP, Boccarelli A, Francia VC, Pacifico C, Sivo MF, Natile G, Giordano D, De Rinaldis P, 
Coluccia M. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2004; 9:768–780. [PubMed: 15241660] 
205. Cini R, Caputo PA, Intini FP, Natile G. Inorg. Chem. 1995; 34:1130–1137.
206. Boccarelli A, Coluccia M, Intini FP, Natile G, Locker D, Leng M. Anticancer Drug Des. 1999; 
14:253–264. [PubMed: 10500500] 
207. Coluccia M, Nassi A, Boccarelli A, Giordano D, Cardellicchio N, Intini FP, Natile G, Barletta A, 
Paradiso A. Int. J. Oncol. 1999; 15:1039–1044. [PubMed: 10536190] 
208. Coluccia M, Nassi A, Boccarelli A, Giordano D, Cardellicchio N, Locker D, Leng M, Sivo M, 
Intini FP, Natile G. J Inorg. Biochem. 1999; 77:31–35. [PubMed: 10626350] 
209. Brabec V, Vrana O, Novakova O, Kleinwachter V, Intini FP, Coluccia M, Natile G. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 1996; 24:336–341. [PubMed: 8628659] 
210. Zaludova R, Zakovska A, Kasparkova J, Balcarova Z, Vrana O, Coluccia M, Natile G, Brabec V. 
Mol. Pharmacol. 1997; 52:354–361. [PubMed: 9281596] 
211. Novakova O, Kasparkova J, Malina J, Natile G, Brabec V. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003; 31:6450–
6460. [PubMed: 14602903] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 59
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

212. Liu Y, Sivo MF, Natile G, Sletten E. Met. Based Drugs. 2000; 7:169–176. [PubMed: 18475942] 
213. Leng M, Locker D, Giraud-Panis M-J, Schwartz A, Intini FP, Natile G, Pisano C, Boccarelli A, 
Giordano D, Coluccia M. Mol. Pharmacol. 2000; 58:1525–1535. [PubMed: 11093793] 
214. Boccarelli A, Intini FP, Sasanelli R, Sivo MF, Coluccia M, Natile G. J Med. Chem. 2006; 
49:829–837. [PubMed: 16420068] 
215. Montero EI, Diaz S, Gonzalez-Vadillo AM, Perez JM, Alonso C, Navarro-Ranninger C. J Med. 
Chem. 1999; 42:4264–4268. [PubMed: 10514297] 
216. Pérez JM, Montero EI, González AM, Alvarez-Valdés A, Alonso C, Navarro-Ranninger C. J 
Inorg. Biochem. 1999; 77:37–42. [PubMed: 10626351] 
217. Montero EI, Perez JM, Schwartz A, Fuertes MA, Malinge JM, Alonso C, Leng M, Navarro-
Ranninger C. Chem Bio Chem. 2002; 3:61–67.
218. Prokop R, Kasparkova J, Novakova O, Marini V, Pizarro AM, Navarro-Ranninger C, Brabec V. 
Biochem. Pharmacol. 2004; 67:1097–1109. [PubMed: 15006546] 
219. Billecke C, Finniss S, Tahash L, Miller C, Mikkelsen T, Farrell NP, Bogler O. Neuro. Oncol. 
2006; 8:215–226. [PubMed: 16723633] 
220. Farrell, N.; Qu, Y.; Bierbach, U.; Valsecchi, M.; Mentab, E. Cisplatin. Verlag Helvetica Chimica 
Acta: 2006. p. 477-496.
221. Farrell N, Qu Y, Hacker MP. J Med. Chem. 1990; 33:2179–2184. [PubMed: 2374143] 
222. Farrell N. Cancer Invest. 1993; 11:578–589. [PubMed: 8402226] 
223. Zou Y, Van Houten B, Farrell N. Biochemistry. 1994; 33:5404–5410. [PubMed: 8180163] 
224. Yang D, van Boom SS, Reedijk J, van Boom JH, Farrell N, Wang AH. Nat. Struct. Biol. 1995; 
2:577–578. [PubMed: 7664126] 
225. Brabec V, Kasparkova J, Vrana O, Novakova O, Cox JW, Qu Y, Farrell N. Biochemistry. 1999; 
38:6781–6790. [PubMed: 10346899] 
226. Perego P, Caserini C, Gatti L, Carenini N, Romanelli S, Supino R, Colangelo D, Viano I, Leone 
R, Spinelli S, Pezzoni G, Manzotti C, Farrell N, Zunino F. Mol. Pharmacol. 1999; 55:528–534. 
[PubMed: 10051537] 
227. Roberts JD, Peroutka J, Beggiolin G, Manzotti C, Piazzoni L, Farrell N. J Inorg. Biochem. 1999; 
77:47–50. [PubMed: 10626353] 
228. McGregor TD, Balcarova Z, Qu Y, Tran MC, Zaludova R, Brabec V, Farrell N. J Inorg. 
Biochem. 1999; 77:43–46. [PubMed: 10626352] 
229. McGregor TD, Bousfield W, Qu Y, Farrell N. J Inorg. Biochem. 2002; 91:212–219. [PubMed: 
12121778] 
230. Pratesi G, Perego P, Polizzi D, Righetti SC, Supino R, Caserini C, Manzotti C, Giuliani FC, 
Pezzoni G, Tognella S, Spinelli S, Farrell N, Zunino F. Br. J. Cancer. 1999; 80:1912–1919. 
[PubMed: 10471039] 
231. Orlandi L, Colella G, Bearzatto A, Abolafio G, Manzotti C, Daidone MG, Zaffaroni N. Eur. J. 
Cancer. 2001; 37:649–659. [PubMed: 11290441] 
232. Colella G, Pennati M, Bearzatto A, Leone R, Colangelo D, Manzotti C, Daidone MG, Zaffaroni 
N. Br. J. Cancer. 2001; 84:1387–1390. [PubMed: 11355952] 
233. Sessa C, Capri G, Gianni L, Peccatori F, Grasselli G, Bauer J, Zucchetti M, Viganò L, Gatti A, 
Minoia C, Liati P, Van den Bosch S, Bernareggi A, Camboni G, Marsoni S. Ann. Oncol. 2000; 
11:977–983. [PubMed: 11038034] 
234. Calvert AH, Thomas H, Colombo N, Gore M, Earl H, Sena L, Camboni G, Liati P, Sessa C. Eur. 
J. Cancer. 2001; 37(Supplement 6):S260.
235. Scagliotti G, Novello S, Crinò L, De Marinis F, Tonato M, Noberasco C, Selvaggi G, Massoni F, 
Gatti B, Camboni G. Lung Cancer. 2003; 41(Supplement 2):S223.
236. Jodrell DI, Evans TR, Steward W, Cameron D, Prendiville J, Aschele C, Noberasco C, Lind M, 
Carmichael J, Dobbs N, Camboni G, Gatti B, De Braud F. Eur. J. Cancer. 2004; 40:1872–1877. 
[PubMed: 15288289] 
237. Hensing TA, Hanna NH, Gillenwater HH, Gabriella Camboni M, Allievi C, Socinski MA. 
Anticancer Drugs. 2006; 17:697–704. [PubMed: 16917215] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 60
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

238. Qu Y, Harris A, Hegmans A, Petz A, Kabolizadeh P, Penazova H, Farrell N. J Inorg. Biochem. 
2004; 98:1591–1598. [PubMed: 15458821] 
239. Komeda S, Moulaei T, Woods KK, Chikuma M, Farrell NP, Williams LD. J Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006; 128:16092–16103. [PubMed: 17165762] 
240. Mangrum JB, Farrell NP. Chem. Commun. 2010; 46:6640–6650.
241. Harris A, Qu Y, Farrell N. Inorg. Chem. 2005; 44:1196–1198. [PubMed: 15732956] 
242. Prisecaru A, Molphy Z, Kipping RG, Peterson EJ, Qu Y, Kellett A, Farrell NP. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 2014; 42:13474–13487. [PubMed: 25414347] 
243. Malina J, Farrell NP, Brabec V. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014; 53:12812–12816.
244. Malina J, Farrell NP, Brabec V. Inorg. Chem. 2014; 53:1662–1671. [PubMed: 24428232] 
245. Harris AL, Yang X, Hegmans A, Povirk L, Ryan JJ, Kelland L, Farrell NP. Inorg. Chem. 2005; 
44:9598–9600. [PubMed: 16363817] 
246. Harris AL, Ryan JJ, Farrell N. Mol. Pharmacol. 2006; 69:666–672. [PubMed: 16275707] 
247. Brodie CR, Collins JG, Aldrich-Wright JR. Dalton Trans. 2004:1145–1152. [PubMed: 15252653] 
248. Kemp S, Wheate NJ, Buck DP, Nikac M, Collins JG, Aldrich-Wright JR. J Inorg. Biochem. 2007; 
101:1049–1058. [PubMed: 17544512] 
249. Fisher DM, Bednarski PJ, Grunert R, Turner P, Fenton RR, Aldrich-Wright JR. ChemMedChem. 
2007; 2:488–495. [PubMed: 17340669] 
250. Fisher DM, Fenton RR, Aldrich-Wright JR. Chem. Commun. 2008:5613–5615.
251. Krause-Heuer AM, Grunert R, Kuhne S, Buczkowska M, Wheate NJ, Le Pevelen DD, Boag LR, 
Fisher DM, Kasparkova J, Malina J, Bednarski PJ, Brabec V, Aldrich-Wright JR. J Med. Chem. 
2009; 52:5474–5484. [PubMed: 19658404] 
252. Garbutcheon-Singh KB, Leverett P, Myers S, Aldrich-Wright JR. Dalton Trans. 2013; 42:918–
926. [PubMed: 23018340] 
253. Jennette KW, Lippard SJ, Vassiliades GA, Bauer WR. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1974; 
71:3839–3843. [PubMed: 4530265] 
254. Long EC, Barton JK. Accounts of Chemical Reseach. 1990; 23:271–273.
255. Wu YS, Koch KR, Abratt VR, Klump HH. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2005; 440:28–37. [PubMed: 
16009327] 
256. Davis KJ, Carrall JA, Lai B, Aldrich-Wright JR, Ralph SF, Dillon CT. Dalton Trans. 2012; 
41:9417–9426. [PubMed: 22740039] 
257. Garbutcheon-Singh KB, Myers S, Harper BW, Ng NS, Dong Q, Xie C, Aldrich-Wright JR. 
Metallomics. 2013; 5:1061–1067. [PubMed: 23784536] 
258. Hope JM, Wilson JJ, Lippard SJ. Dalton Trans. 2013; 42:3176–3180. [PubMed: 23143731] 
259. Suntharalingam K, Wilson JJ, Lin W, Lippard SJ. Metallomics. 2014; 6:437–443. [PubMed: 
24514456] 
260. Muller PAJ, Vousden KH. Nature Cell Biology. 2013; 15:2–8. [PubMed: 23263379] 
261. Macquet J-P, Butour J-L. J Natl. Cancer Inst. 1983; 70:899–905. [PubMed: 6573534] 
262. Hollis LS, Miller AV, Amundsen AR, Stern EW, Sundquist WI, Toni J, Burstyn JN, Heiger W, 
Lippard SJ. J Inorg. Biochem. 1989; 36:153.
263. Sundquist WI, Bancroft DP, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 1990; 112:1590–1596.
264. Hollis LS, Sundquist WI, Burstyn JN, Heigerbernays WJ, Bellon SF, Ahmed KJ, Amundsen AR, 
Stern EW, Lippard SJ. Cancer Res. 1991; 51:1866–1875. [PubMed: 2004370] 
265. Bellon SF, Lippard SJ. Biophys. Chem. 1990; 35:179–188. [PubMed: 2397272] 
266. Keck MV, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 1992; 114:3386–3390.
267. Donahue BA, Augot M, Bellon SF, Treiber DK, Toney JH, Lippard SJ, Essigmann JM. 
Biochemistry. 1990; 29:5872–5880. [PubMed: 2383564] 
268. Johnstone TC, Park GY, Lippard SJ. Anticancer Res. 2014; 34:471–476. [PubMed: 24403503] 
269. Lovejoy KS, Todd RC, Zhang S, McCormick MS, D'Aquino JA, Reardon JT, Sancar A, 
Giacomini KM, Lippard SJ. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2008; 105:8902–8907. [PubMed: 
18579768] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 61
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

270. Lovejoy KS, Serova M, Bieche I, Emami S, D'Incalci M, Broggini M, Erba E, Gespach C, 
Cvitkovic E, Faivre S, Raymond E, Lippard SJ. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:1709–1719. 
[PubMed: 21750216] 
271. Zhu G, Myint M, Ang WH, Song L, Lippard SJ. Cancer Res. 2012; 72:790–800. [PubMed: 
22180496] 
272. Wang D, Zhu G, Huang X, Lippard SJ. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2010; 107:9584–9589. 
[PubMed: 20448203] 
273. Park GY, Wilson JJ, Song Y, Lippard SJ. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012; 109:11987–11992. 
[PubMed: 22773807] 
274. Kellinger MW, Park GY, Chong J, Lippard SJ, Wang D. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2013; 135:13054–
13061. [PubMed: 23927577] 
275. Gregory MT, Park GY, Johnstone TC, Lee Y-S, Yang W, Lippard SJ. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 2014; 111:9133–9138. [PubMed: 24927576] 
276. Johnstone TC, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2014; 136:2126–2134. [PubMed: 24417436] 
277. Johnstone TC, Alexander SM, Lin W, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2014; 136:116–118. 
[PubMed: 24364388] 
278. Martins ET, Baruah H, Kramarczyk J, Saluta G, Day CS, Kucera GL, Bierbach U. J Med. Chem. 
2001; 44:4492–4496. [PubMed: 11728195] 
279. Baruah H, Rector CL, Monnier SM, Bierbach U. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2002; 64:191–200. 
[PubMed: 12123739] 
280. Baruah H, Barry CG, Bierbach U. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2004; 4:1537–1549. [PubMed: 
15579095] 
281. Baruah H, Wright MW, Bierbach U. Biochemistry. 2005; 44:6059–6070. [PubMed: 15835895] 
282. Ackley MC, Barry CG, Mounce AM, Farmer MC, Springer BE, Day CS, Wright MW, Berners-
Price SJ, Hess SM, Bierbach U. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2004; 9:453–461. [PubMed: 15067524] 
283. Hess SM, Mounce AM, Sequeira RC, Augustus TM, Ackley MC, Bierbach U. Cancer 
Chemother. Pharmacol. 2005; 56:337–343. [PubMed: 15895232] 
284. Hess SM, Anderson JG, Bierbach U. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2005; 15:443–446. [PubMed: 
15603970] 
285. Guddneppanavar R, Saluta G, Kucera GL, Bierbach U. J Med. Chem. 2006; 49:3204–3214. 
[PubMed: 16722638] 
286. Guddneppanavar R, Choudhury JR, Kheradi AR, Steen BD, Saluta G, Kucera GL, Day CS, 
Bierbach U. J Med. Chem. 2007; 50:2259–2263. [PubMed: 17408248] 
287. Ma Z, Saluta G, Kucera GL, Bierbach U. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2008; 18:3799–3801. 
[PubMed: 18515101] 
288. Smyre CL, Saluta G, Kute TE, Kucera GL, Bierbach U. ACS Med. Chem. Lett. 2011; 2:870–874. 
[PubMed: 22328962] 
289. Guddneppanavar R, Bierbach U. Anticancer Agents Med. Chem. 2007; 7:125–138. [PubMed: 
17266509] 
290. Choudhury J, Rao L, Bierbach U. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2011; 16:373–380. [PubMed: 21086002] 
291. Ma Z, Choudhury JR, Wright MW, Day CS, Saluta G, Kucera GL, Bierbach U. J Med. Chem. 
2008; 51:7574–7580. [PubMed: 19012390] 
292. Lin JH. Bone. 1996; 18:75–85. [PubMed: 8833200] 
293. Stresing V, Daubiné F, Benzaid I, Mönkkönen H, Clézardin P. Cancer Lett. 2007; 257:16–35. 
[PubMed: 17697748] 
294. Cremers S, Papapoulos S. Bone. 2011; 49:42–49. [PubMed: 21281748] 
295. Xue Z, Lin M, Zhu J, Zhang J, Li Y, Guo Z. Chem. Commun. 2010; 46:1212–1214.
296. Iafisco M, Margiotta N. J Inorg. Biochem. 2012; 117:237–247. [PubMed: 22824154] 
297. Bose RN, Maurmann L, Mishur RJ, Yasui L, Gupta S, Grayburn WS, Hofstetter H, Salley T. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2008; 105:18314–18319. [PubMed: 19020081] 
298. Moghaddas S, Majmudar P, Marin R, Dezvareh H, Qi C, Soans E, Bose RN. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 
2012; 393:173–181.
Johnstone et al.
Page 62
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

299. Sasanelli R, Boccarelli A, Giordano D, Laforgia M, Arnesano F, Natile G, Cardellicchio C, 
Capozzi MAM, Coluccia M. J Med. Chem. 2007; 50:3434–3441. [PubMed: 17583333] 
300. Arnesano F, Boccarelli A, Cornacchia D, Nushi F, Sasanelli R, Coluccia M, Natile G. J Med. 
Chem. 2009; 52:7847–7855. [PubMed: 19757821] 
301. Belviso BD, Caliandro R, Siliqi D, Calderone V, Arnesano F, Natile G. Chem. Commun. 2013; 
49:5492.
302. Wilson JJ, Lippard SJ. Chem. Rev. 2014; 114:4470–4495. [PubMed: 24283498] 
303. Dolman RC, Deacon GB, Hambley TW. J Inorg. Biochem. 2002; 88:260–267. [PubMed: 
11897339] 
304. Creaven PJ, Madajewicz S, Pendyala L, Mittelman A, Pontes E, Spaulding M, Arbuck S, 
Solomon J. Cancer Treat Rep. 1983; 67:795–800. [PubMed: 6883356] 
305. McCormick MC, Keijzer K, Polavarapu A, Schultz FA, Baik M-H. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2014; 
136:8992–9000. [PubMed: 24853204] 
306. Wilson JJ, Lippard SJ. Inorg. Chem. 2011; 50:3103–3115. [PubMed: 21361279] 
307. Hambley TW, Battle AR, Deacon GB, Lawrenz ET, Fallon GD, Gatehouse BM, Webster LK, 
Rainone S. J Inorg. Biochem. 1999; 77:3–12. [PubMed: 10626347] 
308. Ellis LT, Er HM, Hambley TW. Aust. J. Chem. 1995; 48:793–806.
309. Choi S, Filotto C, Bisanzo M, Delaney S, Lagasee D, Whitworth JL, Jusko A, Li CR, Wood NA, 
Willingham J, Schwenker A, Spaulding K. Inorg. Chem. 1998; 37:2500–2504.
310. Peloso A. J Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans. 1984:249–254.
311. Lemma K, Berglund J, Farrell N, Elding LI. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2000; 5:300–306. [PubMed: 
10907740] 
312. Lemma K, Shi T, Elding LI. Inorg. Chem. 2000; 39:1728–1734. [PubMed: 12526561] 
313. Lemma K, Sargeson AM, Elding LI. J Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans. 2000:1167–1172.
314. Lemma K, House DA, Retta N, Elding LI. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 2002; 331:98–108.
315. Zhang JZ, Wexselblatt E, Hambley TW, Gibson D. Chem. Commun. 2012; 48:847–849.
316. Gibbons GR, Wyrick S, Chaney SG. Cancer Res. 1989; 49:1402–1407. [PubMed: 2924297] 
317. Rose WC, Schurig JE, Huftalen JB, Bradner WT. Cancer Treat Rep. 1982; 66:135–146. 
[PubMed: 7198010] 
318. Anderson WK, Quagliato DA, Haugwitz RD, Narayanan VL, Wolpert-DeFilippes MK. Cancer 
Treat. Rep. 1986; 70:997–1002. [PubMed: 3731155] 
319. Rahman A, Roh JK, Wolpert-DeFilippes MK, Goldin A, Venditti JM, Woolley PV. Cancer Res. 
1988; 48:1745–1752. [PubMed: 3162402] 
320. Parker RJ, Vionnet JA, Bostick-Bruton F, Reed E. Cancer Res. 1993; 53:242–247. [PubMed: 
8417816] 
321. Schilder RJ, LaCreta FP, Perez RP, Johnson SW, Brennan JM, Rogatko A, Nash S, McAleer C, 
Hamilton TC, Roby D, et al. Cancer Res. 1994; 54:709–717. [PubMed: 8306332] 
322. O'Rourke TJ, Weiss GR, New P, Burris HA 3rd, Rodriguez G, Eckhardt J, Hardy J, Kuhn JG, 
Fields S, Clark GM, et al. Anticancer Drugs. 1994; 5:520–526. [PubMed: 7858283] 
323. Tutsch KD, Arzoomanian RZ, Alberti D, Tombes MB, Feierabend C, Robins HI, Spriggs DR, 
Wilding G. Invest. New Drugs. 1999; 17:63–72. [PubMed: 10555124] 
324. Pendyala L, Cowens JW, Chheda GB, Dutta SP, Creaven PJ. Cancer Res. 1988; 48:3533–3536. 
[PubMed: 3370646] 
325. Pendyala L, Arakali AV, Sansone P, Cowens JW, Creaven PJ. Cancer Chemoth. Pharm. 1990; 
27:248–250.
326. Bramwell VH, Crowther D, O'Malley S, Swindell R, Johnson R, Cooper EH, Thatcher N, Howell 
A. Cancer Treat Rep. 1985; 69:409–416. [PubMed: 3995511] 
327. Paolozzi FP, Gaver R, Poiesz BJ, Louie A, DiFino S, Comis RL, Newman N, Ginsberg S. Invest. 
New Drugs. 1988; 6:199–206. [PubMed: 3192385] 
328. Sessa C, Vermorken J, Renard J, Kaye S, Smith D, ten Bokkel Huinink W, Cavalli F, Pinedo H. J 
Clin. Oncol. 1988; 6:98–105. [PubMed: 3335895] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 63
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

329. Clavel M, Monfardini S, Gundersen S, Kaye S, Siegenthaler P, Renard J, van Glabbeke M, 
Pinedo HM. Eur. J. Cancer Clin. Oncol. 1988; 24:1345–1348. [PubMed: 3181255] 
330. Petrelli NJ, Creaven PJ, Herrera L, Mittelman A. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 1989; 23:61–62. 
[PubMed: 2909291] 
331. Meisner DJ, Ginsberg S, Ditch A, Louie A, Newman N, Comis R, Poiesz B. American Journal of 
Clinical Oncology. 1989; 12:129–131. [PubMed: 2705402] 
332. de Wit R, Tesselaar M, Kok TC, Seynaeve C, Rodenburg CJ, Verweij J, Helle PA, Stoter G. Eur. 
J. Cancer. 1991; 27:1383–1385. [PubMed: 1835851] 
333. Anderson H, Wagstaff J, Crowther D, Swindell R, Lind MJ, McGregor J, Timms MS, Brown D, 
Palmer P. Eur. J. Cancer Clin. Oncol. 1988; 24:1471–1479. [PubMed: 3053207] 
334. Echo DV. Phase II/III Comparison of the Platinum Compounds CBDCA vs CHIP vs CACP for 
Recurrent or Metastatic Epidermoid Carcinoma of the Head and Neck. Accessed. 
335. Kelland LR, Abel G, McKeage MJ, Jones M, Goddard PM, Valenti M, Murrer BA, Harrap KR. 
Cancer Res. 1993; 53:2581–2586. [PubMed: 8388318] 
336. Bhargava A, Vaishampayan UN. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2009; 18:1787–1797.
337. Kelland LR. Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs. 2000; 9:1373–1382.
338. Raynaud FI, Mistry P, Donaghue A, Poon GK, Kelland LR, Barnard CF, Murrer BA, Harrap KR. 
Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 1996; 38:155–162. [PubMed: 8616906] 
339. Fink D, Nebel S, Aebi S, Zheng H, Cenni B, Nehme A, Christen RD, Howell SB. Cancer Res. 
1996; 56:4881–4886. [PubMed: 8895738] 
340. Vaisman A, Lim SE, Patrick SM, Copeland WC, Hinkle DC, Turchi JJ, Chaney SG. 
Biochemistry. 1999; 38:11026–11039. [PubMed: 10460158] 
341. Wei M, Cohen SM, Silverman AP, Lippard SJ. J Biol. Chem. 2001; 276:38774–38780. [PubMed: 
11514569] 
342. Harrap KR. Cancer Treat. Rev. 1985; 12:21–33. [PubMed: 3910219] 
343. Choy H, Park C, Yao M. Clin. Cancer Res. 2008; 14:1633–1638. [PubMed: 18347164] 
344. McKeage MJ, Raynaud F, Ward J, Berry C, O'Dell D, Kelland LR, Murrer B, Santabarabara P, 
Harrap KR, Judson IR. J Clin. Oncol. 1997; 15:2691–2700. [PubMed: 9215842] 
345. Kurata T, Tamura T, Sasaki Y, Fujii H, Negoro S, Fukuoka M, Saijo N. Jpn. J. Clin. Oncol. 2000; 
30:377–384. [PubMed: 11095134] 
346. Beale P, Raynaud F, Hanwell J, Berry C, Moore S, Odell D, Judson I. Cancer Chemother. 
Pharmacol. 1998; 42:142–148. [PubMed: 9654114] 
347. Sessa C, Minoia C, Ronchi A, Zucchetti M, Bauer J, Borner M, de Jong J, Pagani O, Renard J, 
Weil C, D'Incalci M. Ann. Oncol. 1998; 9:1315–1322. [PubMed: 9932162] 
348. Vouillamoz-Lorenz S, Buclin T, Lejeune F, Bauer J, Leyvraz S, Decosterd LA. Anticancer Res. 
2003; 23:2757–2765. [PubMed: 12926110] 
349. Judson I, Cerny T, Epelbaum R, Dunlop D, Smyth J, Schaefer B, Roelvink M, Kaplan S, 
Hanauske A. Ann. Oncol. 1997; 8:604–606. [PubMed: 9261531] 
350. Squibb, Bristol-Myers. Squibb, B-M., editor. 1998. vol. Accession No. 910068667
351. Trudeau M, Stuart G, Hirte H, Drouin P, Plante M, Bessette P, Dulude H, Lebwohl D, Fisher B, 
Seymour L. Gynecol. Oncol. 2002; 84:327–331. [PubMed: 11812095] 
352. Figg WD, Chau CH, Madan RA, Gulley JL, Gao R, Sissung TM, Spencer S, Beatson M, Aragon-
Ching J, Steinberg SM, Dahut WL. Clin. Genitourin. Cancer. 2013; 11:229–237. [PubMed: 
23684781] 
353. Vaishampayan UN, Fontana J, Heilbrun LK, Smith D, Heath E, Dickow B, Figg WD. Urol. 
Oncol. 2014; 32:31 e25–33 e25. [PubMed: 23433892] 
354. Sternberg CN, Whelan P, Hetherington J, Paluchowska B, Slee PH, Vekemans K, Van Erps P, 
Theodore C, Koriakine O, Oliver T, Lebwohl D, Debois M, Zurlo A, Collette L. Oncology. 2005; 
68:2–9. [PubMed: 15741753] 
355. Petrylak D, Sartor O, Witje F. Proc. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol. 2007
356. Sternberg CN, Petrylak D, Witjes F. Proc. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol. 2007; 25:5019.
357. Inc, GB. Advisory Committee Briefing Document. U. F. a. D. Administration. , editor. 2007. 
Johnstone et al.
Page 64
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

358. E. M. Agency. , editor. 2008. p. 1-37.
359. Ang WH, Khalaila I, Allardyce CS, Juillerat-Jeanneret L, Dyson PJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2005; 
127:1382–1383. [PubMed: 15686364] 
360. Parker LJ, Italiano LC, Morton CJ, Hancock NC, Ascher DB, Aitken JB, Harris HH, 
Campomanes P, Rothlisberger U, De Luca A, Lo Bello M, Ang WH, Dyson PJ, Parker MW. 
Chemistry. 2011; 17:7806–7816. [PubMed: 21681839] 
361. Townsend DM, Tew KD. Oncogene. 2003; 22:7369–7375. [PubMed: 14576844] 
362. Yang J, Sun X, Mao W, Sui M, Tang J, Shen Y. Mol. Pharmaceutics. 2012; 9:2793–2800.
363. Novohradsky V, Zerzankova L, Stepankova J, Vrana O, Raveendran R, Gibson D, Kasparkova J, 
Brabec V. J Inorg. Biochem. 2014; 140:72–79. [PubMed: 25063910] 
364. Dhar S, Lippard SJ. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2009; 106:22199–22204. [PubMed: 20007777] 
365. Xue X, You S, Zhang Q, Wu Y, Zou GZ, Wang PC, Zhao YL, Xu Y, Jia L, Zhang X, Liang XJ. 
Mol. Pharm. 2012; 9:634–644. [PubMed: 22289032] 
366. Wexselblatt E, Yavin E, Gibson D. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2013; 52:6059–6062.
367. Johnstone TC, Kulak N, Pridgen EM, Farokhzad OC, Langer R, Lippard SJ. ACS Nano. 2013; 
7:5675–5683. [PubMed: 23697579] 
368. Suntharalingam K, Song Y, Lippard SJ. Chem. Commun. 2014; 50:2465–2468.
369. Huang JC, Zamble DB, Reardon JT, Lippard SJ, Sancar A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1994; 
91:10394–10398. [PubMed: 7937961] 
370. He Q, Liang CH, Lippard SJ. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2000; 97:5768–5772. [PubMed: 
10811891] 
371. Barnes KR, Kutikov A, Lippard SJ. Chem. Biol. 2004; 11:557–564. [PubMed: 15123250] 
372. Mukhopadhyay S, Barnés CM, Haskel A, Short SM, Barnes KR, Lippard SJ. Bioconjugate Chem. 
2008; 19:39–49.
373. Massaguer A, González-Cantó A, Escribano E, Barrabés S, Artigas G, Moreno V, Marchán V. 
Dalton Trans. 2015; 44:202–212. [PubMed: 25369773] 
374. Yuan Y, Chen Y, Tang BZ, Liu B. Chem. Commun. 2014; 50:3868–3870.
375. Gaviglio L, Gross A, Metzler-Nolte N, Ravera M. Metallomics. 2012; 4:260–266. [PubMed: 
22310724] 
376. Abramkin S, Valiahdi SM, Jakupec MA, Galanski M, Metzler-Nolte N, Keppler BK. Dalton. 
Trans. 2012; 41:3001–3005. [PubMed: 22281694] 
377. Graf N, Mokhtari TE, Papayannopoulos IA, Lippard SJ. J Inorg. Biochem. 2012; 110:58–63. 
[PubMed: 22465700] 
378. DeBin JA, Strichartz GR. Toxicon. 1991; 29:1403–1408. [PubMed: 1726031] 
379. Hall MD, Hambley TW. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2002; 232:49–67.
380. Vrana O, Brabec V, Kleinwachter V. Anti-Cancer Drug Des. 1986; 1:95–109.
381. Brabec V, Vrana O, Kleinwachter V. Studia Biophysica. 1986; 114:199–207.
382. Choi S, Delaney S, Orbai L, Padgett EJ, Hakemian AS. Inorg. Chem. 2001; 40:5481–5482. 
[PubMed: 11599941] 
383. Choi S, Cooley RB, Hakemian AS, Larrabee YC, Bunt RC, Maupas SD, Muller JG, Burrows CJ. 
J Am. Chem. Soc. 2004; 126:591–598. [PubMed: 14719958] 
384. Choi S, Cooley RB, Voutchkova A, Leung CH, Vastag L, Knowles DE. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2005; 
127:1773–1781. [PubMed: 15701012] 
385. Choi S, Vastag L, Leung C-H, Beard AM, Knowles DE, Larrabee JA. Inorg. Chem. 2006; 
45:10108–10114. [PubMed: 17140216] 
386. Choi S, Personick ML, Bogart JA, Ryu D, Redman RM, Laryea-Walker E. Dalton Trans. 2011; 
40:2888. [PubMed: 21318207] 
387. Vollano JF, Blatter EE, Dabrowiak JC. J Am. Chem. Soc. 1984; 106:2732–2733.
388. Johnstone TC, Lippard SJ. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2014; 19:667–674. [PubMed: 24515615] 
389. Bednarski PJ, Mackay FS, Sadler PJ. Anti-Cancer Agents Med. Chem. 2007; 7:75–93.
390. Smith NA, Sadler PJ. Photoactivatable metal complexes: from theory to applications in 
biotechnology and medicine. 2013
Johnstone et al.
Page 65
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

391. Kratochwil NA, Bednarski PJ, Mrozek H, Vogler A, Nagle JK. Anti-Cancer Drug Des. 1996; 
11:155–171.
392. Kratochwil NA, Zabel M, Range K-J, Bednarski PJ. J Med. Chem. 1996; 39:2499–2507. 
[PubMed: 8691447] 
393. Kratochwil NA, Parkinson JA, Bednarski PJ, Sadler PJ. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 1999; 38:1460–
1463.
394. Kratochwil NA, Guo Z, del Socorro Murdoch P, Parkinson JA, Bednarski PJ, Sadler PJ. J Am. 
Chem. Soc. 1998; 120:8253–8254.
395. Vogler A, Kern A, Hüttermann J. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 1978; 17:524–525.
396. Müller P, Schröder B, Parkinson JA, Kratochwil NA, Coxall RA, Parkin A, Parsons S, Sadler PJ. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2003; 115:349–353.
397. Bednarski PJ, Grunert R, Zielzki M, Wellner A, Mackay FS, Sadler PJ. Chem. Biol. 2006; 13:61–
67. [PubMed: 16426972] 
398. Mackay FS, Woods JA, Moseley H, Ferguson J, Dawson A, Parsons S, Sadler PJ. Chemistry. 
2006; 12:3155–3161. [PubMed: 16470886] 
399. Kasparkova J, Mackay FS, Brabec V, Sadler PJ. J Biol. Inorg. Chem. 2003; 8:741–745. [PubMed: 
14505077] 
400. Ronconi L, Sadler PJ. Dalton. Trans. 2011; 40:262–268. [PubMed: 21076743] 
401. Pracharova J, Zerzankova L, Stepankova J, Novakova O, Farrer NJ, Sadler PJ, Brabec V, 
Kasparkova J. Chem Res Toxicol. 2012; 25:1099–1111. [PubMed: 22420335] 
402. Westendorf AF, Woods JA, Korpis K, Farrer NJ, Salassa L, Robinson K, Appleyard V, Murray 
K, Grunert R, Thompson AM, Sadler PJ, Bednarski PJ. Mol. Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:1894–1904. 
[PubMed: 22710878] 
403. Zhao Y, Woods JA, Farrer NJ, Robinson KS, Pracharova J, Kasparkova J, Novakova O, Li H, 
Salassa L, Pizarro AM, Clarkson GJ, Song L, Brabec V, Sadler PJ. Chemistry. 2013; 19:9578–
9591. [PubMed: 23733242] 
404. Zhao Y, Farrer NJ, Li H, Butler JS, McQuitty RJ, Habtemariam A, Wang F, Sadler PJ. Angew. 
Chem., Int. Ed. 2013; 52:13633–13637.
405. Farokhzad OC, Langer R. ACS Nano. 2009; 3:16–20. [PubMed: 19206243] 
406. Peer D, Karp JM, Hong S, Farokhzad OC, Margalit R, Langer R. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2007; 2:751–
760. [PubMed: 18654426] 
407. Ruoslahti E, Bhatia SN, Sailor MJ. The Journal of Cell Biology. 2010; 188:759–768. [PubMed: 
20231381] 
408. Iversen T-G, Skotland T, Sandvig K. Nano Today. 2011; 6:176–185.
409. Davis ME, Chen Z, Shin DM. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2008; 7:771–782. [PubMed: 18758474] 
410. Maeda H, Wu J, Sawa T, Matsumura Y, Hori K. J Controlled Release. 2000; 65:271–284.
411. Jhaveri AM, Torchilin VP. Front. Pharmacol. 2014; 5
412. Barry NPE, Sadler PJ. ACS Nano. 2013; 7:5654–5659. [PubMed: 23837396] 
413. Wong BS, Yoong SL, Jagusiak A, Panczyk T, Ho HK, Ang WH, Pastorin G. Adv. Drug Delivery 
Rev. 2013; 65:1964–2015.
414. Feazell RP, Nakayama-Ratchford N, Dai H, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2007; 129:8438–8439. 
[PubMed: 17569542] 
415. Dhar S, Liu Z, Thomale J, Dai HJ, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2008; 130:11467–11476. 
[PubMed: 18661990] 
416. Garin-Chesa P, Campbell I, Saigo PE, Lewis JL Jr, Old LJ, Rettig WJ. Am. J. Pathol. 1993; 
142:557–567. [PubMed: 8434649] 
417. Parker N, Turk MJ, Westrick E, Lewis JD, Low PS, Leamon CP. Anal. Biochem. 2005; 338:284–
293. [PubMed: 15745749] 
418. Li J, Yap SQ, Chin CF, Tian Q, Yoong SL, Pastorin G, Ang WH. Chem. Sci. 2012; 3:2083–2087.
419. Yudasaka M, Ajima K, Suenaga K, Ichihashi T, Hashimoto A, Iijima S. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2003; 
380:42–46.
Johnstone et al.
Page 66
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

420. Yoong SL, Wong BS, Zhou QL, Chin CF, Li J, Venkatesan T, Ho HK, Yu V, Ang WH, Pastorin 
G. Biomaterials. 2014; 35:748–759. [PubMed: 24140044] 
421. Ko YH, Smith BL, Wang Y, Pomper MG, Rini DA, Torbenson MS, Hullihen J, Pedersen PL. 
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004; 324:269–275. [PubMed: 15465013] 
422. Li J, Pant A, Chin CF, Ang WH, Ménard-Moyon C, Nayak TR, Gibson D, Ramaprabhu S, 
Panczyk T, Bianco A, Pastorin G. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine. 2014; 
10:1465–1475.
423. Muzi L, Ménard-Moyon C, Russier J, Li J, Chin CF, Ang WH, Pastorin G, Risuleo G, Bianco A. 
Nanoscale. 2015; 7:5383–5394. [PubMed: 25727105] 
424. Chin CF, Yap SQ, Li J, Pastorin G, Ang WH. Chem. Sci. 2014; 5:2265–2270.
425. Xu X, Ray R, Gu Y, Ploehn HJ, Gearheart L, Raker K, Scrivens WA. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2004; 
126:12736–12737. [PubMed: 15469243] 
426. Sahu S, Behera B, Maiti TK, Mohapatra S. Chem. Commun. 2012; 48:8835–8837.
427. Liu H, Ye T, Mao C. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2007; 46:6473–6475.
428. Sun Y-P, Zhou B, Lin Y, Wang W, Shiral Fernando KA, Pathak P, Meziani MJ, Harruff BA, 
Wang X, Wang H, Luo PG, Yang H, Kose ME, Chen B, Veca LM, Xie S-Y. J Am. Chem. Soc. 
2006; 128:7756–7757. [PubMed: 16771487] 
429. Zhu S, Meng Q, Wang L, Zhang J, Song Y, Jin H, Zhang K, Sun H, Wang H, Yang B. Angew. 
Chem., Int. Ed. 2013; 52:3953–3957.
430. Yang X-D, Xiang H-J, An L, Yang S-P, Liu J-G. New J. Chem. 2015; 39:800–804.
431. Li J, Lyv Z, Li Y, Liu H, Wang J, Zhan W, Chen H, Chen H, Li X. Biomaterials. 2015; 51:12–21. 
[PubMed: 25770993] 
432. Robinson JT, Tabakman SM, Liang Y, Wang H, Sanchez Casalongue H, Vinh D, Dai H. J Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2011; 133:6825–6831. [PubMed: 21476500] 
433. Zhang W, Guo Z, Huang D, Liu Z, Guo X, Zhong H. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:8555–8561. 
[PubMed: 21839507] 
434. Dhar S, Daniel WL, Giljohann DA, Mirkin CA, Lippard SJ. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2009; 131:14652–
14653. [PubMed: 19778015] 
435. Liedert B, Pluim D, Schellens J, Thomale J. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006; 34:e47. [PubMed: 
16571898] 
436. Shi Y, Goodisman J, Dabrowiak JC. Inorg. Chem. 2013; 52:9418–9426. [PubMed: 23889547] 
437. Alkilany AM, Thompson LB, Boulos SP, Sisco PN, Murphy CJ. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2012; 
64:190–199.
438. Min YZ, Mao CQ, Xu DC, Wang J, Liu YZ. Chem. Commun. 2010; 46:8424–8426.
439. Min Y, Mao C-Q, Chen S, Ma G, Wang J, Liu Y. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012; 51:6742–6747.
440. Dai Y, Xiao H, Liu J, Yuan Q, Ma Pa, Yang D, Li C, Cheng Z, Hou Z, Yang P, Lin J. J Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2013; 135:18920–18929. [PubMed: 24279316] 
441. Min Y, Li J, Liu F, Yeow EKL, Xing B. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2014; 53:1012–1016.
442. Bakalova R, Ohba H, Zhelev Z, Nagase T, Jose R, Ishikawa M, Baba Y. Nano Lett. 2004; 
4:1567–1573.
443. Gomez Blanco N, Maldonado CR, Mareque-Rivas JC. Chem. Commun. 2009:5257–5259.
444. Maldonado CR, Gómez-Blanco N, Jauregui-Osoro M, Brunton VG, Yate L, Mareque-Rivas JC. 
Chem. Commun. 2013; 49:3985–3987.
445. Infante I, Azpiroz JM, Gomez Blanco N, Ruggiero E, Ugalde JM, Mareque-Rivas JC, Salassa L. 
The Journal of Physical Chemistry C. 2014; 118:8712–8721.
446. Ruggiero E, Hernández-Gil J, Mareque-Rivas JC, Salassa L. Chem. Commun. 2015; 51:2091–
2094.
447. Dai Y, Kang X, Yang D, Li X, Zhang X, Li C, Hou Z, Cheng Z, Ma Pa, Lin J. Adv. Healthcare 
Mater. 2013; 2:562–567.
448. Cheng Z, Dai Y, Kang X, Li C, Huang S, Lian H, Hou Z, Ma P, Lin J. Biomaterials. 2014; 
35:6359–6368. [PubMed: 24816364] 
449. Duan, X.; Evans, DG., editors. Layered double hydroxides. Berlin ; New York: Springer; 2005. 
Johnstone et al.
Page 67
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

450. Rieter WJ, Pott KM, Taylor KML, Lin W. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2008; 130:11584–11585. [PubMed: 
18686947] 
451. Liu D, Poon C, Lu K, He C, Lin W. Nat. Commun. 2014; 5:4182. [PubMed: 24964370] 
452. He C, Liu D, Lin W. Biomaterials. 2015; 36:124–133. [PubMed: 25315138] 
453. Huxford RC, Della Rocca J, Lin W. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2010; 14:262–268. [PubMed: 
20071210] 
454. Taylor-Pashow KML, Della Rocca J, Xie Z, Tran S, Lin W. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2009; 131:14261–
14263. [PubMed: 19807179] 
455. He C, Lu K, Liu D, Lin W. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2014; 136:5181–5184. [PubMed: 24669930] 
456. Della Rocca J, Huxford RC, Comstock-Duggan E, Lin W. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2011; 
50:10330–10334.
457. Aydar E. Cancer Res. 2004; 64:5029–5035. [PubMed: 15289298] 
458. Della Rocca J, Werner ME, Kramer SA, Huxford-Phillips RC, Sukumar R, Cummings ND, 
Vivero-Escoto JL, Wang AZ, Lin W. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology, and Medicine. 
2015; 11:31–38.
459. Jain RA. Biomaterials. 2000; 21:2475–2490. [PubMed: 11055295] 
460. Working, PK.; Newman, MS.; Johnson, J.; Cornacoff, JB. Poly(ethylene glycol): Chemistry and 
Biological Applications. Harris, JM.; Zalipsky, S., editors. Vol. 680. American Chemical 
Society; 1997. p. 45-57.
461. 
462. Stayshich RM, Meyer TY. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2010; 132:10920–10934. [PubMed: 20681726] 
463. Li J, Stayshich RM, Meyer TY. J Am. Chem. Soc. 2011; 133:6910–6913. [PubMed: 21488683] 
464. Reiter RE, Gu ZN, Watabe T, Thomas G, Szigeti K, Davis E, Wahl M, Nisitani S, Yamashiro J, 
Le Beau MM, Loda M, Witte ON. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1998; 95:1735–1740. [PubMed: 
9465086] 
465. Dhar S, Kolishetti N, Lippard SJ, Farokhzad OC. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2011; 108:1850–
1855. [PubMed: 21233423] 
466. Graf N, Bielenberg DR, Kolishetti N, Muus C, Banyard J, Farokhzad OC, Lippard SJ. ACS Nano. 
2012; 6:4530–4539. [PubMed: 22584163] 
467. Johnstone TC, Lippard SJ. Inorg. Chem. 2013; 52:9915–9920. [PubMed: 23859129] 
468. Gan GN, Wittschieben JP, Wittschieben BØ, Wood RD. Cell Research. 2008; 18:174–183. 
[PubMed: 18157155] 
469. Xie K, Doles J, Hemann MT, Walker GC. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2010; 107:20792–20797. 
[PubMed: 21068378] 
470. Pathak RK, McNitt CD, Popik VV, Dhar S. Chem.–Eur. J. 2014; 20:6861–6865. [PubMed: 
24756923] 
471. Marrache S, Pathak RK, Dhar S. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2014; 111:10444–10449. 
[PubMed: 25002500] 
472. Murphy AR, Kaplan DL. J Mater. Chem. 2009; 19:6443–6450. [PubMed: 20161439] 
473. Kim U-J, Park J, Kim HJ, Wada M, Kaplan DL. Biomaterials. 2005; 26:2775–2785. [PubMed: 
15585282] 
474. Mathur AB, Gupta V. Nanomedicine. 2010; 5:807–820. [PubMed: 20662650] 
475. Qu J, Liu Y, Yu Y, Li J, Luo J, Li M. Mater. Sci. Eng., C. 2014; 44:166–174.
476. Lozano-Pérez AA, Gil AL, Pérez S, Cutillas N, Meyer H, Pedreño MI, Aznar-Cervantes SD, 
Janiak C, Cenis JL, Ruiz J. Dalton Trans. 2015 In press. 
477. Cohen S, Yoshioka T, Lucarelli M, Hwang LH, Langer R. Pharm. Res. 1991; 8:713–720. 
[PubMed: 2062800] 
478. Zhou D, Cong Y, Qi Y, He S, Xiong H, Wu Y, Xie Z, Chen X, Jing X, Huang Y. Biomater. Sci. 
2015; 3:182–191. [PubMed: 26214201] 
479. Reithofer MR, Valiahdi SM, Galanski M, Jakupec MA, Arion VB, Keppler BK. Chem. 
Biodivers. 2008; 5:2160–2170. [PubMed: 18972539] 
480. Aryal S, Jack Hu C-M, Fu V, Zhang L. J Mater. Chem. 2012; 22:994–999.
Johnstone et al.
Page 68
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

481. Lin C-T, Lai H-C, Lee H-Y, Lin W-H, Chang C-C, Chu T-Y, Lin Y-W, Lee K-D, Yu M-H. 
Cancer Sci. 2008; 99:1218–1226. [PubMed: 18429963] 
482. Aryal S, Hu C-MJ, Zhang L. ACS Nano. 2010; 4:251–258. [PubMed: 20039697] 
483. Shen W, Luan J, Cao L, Sun J, Yu L, Ding J. Biomacromolecules. 2015; 16:105–115. [PubMed: 
25435165] 
484. Kolishetti N, Dhar S, Valencia PM, Lin LQ, Karnik R, Lippard SJ, Langer R, Farokhzad OC. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2010; 107:17939–17944. [PubMed: 20921363] 
485. Karnik R, Gu F, Basto P, Cannizzaro C, Dean L, Kyei-Manu W, Langer R, Farokhzad OC. Nano 
Lett. 2008; 8:2906–2912. [PubMed: 18656990] 
486. Valencia PM, Pridgen EM, Perea B, Gadde S, Sweeney C, Kantoff PW, Bander NH, Lippard SJ, 
Langer R, Karnik R, Farokhzad OC. Nanomedicine. 2013; 8:687–698. [PubMed: 23075285] 
487. Park GY, Gadde S, Johnstone TC, Gagnon PG, Hasjia AK, Farokhzad OC, Lippard SJ. 
Manuscript in preparation. 
488. Xiao H, Li W, Qi R, Yan L, Wang R, Liu S, Zheng Y, Xie Z, Huang Y, Jing X. J Controlled 
Release. 2012; 163:304–314.
489. Xiao H, Song H, Yang Q, Cai H, Qi R, Yan L, Liu S, Zheng Y, Huang Y, Liu T, Jing X. 
Biomaterials. 2012; 33:6507–6519. [PubMed: 22727463] 
490. Xiao H, Yan L, Zhang Y, Qi R, Li W, Wang R, Liu S, Huang Y, Li Y, Jing X. Chem. Commun. 
2012; 48:10730–10732.
491. Du R, Xiao H, Guo G, Jiang B, Yan X, Li W, Yang X, Zhang Y, Li Y, Jing X. Colloids Surf., B. 
2014; 123:734–741.
492. Xiao H, Qi R, Liu S, Hu X, Duan T, Zheng Y, Huang Y, Jing X. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:7732–
7739. [PubMed: 21783244] 
493. Qi R, Liu S, Chen J, Xiao H, Yan L, Huang Y, Jing X. J Controlled Release. 2012; 159:251–260.
494. Xiao H, Noble GT, Stefanick JF, Qi R, Kiziltepe T, Jing X, Bilgicer B. J Controlled Release. 
2014; 173:11–17.
495. Song H, Xiao H, Zhang Y, Cai H, Wang R, Zheng Y, Huang Y, Li Y, Xie Z, Liu T, Jing X. J 
Mater. Chem. B. 2013; 1:762–772.
496. Farrell, N. Platinum-Based Drugs in Cancer Therapy. Kelland, LR.; Farrell, NP., editors. Humana 
Press; 2000. p. 321-338.
497. Xiao H, Song H, Zhang Y, Qi R, Wang R, Xie Z, Huang Y, Li Y, Wu Y, Jing X. Biomaterials. 
2012; 33:8657–8669. [PubMed: 22938766] 
498. Qi R, Xiao H, Wu S, Li Y, Zhang Y, Jing X. J Mater. Chem. B. 2015; 3:176–179.
499. O'Reilly RK, Hawker CJ, Wooley KL. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2006; 35:1068–1083. [PubMed: 
17057836] 
500. Fleige E, Quadir MA, Haag R. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2012; 64:866–884.
501. Han Y, Li J, Zan M, Luo S, Ge Z, Liu S. Polymer Chemistry. 2014; 5:3707–3718.
502. Duong HTT, Huynh VT, de Souza P, Stenzel MH. Biomacromolecules. 2010; 11:2290–2299. 
[PubMed: 20831272] 
503. Hou J, Shang J, Jiao C, Jiang P, Xiao H, Luo L, Liu T. Macromol. Biosci. 2013; 13:954–965. 
[PubMed: 23744619] 
504. Song H, Wang R, Xiao H, Cai H, Zhang W, Xie Z, Huang Y, Jing X, Liu T. Eur. J. Pharm. 
Biopharm. 2013; 83:63–75. [PubMed: 23046872] 
505. Yang J, Liu W, Sui M, Tang J, Shen Y. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:9136–9143. [PubMed: 21889206] 
506. Liao L, Liu J, Dreaden EC, Morton SW, Shopsowitz KE, Hammond PT, Johnson JA. J Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2014; 136:5896–5899. [PubMed: 24724706] 
507. Mi Y, Zhao J, Feng S-S. J Controlled Release. 2013; 169:185–192.
508. Liu H, Li Y, Lyu Z, Wan Y, Li X, Chen H, Chen H, Li X. J Mater. Chem. B. 2014; 2:8303–8309.
509. Cook TR, Zheng Y-R, Stang PJ. Chem. Rev. 2013; 113:734–777. [PubMed: 23121121] 
510. Zheng Y-R, Suntharalingam K, Johnstone TC, Lippard SJ. Chem. Sci. 2015; 6:1189–1193. 
[PubMed: 25621144] 
Johnstone et al.
Page 69
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

511. Stetefeld J, Jenny M, Schulthess T, Landwehr R, Engel J, Kammerer RA. Nat. Struct. Biol. 2000; 
7:772–776. [PubMed: 10966648] 
512. Peters J, Baumeister W, Lupas A. J Mol. Biol. 1996; 257:1031–1041. [PubMed: 8632466] 
513. Eriksson M, Hassan S, Larsson R, Linder S, Ramqvist T, Lövborg H, Vikinge T, Figgemeier E, 
Müller J, Stetefeld J, Dalianis T, Özbek S. Anticancer Res. 2009; 29:11–18. [PubMed: 
19331128] 
514. Thanasupawat T, Bergen H, Hombach-Klonisch S, Krcek J, Ghavami S, Del Bigio MR, Krawitz 
S, Stelmack G, Halayko A, McDougall M, Meier M, Stetefeld J, Klonisch T. Nanomedicine: 
Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine. 2015 In press. 
515. Zheng Y-R, Suntharalingam K, Johnstone TC, Yoo H, Lin W, Brooks JG, Lippard SJ. J Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2014; 136:8790–8798. [PubMed: 24902769] 
516. Haxton KJ, Burt HM. J Pharm. Sci. 2009; 98:2299–2316. [PubMed: 19009590] 
517. Bryde S, M. de Kroon AIP. Future Med. Chem. 2009; 1:1467–1480. [PubMed: 21426060] 
518. Liu D, He C, Wang A, Lin W. Int. J. Nanomed. 2013; 3309
519. Butler JS, Sadler PJ. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2013; 17:175–188. [PubMed: 23395452] 
520. Oberoi HS, Nukolova NV, Kabanov AV, Bronich TK. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2013; 65:1667–
1685.
521. Zalba S, Garrido MJ. Expert Opin. Drug Delivery. 2013; 10:829–844.
522. Kieler-Ferguson HM, Fréchet JMJ, Szoka FC. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. 
Nanobiotechnol. 2013; 5:130–138. [PubMed: 23335566] 
523. Ulbrich K, Šubr V. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2010; 62:150–166.
524. Rademaker-Lakhai JM, Terret C, Howell SB, Baud CM, de Boer RF, Pluim D, Beijnen JH, 
Schellens JHM, Droz J-P. Clin. Cancer Res. 2004; 10:3386–3395. [PubMed: 15161693] 
525. Sood P, Thurmond KB II, Jacob JE, Waller LK, Silva GO, Stewart DR, Nowotnik DP. 
Bioconjugate Chem. 2006; 17:1270–1279.
526. Nowotnik DP, Cvitkovic E. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2009; 61:1214–1219.
527. Campone M, Rademaker-Lakhai JM, Bennouna J, Howell SB, Nowotnik DP, Beijnen JH, 
Schellens JHM. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 2007; 60:523–533. [PubMed: 17308894] 
528. Ait-Oudhia S, Mager D, Straubinger R. Pharmaceutics. 2014; 6:137–174. [PubMed: 24647104] 
529. Immordino ML, Dosio F, Cattel L. Int. J. Nanomed. 2006; 1:297–315.
530. Petschauer JS, Madden AJ, Kirschbrown WP, Song G, Zamboni WC. Nanomedicine. 2015; 
10:447–463. [PubMed: 25707978] 
531. Business Wire. New York: 1996. 
532. Amantea MA, DeMario MD, Schwartz G, Vogelzang NJ, Tonda M, Pendyala L, Ratain MJ. Ann. 
Oncol. 1998; 9(suppl2) 121 #465. 
533. Working PK, Newman MS, Amantea MA. Ann. Oncol. 1998; 9(suppl 2) 53 #201. 
534. Stathopoulos GP, Boulikas T. J Drug Delivery. 2012; 2012:581363.
Johnstone et al.
Page 70
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. 
NIH-registered clinical trials involving cisplatin in various parts of the world as of 2015. 
The numbers reflect only those trials that are open and whose activity has been verified by 
the NIH within the past two years. Graphic generated using search tools from 
www.clinicaltrials.gov.
Johnstone et al.
Page 71
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. 
Schematic summary of the topics discussed in this review.
Johnstone et al.
Page 72
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. 
The four steps of the mechanism of cisplatin and, by extension, related platinum anticancer 
drugs. (i) Cellular uptake, (ii) aquation/activation, (iii) DNA binding, and (iv) cellular 
processing of DNA lesions leading to apoptosis. Reproduced from reference 15. Copyright 
© 2015, The Royal Society.
Johnstone et al.
Page 73
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. 
The structures of double-stranded DNA adducts of different platinum anticancer agents as 
determined by X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy. (a) Cisplatin 1,2-d(GpG) 
intrastrand cross-link (PDB 1AIO). (b) Cisplatin 1,3-d(GpTpG) intrastrand cross-link (PDB 
1DA4). (c) Cisplatin interstrand cross-link (PDB 1A2E). (d) Oxaliplatin 1,2-d(GpG) 
intrastrand cross-link (PDB 1PG9). (e) Satraplatin 1,2-d(GpG) intrastrand cross-link (PDB 
1LU5). (f) cDPCP monofunctional adduct (PDB 3CO3). Reproduced from reference 41. 
Copyright © 2009, The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Johnstone et al.
Page 74
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. 
The paths travelled by cisplatin before and after entering the cell. Attention is drawn to 
instances where deactivation/sequestration can occur. Reproduced from 49. Copyright © 
2013, The American Chemical Society.
Johnstone et al.
Page 75
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. 
The composition of platinum(IV) prodrugs. Adapted from reference302. Copyright © 2014, 
The American Chemical Society.
Johnstone et al.
Page 76
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. 
Schematic representation of the accumulation of nanoparticles in tumor tissues as a result of 
the enhanced permeation and retention effect. Reproduced from reference411. Copyright © 
2014, A. M. Jhaveri and V. P. Torchilin (Creative Commons Attribution License).
Johnstone et al.
Page 77
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. 
Formation of a supramolecular drug delivery device driven by host-guest interactions 
between a platinum(IV) prodrug and a platinum(II) cage. Reproduced from reference510. 
Copyright © 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Johnstone et al.
Page 78
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 8. 
A) A platinum(IV) prodrug designed to mimic a fatty acid. B) The modelled complex of the 
platinum(IV) prodrug in human serum albumin. Adapted from reference515. Copyright © 
2014, The American Chemical Society.
Johnstone et al.
Page 79
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 9. 
Artistic rendition of lipoplatin. The cisplatin core is shown as a blue, roughly spherical ball 
surrounded by a vesicular lipid bilayer. PEG chains protrude from the surface of the 
liposome. Adapted from reference534. Copyright © 2012, G. P. Stathopoulos and T. 
Boulikas (Creative Commons Attribution License).
Johnstone et al.
Page 80
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 1. 
Chemical structures of clinically-approved and marketed platinum anticancer drugs.
Johnstone et al.
Page 81
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 2. 
Chemical structures of cugar-conjugated platinum(II) complexes.
Johnstone et al.
Page 82
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 3. 
Chemical structures of estrogen receptor ligands tethered to platinum(II) complexes.
Johnstone et al.
Page 83
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 4. 
Chemical structures of bile-acid tethered platinum(II) agents.
Johnstone et al.
Page 84
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 5. 
Chemical structures of folate-targeted platinum(II) complexes.
Johnstone et al.
Page 85
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 6. 
Chemical structures of platinum(II) complexes tethered to peptides.
Johnstone et al.
Page 86
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 7. 
Chemical structures of biologically inactive and active trans-platinum(II) agents.
Johnstone et al.
Page 87
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 8. 
Chemical structures of trans-platinum(II) agents with one or two iminoether ligands.
Johnstone et al.
Page 88
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 9. 
Chemical structures of trans-platinum(II) agents with one or two aliphatic amine ligands.
Johnstone et al.
Page 89
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 10. 
Chemical structures of di- and tri-nuclear platinum agents. The pendent aliphatic groups of 
TriplatinNC-A are shown in the protonated state, raising the overall charge of the complex 
to 8+.
Johnstone et al.
Page 90
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 11. 
Chemical structure of platinum(II) complexes that bind to DNA through non-covalent 
interactions.
Johnstone et al.
Page 91
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 12. 
Chemical structures of monofunctional platinum(II) complexes.
Johnstone et al.
Page 92
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 13. 
Chemical structures of platinum(IV) agents that have undergone clinical trials.
Johnstone et al.
Page 93
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 14. 
Chemical structure of dual-treat platinum(IV) agents.
Johnstone et al.
Page 94
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 15. 
Chemical structure of dual-treat platinum(IV) agents bearing vitamin E (A) or estrogen (B) 
derivatives.
Johnstone et al.
Page 95
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 16. 
Chemical structures of photoactivable platinum(II)-diiodo complexes.
Johnstone et al.
Page 96
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 17. 
Chemical structures of photoactivable cis- and trans-platinum(II)-diazido complexes.
Johnstone et al.
Page 97
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 18. 
Carbon-based delivery systems for platinum(IV) prodrugs including single-walled carbon 
nanotubes (SWCNTs), multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), and spherical carbon 
nanoparticles.
Johnstone et al.
Page 98
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 19. 
Chemical structures of platinum(IV) prodrugs used in the preparation of gold nanoparticle 
delivery constructs.
Johnstone et al.
Page 99
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 20. 
Chemical structures of platinum(IV) complexes conjugated to inorganic nanoparticles 
including lanthanide-based upconversion nanoparticles, quantum dots, iron oxide 
nanoparticles, and layered double hydroxides.
Johnstone et al.
Page 100
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 21. 
Depiction of the formation of coordination polymers using metal units to link platinum(IV) 
prodrugs bearing axial ligands with coordinating motifs.
Johnstone et al.
Page 101
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 22. 
Depiction of the polymerization of platinum(IV) prodrugs bearing axial ligands with 
pendent trialkoxysilanes to form platinum-containing polysilsesquioxane nanoparticles.
Johnstone et al.
Page 102
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Chart 23. 
Platinum complexes encapsulated within polymeric micelles using non-covalent 
interactions. The complexes are shown next to the polymer (blue) that was used to make the 
nanoparticle. In the case of the PLGA nanoparticle, PEGylated lipids were used to stabilize 
the particles formed from the non-amphiphilic polymer.
Johnstone et al.
Page 103
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Johnstone et al.
Page 104
Table 1
Clinically approved platinum anticancer agents.
Generic
Name
Research
Name
Trade
Name
Approval
Granted
Tenure
of approval
Cispatin
CDDP
Platinol
1978
Global
Carboplatin
JM8
Paraplatin
1989
Global
Oxaliplatin
l-OHP
Eloxatin
2002
Global
Nedaplatin
254-S
Aqupla
アクプラ
1995
Japan
Heptaplatin
SKI 2053R
Sunpla
선플라
1999
Korea
Lobaplatin
D-19466
洛鉑
2010†
China
†See main test for discussion
Chem Rev. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 March 15.
