© 1960 Nature Publishing Group
366 
NATURE 
October 29, 1960 
VOL. 1 SS 
been directed towards the development of a gravi-
metric sampler for measurement of respirablc dust, 
and the opinion is expressed that measuring the 
lnass concentration of respirable dust may prove 
morc useful and convenient than thc present practice 
of mcasuring particle-number concentrations. Alto-
gether a variety of topics is covcred within the 
sections of the report and many of these are of 
scientific and technological intcrcst to a wide rangc of 
industries in addition to the mining industry. 
. 
The International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 
THE wide application of heat and mass transfer, 
including almost every form of engineering, chemistry 
and physics, has made it inevitable that much 
valuable information has hitherto appeared in 
specialized journals which pass unnoticed by workers 
in other fields, who might well find use for such data. 
The very large number of papers now published 
indeed makes it impossible to examine all the journals 
containing such subject-matter. The addition of a 
new monthly journal, published by the Pergamon 
Pres;;, and entitled The International Journal of Heat 
and Mass Transfer, will be welcomed by all engaged 
in such work (1, No.1; June 1960. Pp. 114. 
Sub-
scription rates: 
(A) for Libraries, Government 
E;;tablishments, R esearch Laboratories, etc., £7 (20 
dollars) per vol.; (B) for individuals who placo their 
orders directly with the publisher and certify that 
thc journal is for their personal use, £5 5s. (15 dollars) 
per annum). 
Six distinguished editors drawn from 
Great Britain, the United States, U.S.S.R. and Ger-
many, assisted by some fifty advisers representing 
major academic and industrial concerns from all over 
the world, should ensure a truly international journal 
with a succession of papers of high standard. The 
first issue contains an editorial article and ten papers, 
two of which are in German, one in French, the 
remainder in English; all papers have an abstract in 
English, ]'rench, German and Russian. There is also 
a "Bibliography of Heat Transfer", presumably of 
publications written in the past few years only, 
though this is not stated. Research workers already 
familiar with advanced concepts will find the con-
tents of the most value. 
It is to be hoped that the 
editors will from time to time include fundamental 
but more elementary articles for the benefit of less 
erudite students, such as those in their first year of 
Ph.D. work. 
Bibliography of Research at Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory 
A LIST of articles by m embers of the staff of the 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (operated by the 
Union Carbide Corporation for the United States 
Atomic Energy Commission) published during 1959 
in technical journals has been issued by the Labor-
atory, and requests for reprints where available, 
as indicated by the prefix R, should be addressed to 
the Central Research Library at the Laboratory 
(Pp. v + 84. Oak Ridge, Tennes..'lee : Oak RidgeN ational 
Laboratory, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, 1960). 
The articles are arranged alphabetically by author 
under nine divisions: biology; chemistry; general; 
health physics; 
instrumentation; 
mathematics; 
metallurgy and materials; 
physics; and tech-
nology. 
There is an accompanying list of reports 
issued by the Laboratory, and these, cxcept when 
indicated as "Not for sale", should be ordered through 
the Office of Technical Services, Department of 
Commerce, Washington 25, D.C. 
A third list, 
similarly arranged, records the titles of papers pre-
sonted at scientific meetings, and requests for 
information regarding 
these 
papers 
should 
be 
addressed to the authors concerned. 
Tit,les of 
eighteen theses complcted at the Laboratory during 
the ycar are given in a fourth list, alphabetical by 
author, and finally there if; a list of sixty-eight 
inventions disclosed during the year. 
Research into Electricity Supply 
As a postscript to an artide on thc supply of 
electricity in Great Britain, Arthur Palmer suggest" 
unified areas where research could be carried out 
(Research Applied in Industry, 13, No.9: Septem-
ber 1960). These include investigations into funda-
mental questions of electricity production and use : 
for example, ways and means of escaping the limita · 
tions of the thermodynamic cycle and methods of 
solving the outstanding encrgy storage problem; 
investigations into reductions of cost in all the fields 
of generation, transmission, distribution and utiliza-
tion-this is primarily a soientific and engineering 
matter, but it must occasionally take account of 
psychology or even sociology; investigations into 
techniques for reducing the social nuisanee of 
electrical processes- in an island packed with morc 
and more human beings demanding simultaneously 
the often mutually contradictory ends of higher and 
better standards, this is no easy task; and investiga-
tions into the possibility of maintaining human 
interest in an indust,·ial environment which when 
ideally organized and arranged will record the almost 
effortless glide of electrons from genesis to consum-
mation. 
Poison Sprays and Wild Life 
A JOINT Committee of the Royal Society for the 
Protection of Birds and the British Trust for Ornitho-
logy has been formed under the chairmanship of 
Mr. S. Cramp to study the effect of toxic chemicals 
on birds. The Committee is anxious to obtain evid-
ence of kills of birds due to agricultural chemical;; 
used in sprays or in the form of seed dressings. The 
basic information needed is the date and locality of 
the kills, the species and numbcr of birds affected 
and the chemical used. 
The Committec would 
appreciate prompt notification of birds the death of 
which is thought to be due to agricultural chemicals, 
so that if necessary corpses may be colleeted for 
chemical analysis. Information should be sent to the 
secretary of the Committee, Mr. P. J. Conder, Royal 
Society for the Protection of Birds, 25 Eccleston 
Square, London, S.W.I. 
Insulin 
A RECENT issue of the Briti8h ll'ledical Bullet'in 
deals with insulin in its varied aspects (16, No.3 ; 
September 1960). Prof. Charles H. Best describes hi;; 
pionecr work with Banting and developments which 
have occurred during the past forty years. 'fhis if; 
followed by an account by Dr. F. Sanger oft,he chemis-
t.ry of insulin based on his Nobcl Prize Lecture. Other 
articlcs include one by Dr. loun Harris on the 
chemistry 
of pituitary 
polypeptide 
hormones ; 
methods of insulin assay by G. A. Stewart; insulin 
antibodies by Dr. P. H. Wright; the action of 
insulin on carbohyrlrate met.abolism by Dr. R. B. 
