Pure&App/. Chern., Vol. 62, No. 6, pp. 1099-1102,1990. 
Printed in Great Britain. 
@ 1990 IUPAC 
Supramolecular photochemistry 
Vinceneo Baleani 
"G. Ciamician" Department of Chemistry of the University and 
F.R.A.E.- C.N.R. Institute, Bologna, Italy. 
Abstract. The photochemistry of supramolecular species is an emerging 
and rapidly growing research field. A review is presented of recent 
results concerning the photochemical behavior and/or the luminescence 
of (i) second-sphere coordination compounds of Co(CN)i- and 
Pt (bpy) ( NH3) g', 
( ii) cage-type complexes of Co3', 
Eu3', 
and Ru2', 
and 
(iii) polynuclear Ru2' 
complexes of polypyridine bridging ligands. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the field of photochemistry, which is at the crossroads of chemistry, physics and 
biology and at the interface between matter and light, the quantitative growth of the 
last 20 years has been accompanied by profound qualitative changes. The interest of 
the research workers has progressively moved from photoreactions taking place inside 
molecules (mamolecular photochemistry) to processes taking place between long- 
lived excited states and suitable reaction partners (intermolecular electron and 
energy transfer processes). In 
the last few years a trend to study artificial 
assemblies of two or more molecular components (-molecular 
photochemistry) has 
also emerged with the dual aim of making progress toward the understanding of 
photobiological processes and the design of artificial systems capable of performing 
useful functions (ref. 1). In the area of coordination chemistry, one can distinguish 
three types of supramolecular systems: (i) second-sphere coordination compounds, i.e. 
complexes associated to other species by electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonds, 
or other intramolecular forces; (ii) cage-type coordination compounds, i.e. complexes 
in which a metal ion is encapsulated in a single, polydentate ligand; (iii) molecular 
building blocks linked via bridging units by means of covalent or coordinated bonds. 
In this paper, we will illustrate and discuss the photochemical and photophysical 
behavior of selected examples of these three types of supramolecular systems. 
SECOND-SPHERE COORDINATION COMPOUNDS 
Hexacyanocobaltate(ll1) anion with polyammonium macrocyclic receptors 
Co(CN)i- gives rise to 1:l adducts with the fully protonated forms of the macrocyclic 
receptors [32]ane-N8 and [24]ane-N6. The quantum yield of ligand photodissociation is 
reduced by a factor of 3 for the (H8[32]ane-N8)[Co(CN)6]5+ adduct and by a factor of 
2 for the (H6[24]ane-N6)[Co(CN)6]3t adduct (ref. 2). Such a discrete quenching effect 
is taken as an indication that the adducts possess well-defined supramolecular 
structures. The protonated forms of the larger 32-atom ring is thought to encircle 
the complex giving rise to hydrogen bonds with four equatorial CN- ligands (1). In 
this way, four out of six CN- ligands are prevented to photodissociate, accounting 
for the reduction in the quantum yield by a factor of 3. For the protonated form of 
the smaller 24-atom ring, encircling of Co(CN):- 
is not possible and only the three 
cyanide ligands of an octahedral face can be hydrogen bonded to the macrocyclic 
receptor ( 2 ) .  This accounts for the reduction in the quantum yield by a factor of 2 
1 
T 
.. 
1099 

1100 
V. BALZANI 
since in such a supramolecular structure only three CN- ligands are allowed to 
dissociate. Recent results (ref. 3) obtained for the Co(CN)g- adducts with H8[24]ane- 
N
:
'
,
 
H7[24]ane-Ni', 
and H10[30]ane-N1~o' are in agreement with the formation of the 
two types of structures described above, depending in a critical way on the size of 
the macrocyclic ring. 
2,2-bipyridine-diamineplatinum(ll) with dibenzocrownethers 
Pt(bpy) (NH3)i' 
gives rise to host-guest adducts with aromatic crown ethers like 
dibenzo-30-crown-10, DB30C10. We have recently investigated (ref. 4 )  the 
photochemical and photophysical behaviour of the DB30C10 host, the Pt(bpy) (NH )2' 
guest, and the [Pt(bpy)(NH3)2-DB30C10]2t adduct (3) in CH2C12. The results obtained 
can be summarized as follows: (i) in the adduct, the absorption band of the aromatic 
crown ether and the ligand (bpy) centered band of Pt(bpy)(NH3)gt decrease in 
intensity, while a new broad band appears at lower energies; (ii) the fluorescence 
emission of the aromatic crown ether and the phosphorescence (ligand centered) 
emission of Pt(bpy)(NH3);' 
disappear on adduct formation, while a new, broad, short- 
lived emission appears at lower energies; (iii) the photoreactivity of the metal 
complex is prevented in the adduct. Extension of these studies to a family of 
aromatic crown ether hosts (ref. 5 )  has shown that the electronic interaction between 
the bpy ligand of the metal complex and the aromatic rings of the crown ether depends 
on the size of the crown rings and the nature of the aromatic rings. 
3 2  
CAGE-TYPE COMPLEXES 
Cage-type cobalt(ll1) complexes 
Simple host-guest systems are coordination compounds in which a metal ion is 
encapsulated in a cage-type ligand. One of the first prepared cage-type coordination 
compounds is the Co(II1) sepulchrate ion Co(~ep)~' ( 4 )  (ref. 6), which may be 
considered as the caged version of Co(NH3,f. 
The spectroscopic properties of the two 
complexes are quite similar because the composition and symmetry of the first 
coordination sphere are the same. The photochemical and redox properties, however, 
are completely different. Upon one-electron reduction or photoexcitation in the 
ligand-to-metal charge-transfer bands the hexamine complex undergoes fast release of 
the amine ligands, as expected because of the d7 electronic configuration of the 
reduced or excited complex, leading to complete decomposition of the molecular 
structure. By contrast, reduction or photoexcitation of Co(sep)3t does not cause any 
disruption of the structure of the complex because no simple ligand can be ejected 
and the metal cannot escape from the cage (refs. 7,8). Because of its stability 
towards redox decomposition, C~(sep)~' can be used as an electron relay and 
photosensitizer (in ion-pair systems), while Co(NH3)i' 
is useless in this regard. 
Cage-type complexes of luminescent lanthanide ions 
Some lanthanide ions, particularly Euat and Tb", 
possess strongly luminescent and 
long-lived excited states. For example, the lowest excited state of Eu,?, 
5D0, lives 
3.2 ms and emits with an efficiency of 0.8 in D20 solutions. Unfortunately, these 
ions are very poor light absorbers and to make use of their excellent emitting 
properties one has to remedy for the difficulty to populate their excited states. 
Complexation of the lanthanide ion with suitable ligands is a possibility, but to 
obtain stable complexes lanthanide ions must be enclosed into cage-type li ands like 
the 2.2.1 cryptand ( 5 )  or the bpy.bpy.bpy cryptand ( 6 ) .  The [Eu C2.2.1Ift complex 
exhibits ligand-to-metal charge transfer bands with E ~ v  
100 M-' 
cm-I in the U.V. 
region. Its greatly improved absorption capacity compared to the aquo ion, however, 
is counterbalanced by the 
small efficiency of conversion 
( 0 . 6 % )  of the originally 
populated charge transfer 
states to the luminescent f-f 
level (ref. 9 ) .  Much better 
results are obtained (refs. 
10-12) 
when 
Eu3' 
is 
encapsulated 
in 
the 
exhibits 
very 
strong 
bpy.bpy.bpy cryptand (6) which 

Supramolecular photochemistry 
1101 
absorption bands ('&25000 
M-lcm-') 
in the near U.V. Excitation in these spin-allowed 
ligand centered bands is followed by energy transfer to the 5D0 level of Eu3' 
with a 
reasonably high efficiency (lo%), with the result that such a complex is an efficient 
molecular device for the conversion of U.V. light absorbed by the ligands into 
visible luminescence emitted by the metal ion (antenna effect). [Tbc bpy.bpy.bpy13' 
(ref. 11) and other Eu3+ and Tb3' 
cryptates of the same family have also been 
investigated in our laboratories. 
Cage-type ruthenium(l1) polypyridine complexes 
In the last ten years Ru(I1)-polypyridine complexes have attracted the attention of 
several research groups because of a unique combination of ground and excited states 
properties (ref. 13). The prototype of these complexes is the famous Ru(bpy)$' 
that 
is extensively used as photoluminescent compound and sensitizer in the 
interconversion of light and chemical energy. Comparison between the properties of 
this complex and the requirements needed for luminophores and sensitizers shows that 
the main drawbacks of Ru(bpy)$+ are (i) the relatively fast radiationless decay of 
the 3CT excited state to the ground state (with, as a consequence, a relatively short 
excited state lifetime and a small luminescence efficiency) and (ii) the occurrence 
of a ligand photosubstitution reaction. If the bpy ligands are linked together to 
make a cage around the ruthenium ion, ligand photodissociation can be prevented. A 
suitable cage ligand can also confer more rigidity to the molecule, slowing down 
radiationless decay processes and thereby making stronger the luminescence emission 
and longer the excited state lifetime. It may also happen, however, that the cage 
ligand does not allow the metal to attain an appropriate 
octahedral coordination geometry and/or suitable Ru-N bond 
distances. Molecular models show that the cryptand of 6 is 
suitable for the larger, not symmetry-demanding Eu3' 
ion, 
but it is clearly unsuitable to create the octahedral 
coordination required by Ru2'. 
The cage-type ligand of 7 is 
much more suitable in this regard because its larger spacers 
allow the bpy ligands to bend, making an almost ideal 
octahedral coordination environment. In practice, the best 
way to obtain the Ru2' 
complex 7 resulted to be a template 
reaction starting from a derivative of Ru(bpy)!' 
(ref. 14). 
Recent studies (ref. 15) have shown that this caged Ru(I1) 
complex exhibits absorption and emission spectra very 
similar to those of the parent Ru(bpy);', 
a longer excited 
state lifetime and, as expected, an extremely greater (about 
lo4 times) stability towards ligand photosubstitution. The 
last property should assure a quite high turnover number 
when this complex is used as a sensitizer. 
I 
BUILDING BLOCKS LINKED BY BRIDGING LIGANDS 
Mononuclear complexes may be highly luminescent species and powerful redox reactants 
for light-induced and light-generating electron transfer processes (ref. 13). For a 
variety of practical applications, however, multicenter luminescent and redox systems 
are expected to be more useful. The synthesis and characterization of polynuclear 
coordination compounds having the desired photophysicsl and photochemical properties 
is currently an important research field and dozens of papers have recently appeared 
on this subject. We only mention here some of the studies carried out recently in our 
laboratories. 
Dinuclear rutheniurn(l1) complexes 
The dimclear complexes ( p - 2 , 3 - d p p ) [ R ~ ( C O ) ~ C l ~ ] ~  
and ( p - 2 , 5 - d p p ) [ R ~ ( C O ) ~ C l ~ ] ~  
(for 
dpp, see 8 and 9 )  show a quite interesting behaviour (ref. 
chloride ligands leads to the presence of closely lying 
ligand centered, charge transfer, and metal centered excited 
16). The unusual combination of polypyridine, carbonyl, and 
states. The interplay of these three types of levels on 
changing temperature results in the presence of a strong 
ligand centered luminescence at low temperature and a strong photosensitivity at room 
* 0 8 
'r4 

1102 
V. BALZANI 
temperature. The properties related to the aromatic bridging ligands (e.g. the 
reduction potentials) are affected by coordination to the metal centers, but the two 
Ru(C0)2C1Z moieties practically do not communicate in the bimetallic complexes 
because of the strong withdrawing effect of the CO ligands. 
Homo- and hetero-tetrametallic complexes 
The tetrametallic complexes M[( /U.-2,3-dpp)Ru(bpy)2]it (M = Ru or 0 s )  have been 
prepared and their electrochemical and luminescent properties have been studied (ref. 
17; for M = Ru, see also ref. 18). For both complexes, reduction first takes place on 
the dpp ligands, while oxidation first occurs in the central metal for M = 0s and in 
the peripherical metals for M = Ru. Both complexes feature the so-called "antenna 
effect" (ref. 19), but in opposite directions: for M 
0s luminescence takes place 
from the central chromophore, which receives the energy collected by the peripherical 
chromophores (concentration effect), whereas the reverse occurs for M = Ru (diffusion 
effect). 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank my colleagues 
and co-workers, whose names appear in the 
references quoted, and Mr. G. Gubellini for the drawings. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
V. Balzani, Ed. Supramolecular Photochemistry, Reidel, Dordrecht (1987). 
2. 
M.F. Manfrin , L. Moggi, V. Castelvetro, V. Balzani, M.W. Hosseini, and J.M. Lehn, 
3. F. Pina, L. Moggi, M.F. Manfrin, V. Balzani, M.W. Hosseini, and J.M. Lehn, Gazz. 
4. 
R. Ballardini, M.T. Gandolfi, V. Balzani, F.H. Kohnke, and F.J. Stoddart, Angew. 
5. R. Ballardini, M.T. Gandolfi, L. Prodi, M. Ciano, V. Balzani, F. Kohnke, H.S. 
6. 1.1. Creaser, R.J. Gene, J.M. Harrowfield, A.J. Herlt, A.M. Sargeson, M.R. Snow, 
7. F. Pina, M. Ciano, L. Moggi, and V. Balzani, Inorg. Chem.. 24, 844 (19853, 
8. F. Pina, Q.G. Mulazzani, M. Venturi, M. Ciano, and V. Balzani, Inorg. Chem. 24, 
9. N .  Sabbatini, S. Perathoner, G. Lattanzi, S. Dellonte, and V. Balzani, J. Phys. 
10. B. Alpha, J.M. Lehn, and G. Mathis, Anaew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 26, 266 (1987). 
11. N .  
Sabbatini, L. Perathoner, V. Balzani, B. Alpha, and J.M. Lehn, in 
SuDramolecular Photochemistry, V. Balzani ed., p. 187, 
Reidel, Dordrecht (1987). 
12. R. Ballardini, et al., manuscript in preparation. 
13. A. Juris, V. Balzani, F. Barigelletti, S. Campagna, P. Belser, and A. von 
14. P. Belser, L. De Cola, and A. von Zelewsky, J. Chem.Soc.Chem. Commun. 1057 (1988). 
15. L. De Cola, F. Barigelletti, V. Balzani, P. Belser, A. von Zelewsky, F. Ebmeyer, 
J. Am. Chem. SOC. 107, 6888 (1985). 
Chirn. Ital. 119, 65 (1989). 
Chem. Int. Ed. End. 27, 
692 (1988). 
Zavareh, N .  Spencer, and J.F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. SOC., in press. 
J. Spingborg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 104, 6016 (1982). 
848 (1985). 
Chem., 91, 6136 (1987), and references therein. 
Zelewsky, Coord. Chem. Rev.. 84, 85 (1988). 
F. Voegtle, and S. Grammenudi, J. Am. Chem. SOC., 110, 7210 (1988); 
ibidem, 
in press. 
Chem., in press. 
submitted for publication. 
(1989). 
Balzani ed., p . l ,  Reidel, Dordrecht, 1987. 
16. S. Campagna, G. Denti, G .  De Rosa, G. Sabatino, M. Ciano, and V. Balzani, Inorg'. 
17. S. Campagna, G. Denti, L. Sabatino, S. Serroni, M. Ciano, and V. Balzani, 
18. W.R. Murphy, K.J. Brewer, G. Gettliffe, and J.D. Petersen, Inorg. Chem. 28, 81 
19. V. Balzani, L. Moggi, and F. Scandola, in "SuDramolecular Photochemistry, V. 
