. We introduce a new characterization of the NP complexity class, called Quadratic Span Programs (QSPs), which is a natural exten- sion of span programs deﬁned by Karchmer and Wigderson. Our main motivation is the quick construction of succinct, easily veriﬁed arguments for NP statements. To achieve this goal, QSPs use a new approach to the well-known technique of arithmetization of Boolean circuits. Our new approach yields dramatic performance improvements. Using QSPs, we construct a NIZK argument – in the CRS model – for Circuit-SAT consisting of just 7 group elements. The CRS size and prover computation are quasi-linear, making our scheme seemingly quite practical, a result supported by our implementation. Indeed, our NIZK argument attains the shortest proof, most eﬃcient prover, and most eﬃcient veriﬁer of any known technique. We also present a variant of QSPs, called Quadratic Arithmetic Programs (QAPs), that “naturally” compute arithmetic circuits over large ﬁelds, along with succinct NIZK constructions that use QAPs. Finally, we show how QSPs and QAPs can be used to eﬃciently and publicly verify outsourced computations, where a client asks a server to compute F(x) for a given function F and must verify the result provided by the server in considerably less time than it would take to compute F from scratch. The resulting schemes are the most eﬃcient, general- purpose publicly veriﬁable computation schemes. ⋆The research of this author was sponsored by the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and the U.K. Ministry of Defence and was accomplished under Agreement Number W911NF-06-3-0001. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author(s) and should not be interpreted as representing the oﬃcial policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory, the U.S. Government, the U.K. Ministry of Defence or the U.K. Government. The U.S. and U.K. Governments are authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government purp