www.journals.viamedica.pl/palliative_medicine_in_practice
31
Review
Address for correspondence:
Zofia Barbara Olszewska
University of Warsaw, Krakowskie Przedmieście 26/28, 00–927 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: zb.olszewska@student.uw.edu.pl
	
Palliative Medicine in Practice 2024; 18, 1, 31–37
	
Copyright © 2024 Via Medica, ISSN 2545–0425, e-ISSN 2545–1359
	
DOI: 10.5603/pmp.96441
Received: 10.07.2023 Accepted: 13.11.2023 Early publication date: 11.12.2023
This article is available in open access under Creative Common Attribution-Non-Commercial-No Derivatives 4.0 International  
(CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) license, allowing to download articles and share them with others as long as they credit the authors  
and the publisher, but without permission to change them in any way or use them commercially.
Zofia Barbara Olszewska
Department of Law and Administration, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland
Statements for the event of incapacity 
to consent: current issues  
and postulates regarding future law
Abstract
The issue of providing statements in the event of incapacity to consent to medical treatment is extremely 
complex. The international legal community grapples with terminological confusion, with the terms 
“living wills”, “pro futuro statements”, “advance medical directives”, and the classic “statements for 
the event of future incapacity to consent” being used to describe the concept in question. What exactly, 
however, does this concept involve?
The article points out the legal differences between the classic expression of consent or objection as 
precisely defined in the Polish Act on the Profession of Physician and Dentist, and the making of a state-
ment in the event of future incapacity to consent. The issue of the form required for the delivery of 
such statements was considered. Relevant Polish legislation was analysed with the legal basis facilita­
ting (or not) the making of such statements being indicated and possible risks for physicians providing 
medical services to individuals who had delivered such statements being presented. Also presented are 
the necessary changes to Polish legislation regarding the institution of living wills as well as postulates 
regarding future law.
Palliat Med Pract 2024; 18, 1, 31–37
Keywords: living will, pro futuro statement, advance medical directives, medical law, palliative care, 
patient autonomy, patient rights
Introduction
The issues of patient’s consent and objection to 
a medical procedure are comprehensively regulated 
in the Act on the Profession of Physician and Dentist 
(hereinafter: PPD) [1]. As a general rule, consent to 
a medical procedure is given by an adult, incapacitated 
patient [PPD article 32(1)]. If the patient is a minor or 
incapable of giving informed consent, the consent of 
the patient’s legal representative (a.k.a. surrogate con-
sent) is required whereas, if the patient has no legal 
representative or if communication with the patient is 
impossible, the permission of the guardianship court 
is required [PPD Article 32(2)]. The law provides for 
situations in which consent for a medical procedure 
is not required, with the physicians having the right 

Palliative Medicine in Practice 2024, vol. 18, no. 1
www.journals.viamedica.pl/palliative_medicine_in_practice
32
to take necessary measures when a delay caused by 
the consent procedure would endanger the patient 
with the danger of loss of life, grievous bodily harm, 
or serious health disorder [PPD Article 34(7)].
The problem arises when the patient is unable 
to decide on their own due to a progressive disease, 
being unconscious or receiving medication, among 
other things. With a view to fully implementing the 
autonomy of will directive, the patients deliver sta-
tements in cases of losing the ability to decide for 
themselves. The statement can take the form of 
both consent and objection as well as of indication 
of preference to undertake or not undertake certain 
measures. An example can be provided by a statement 
of objection to blood transfusion should it be required 
as made by Jehovah’s Witnesses, or the indication of 
a preference for specific treatment as made by pa-
tients losing their consciousness due to progressive 
Alzheimer’s disease [3]. At the heart of the institution 
of pro futuro statements lies the desire to extend the 
individual’s ability to decide on their own fate bey-
ond the moment the individual loses their ability to 
consciously express their will [4].
Without a doubt, the issue of providing statements 
in the event of future incapacity to consent to medical 
treatment is extremely complex. The international legal 
community grapples with terminological confusion, 
with the terms “living wills”, “pro futuro statements”, 
“advance medical directives”, and the classic “state-
ments for the event of future incapacity to consent” 
being used to describe the concept in question. While 
it is not the objective of this article to suggest the 
superiority of any of these terms over the remaining 
ones, the term “pro futuro statements” is used herein 
for the sake of clarity and precision. The article outlines 
the history of pro futuro statements and points out the 
differences between these and the classic consent and 
objection statements. The legal basis facilitating (or not) 
the making of such statements is analysed, and the 
issues regarding their legal characteristics and form are 
discussed. Postulates for future law are also presented.
Historical background
The term “living will” became widespread after 
being first used in 1969 as the title of a document 
drawn up by an American lawyer, Luis Kutner, in 
which an adult and competent individual expressed 
their directives regarding medical treatment in the 
event of incapacity. In the early stages of shaping 
the legislation, the statements concerned the pa-
tients’ preferred course of action to be taken by 
physicians in advanced disease states. California was 
the first US state to pass legislation regulating living 
wills (Natural Death Act) in 1976 [5]. By 1986, similar 
legislations were enacted in 41 states. In 1991, the 
United States passed the Patient Self-Determination 
Act [6]. Healthcare providers, including hospitals and 
nursing homes, were required to inform patients of 
their rights to provide advance statements of intent 
in accordance with state law.
Over time, the concept of pro futuro statements 
has evolved, resulting in an expansion of their scope 
to situations other than those related to discontinu-
ation of medical life support [7]. In Europe, the issue 
of pro futuro statements was first addressed in the 
Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine as 
concluded in Oviedo on April 4, 1997 (hereinafter: 
the Oviedo Convention) [8]. The document used very 
general terms to indicate that previously expressed 
will regarding medical interventions to be provided 
to the person concerned should be taken into acco-
unt if they are unable to express their will at the time 
of such intervention. However, the provisions of the 
Oviedo Convention do not specify the form in which 
such a statement should be delivered, nor do they 
precisely delineate the scope of medical interventions 
to be undertaken. Despite the attempts at fitting the 
concept of pro futuro statements within the existing 
legal framework in Poland or at direct application of 
the provisions of the Oviedo Convention have failed to 
deliver satisfactory results, the Convention indisputa-
bly provides an important interpretative guideline for 
understanding the institution of pro futuro statements 
in the Polish legal system [9].
Pro futuro statements vs. the classic 
concept of consent and objection
Although both types of declarations are made in 
relation to future events, the basic difference between 
classic consent or objection and the sensu stricto pro 
futuro statements relates to different situations in 
which the statements in question are made. Although 
the doctrine is divided on this point, the position of 
Bosek, who distinguishes between two basic types 
of situations, is legitimate [10]. The classic consent 
or objection is emphasized to belong to the group of 
statements that concern future treatments with uncer-
tain outcomes while being delivered to the physician in 
specific treatment situations. Thus, they relate e.g. to 
cases of patients being informed of the possibility of 
postoperative complications, but nevertheless giving 
consent for the procedure to be carried out. In this 
case, there is no doubt regarding the applicability of 
the provisions of the PPD Act.
The pro futuro statements, on the other hand, inc-
lude the statements of preferences regarding medical 

www.journals.viamedica.pl/palliative_medicine_in_practice
33
Zofia Barbara Olszewska, Statements for the event of incapacity to consent
management methods or entities to provide medical 
procedures being formulated before there are me-
dical indications for the procedure. A good example 
can be provided by the statements made by Jehovah’s 
Witnesses with regard to cases involving blood trans-
fusion being needed. There may be some doubt as to 
whether an objection to undergo a blood transfusion 
procedure expressed in the form of a written state-
ment by a victim of a traffic accident is a pro futuro 
statement or a classic objection according to PPD. In 
light of the above reasoning, if the statement (and 
therefore consent, objection, or other declaration) was 
made before the prerequisites for the procedure were 
met, it should be treated as a pro futuro statement.
It is suggested, however, that pro futuro state-
ments are intended to indicate the preferred method 
of treatment only if the patient is unable to inde-
pendently express their will. If the patient regains 
consciousness for at least a brief period allowing them 
to make an independent decision, the pro futuro 
statement becomes irrelevant, and the PPD provi-
sions apply. It should be emphasized that statements 
expressed following a misdiagnosis of a disease are 
not to be considered pro futuro statements, although 
misdiagnosis can obviously result in liability (criminal, 
civil, disciplinary) and all the related consequences on 
the part of the physician.
The legal basis for  
pro futuro statements
Rather than being regulated directly, the pro futuro 
statements are addressed within the Polish legal sys-
tem indirectly within the context of the physician’s du-
ties and the patient’s rights. This warrants an overview 
of relevant regulations in other European countries.
Pro futuro statements under the European 
Bioethics Convention
As indicated above, pursuant to Article 9 of the 
Oviedo Convention, advance statements made by 
the patient with regard to their will about medical 
intervention should be taken into account if the pa-
tient is unable to express that will at the time of the 
intervention. However, the Oviedo Convention was sig­
ned by Poland in 1999, its ratification has never been 
completed, and thus the act has not been put into 
force as part of the Polish legal order. Nonetheless, the 
Convention provides important guidance with regard 
to the interpretation of pro futuro statements. The 
guiding principle of the Oviedo Convention is related to 
the autonomy of the patient’s will. Although Article 9 
is found in Chapter II of the Convention, entitled 
“Consent”, there is no doubt that the term “previously 
expressed wishes by a patient” is not relevant to the 
classic concept of consent or objection. As can be 
seen from an analysis of Chapter II, the issue of pa-
tient consent is regulated by Article 5 whereas the 
surrogate consent is addressed in Articles 6 and 7 of 
the Convention. On the other hand, Article 8 of the 
Convention is the equivalent of Article 34(7) of the PPD 
and addresses the authorization of treatment without 
consent in an emergency situation in which a person 
is unable to provide consent to medical intervention.
The Oviedo Convention does not elaborate on 
the question of how to treat “previously expressed 
wishes” and how strongly binding character is attri-
buted to the term “taking into account”. According 
to the Polish language dictionary, the expression 
brać pod uwagę [take into account] is synonymous 
with uwzględniać [consider] [11]. Based on a literal 
interpretation, it seems that the phrasing “previously 
expressed wishes […] shall be taken into account” is 
not binding for the physician. This position is confir-
med by paragraph 62 of the Report of the Committee 
of Ministers of the Council of Europe clarifying the 
intention of the parties to the Oviedo Convention, 
stating that “taking previously expressed wishes into 
account does not mean that they should necessarily 
be followed”. This, however, does not change the fact 
that the patient’s autonomy should be duly respected, 
and the doctor should present arguments for not 
respecting the patient’s wishes. In justifying their 
decision, the physician should demonstrate that the 
patient’s will was taken into account.
Resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly 
of the Council of Europe “Protecting human 
rights and dignity by taking into account 
previously expressed wishes of patients”
The Resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly of 
the Council of Europe “Protecting human rights and 
dignity by taking into account previously expressed 
wishes of patients” (hereinafter: the Resolution) re-
commends that national parliaments, when legislating 
in the field of the protection of the human rights and 
dignity of the terminally ill and dying, respect, among 
others, the following principles [12]:
	
— self-determination for capable adults in the event 
of their future incapacity, by means of advance 
directives, living wills and/or continuing powers of 
attorney, should be promoted and given priority 
over other measures of protection (Section 7.1);
	
— advance directives, living wills and/or continuing 
powers of attorney should, in principle, be made 
in writing and be fully taken into account when 
properly validated and registered (ideally in state 
registries) (Section 7.2);

Palliative Medicine in Practice 2024, vol. 18, no. 1
www.journals.viamedica.pl/palliative_medicine_in_practice
34
	
— prior instructions contained in advance directives 
and/or living wills which are against the law, or 
good practice, or those which do not correspond 
to the actual situation that the interested party 
anticipated at the time of signing the document, 
should not be applied (Section 7.4);
	
— advance directives, living wills and/or continuing 
powers of attorney should be accessible to all; 
complicated forms or expensive formalities should 
thus be avoided (Section 7.5);
	
— a system of supervision to fight abuse should be 
established under which a competent authority 
is empowered to investigate, and, if necessary, 
intervene (Section 7.7).
Although the presented above is just a part of the 
guidance provided to Member States in the Resolu-
tion, a significant difference can be easily seen in the 
level of detail between the Resolution and the Oviedo 
Convention, the former providing clear indications 
on how to shape legal regulations regarding pro 
futuro statements.
Recommendation (2009)11 on principles of 
continuing powers of attorney and advance 
directives for incapacity
The principles presented in Recommendation 
(2009)11 on principles of continuing powers of at-
torney and advance directives for incapacity (here-
inafter: the Recommendation) largely coincide with 
those introduced by the Resolution [13]. However, 
attention should be paid to the issue of the binding 
effect of pro futuro statements. Principle 15 of the 
Recommendation provides that it is up to the states to 
decide to what extent (if any) the advance directives 
(i.e. pro futuro statements) have a binding ef-
fect. Where advance directives have no binding 
effect, they must be treated as statements of wishes 
and be given due respect as such. In addition, states 
should regulate situations that arise in the event 
of a substantial change in circumstances following 
the issue of an advance directive. As clearly seen in the 
cited principle, the choice of a particular legislative 
path is ultimately left to the discretion of Member 
States. However, upon deciding to ascribe binding 
effect to advance directives, directives that have not 
been declared binding should also be respected by 
the legislator. The meaning of “substantial change 
in circumstances” has not been explained in the 
recommendation either. Solutions for the event of 
substantial change in circumstances in the period 
between the expression of the will and the delivery 
of treatment remain in the full regulatory capacity of 
the national legislator.
Supreme Court Order of 27.10.2005,  
ref. no. III CK 155/05
When discussing the understanding of pro futuro 
statements within the Polish legal order, due mention 
must be made to the relevant case law. The Supreme 
Court’s order of October 27, 2005, ref. no. III CK 155/05, 
is an example of Polish legal practice aimed at re-
solving the questions of acceptability and legal me-
aning of pro futuro statements. The Supreme Court 
unequivocally asserted that a patient’s pro futuro 
statement setting forth his or her will regarding me-
dical treatment provided to him or her in situations 
that may arise is binding for the physician if made in 
clear and unambigous manner.
A woman had been involved in a traffic accident 
that left her unconscious, and the medical condition 
resulting from her injuries required a transfusion of 
blood and blood products. A written statement found 
with the woman, drawn up on January 6, 2004 and 
titled “A Statement to the Health Service — no blo-
od” indicated that the subject did not agree to “any 
form of blood transfusion regardless of the circu-
mstances”, even if, in the physician’s opinion, such 
a transfusion would be necessary to save her health 
and life. Simultaneously, the subject stated that she 
would accept non-blood-derived agents to increase 
the amount of plasma, medications to stop bleeding, 
and agents to stimulate the production of red blood 
cells and that she agreed to other alternative treat-
ments not involving the administration of blood. The 
subject’s husband had died in the accident. Using 
the information about the patient’s health status as 
provided by the Independent Public Health Care Centre 
in Węgrów and acting ex officio, the District Court in 
Węgrów, in its decision dated August 19, 2004, au-
thorized the delivery of medical procedures involving 
transfusion of blood and blood products to save the 
woman’s life. The woman appealed the decision of 
the trial court. Having examined the appeal, the Regio-
nal Court in Siedlce, in its decision dated December 20, 
2004, reversed the appealed ruling and discontinued 
the proceedings.
Last resort appeal was allowed, with the Supreme 
Court reversing the appealed decision and remanding 
the case to the Regional Court in Siedlce for recon-
sideration. To quote the main arguments presented 
in the rationale, the Supreme Court stressed that in 
a democratic state under the rule of law, freedom is 
specially protected, including the freedom of priva-
te life and the autonomy of choices made. One of 
the manifestations of an individual’s autonomy and 
freedom of choice consists in the right to decide for 
oneself, including the choice of treatment methods. 

www.journals.viamedica.pl/palliative_medicine_in_practice
35
Zofia Barbara Olszewska, Statements for the event of incapacity to consent
The principle of respect for patient’s autonomy dicta-
tes that the patient is respected regardless of motives 
(religious, ideological, health-related) — the patient’s 
lack of consent to a certain procedure (type of treat-
ment) is binding on the physician and removes any 
criminal or civil liability while delegalizing the proce-
dure in the event it is carried out. In the elaboration 
on the initial statement, references were made by the 
Supreme Court not only to constitutional motives but 
also to the Oviedo Convention as discussed above.
Despite the lack of national legislation on pro 
futuro statements, it is pointed out that they are 
acceptable and binding on the physician once the 
conditions specified in the Supreme Court’s decision 
are met. Some commentators, however, expressed 
their critical opinion on the order in question, stressing 
that the Court had not carried out a systemic analysis 
of pro futuro statements or specifically addressed the 
relationship between the provisions of the PPD Act and 
those of the Civil Code. An argument has been raised 
that the Court did not reflect on the prerequisites for 
the effectiveness of such a statement which, contrary 
to the Court’s intention, might result in problems with 
respecting the patient’s will in practice [14].
Legal characteristics and form  
of pro futuro statements within  
the Polish legal order
Despite the aforementioned concerns, the view 
that pro futuro statements are declarations of in-
tent as expressed by the Supreme Court has met 
an approving reception [15]. According to the part 
of the doctrine, pro futuro statements have the legal 
character of a declaration of will under Article 60 of 
the Civil Code [16–18]. It is pointed out that both the 
consent to treatment in case of incapacitation and 
the refusal of such consent can be included in this 
group [15]. Kulesza [19] agrees that a pro futuro sta-
tement constitutes consent but points out, contrary 
to the Supreme Court’s reasoning, that it does not 
have the character of a classic declaration of will. 
The second view propounded by the Supreme Court 
is that consent is a statement of knowledge similar to 
a declaration of will so that the rules on declarations 
of will and legal actions shall apply accordingly [20]. 
Smyk [21] and Sośniak [22] qualify the consent as a le-
gal action similar to a declaration of will, specifically 
approving the freedom to respect the requirements 
of civil law as provided by the present solution for the 
aforementioned legal constructs.
Regardless of the above, pro futuro statements 
are not acts of disposition of health and life. After all, 
the intended effect of such statements is to deprive 
another entity of the authority to decide for them-
selves on issues related to the patient’s health and 
life. As is clear from the current legislation, the patient 
does not have to consent to life-saving therapy, there-
fore, if the consent is not given, the physician cannot 
carry out the planned procedure.
The effectiveness of the statements in the event of 
incapacity to consent cannot be undermined based 
on a failure to provide the submitter with medical in-
formation before making such a declaration. It should 
be emphasized that in addition to their right to in-
formation, the patient also has the right to demand 
that the doctor not inform him, said right arising from 
Article 9(4) of the Act on the Patient’s Rights and the 
Patient’s Rights Ombudsman [23]. Failure to provide 
the patient with information upon their request de-
prives the consent of legal effect unless the patient 
waives their right to obtain information.
Despite the need for the autonomy of the will 
directive to be applied to the fullest possible extent, 
it is pointed out that the will of the patient is not 
a sufficient premise for the legality of any medical 
procedure. The pro futuro statement can be binding 
only with regard to procedures that are permitted by 
Polish law. If a certain medical procedure is prohibited, 
the patient’s willingness to undergo such a procedure 
does not deprive its performance of the feature of 
illegality [10]. Given the above, there is no doubt that 
by no way euthanasia procedures shall be legalized 
by pro futuro statements.
Today, a pro futuro statement can be delivered in 
any form, provided that it is made in a clear, unam-
biguous and unmistakable manner, as is clear from 
the Supreme Court’s decision discussed above. The 
statement can take the form of either a formal docu-
ment or a casual note, albeit the handwriting stating 
the writer’s will must be easily legible. There are 
no requirements as to the verbal vs. written mode. 
Janiszewska’s [3] position that the written form has 
an awareness-raising function, as it allows the pa-
tient to understand the finality of their decision, is 
justified. A written statement makes it easier for the 
physician to become free of liability in the event of 
possible claims made by the patient’s family, and 
therefore it is arguably the safest option, for both the 
physician and the patient.
MP’s project to regulate previously 
expressed wishes in the form  
of a living will
During the sessions of the Sixth Parliament, a bill 
was filed to regulate the issues of pro futuro state-
ments in the context of living wills [24]. The issues 

Palliative Medicine in Practice 2024, vol. 18, no. 1
www.journals.viamedica.pl/palliative_medicine_in_practice
36
were to be included in the Act on the Patient’s Rights 
and the Patient’s Rights Ombudsman. The draft pro-
posed that a voluntary and informed written objec-
tion to the provision of life-sustaining health care as 
provided by an adult patient was to be binding on 
the physician in the event of incapacity to consent. 
The condition for the validity of the objection would 
consist of its being registered within the Central Bio-
medical Registry and recorded in the patient’s medical 
records. The person closest to the patient would be 
entitled to apply to the court to have the objection 
declared invalid if the omission of treatment would 
harm the patient’s interest. However, the draft stres-
sed that only an objection expressed in connection 
with a terminal illness from which the patient was suf-
fering at the time of stating their objection would be 
legally binding. Revocation of this objection would 
be possible at any time and in any form, thus making 
the proposed provisions somewhat similar to those 
regarding classic objection under the PPD Act.
Ultimately, the bill has not been passed. Some of 
the solutions were evaluated positively — the idea 
of introducing a Central Biomedical Registry as a me-
thod of providing the physician with the possibility of 
obtaining confirmed information on whether a given 
patient had made a pro futuro statement was received 
with the greatest approval in the literature [25]. Con-
troversies arose over the limited range of situations 
for which such a statement could be made — the im-
plementation of the aforementioned statements was 
to result in the discontinuation of treatment and the 
death of the patient [26]. Statements such as those 
regarding the preferred methods of treatment or Jeho-
vah’s Witnesses’ objection to the use of blood products 
were left outside the scope of the regulation. Concerns 
were also raised with regard to granting the court the 
ability to review the validity of a patient’s statement 
based on a broad criterion of the patient’s interest. 
No indication regarding the possible interpretation 
of this concept by the court was provided in the 
proposed bill.
Postulates regarding future law
While being far from perfect, the provisions pro-
posed in the parliamentary bill to regulate previously 
expressed wishes in the form of a living will intro-
duced a precise legal framework. The initiative to 
establish a Central Biomedical Registry seems to be 
the best way to provide physicians with the ability 
to obtain verified information on whether a particu-
lar patient had expressed his or her will regarding 
treatment methods in the event of incapacity to 
consent. The draft indicated that the platform would 
be publicly accessible for physicians while containing 
only information on the patient’s objection rather 
than on the suggested methods of treatment. The 
actual rules of operation for the Central Biomedical 
Registry should be clarified in terms of the broader 
requests expressed by patients with regard to their 
future treatment [27]. With that in mind, the medical 
rationale for the patient’s making demands regarding 
their treatment should be clearly and explicitly defi-
ned. Only in legitimate medical circumstances and 
based on the existing legal grounds, could a patient, 
on the basis of the comprehensive information they 
had received from their physician, make a pro futuro 
statement regarding participation in the choice of 
proposed therapies [28].
With regard to the mode of delivery, the writ-
ten option as proposed in the draft bill is best for 
the physician and the patient. The effects of pro 
futuro statements are often irreversible and thus of 
significant importance to patients. The patient may 
therefore expect that their statement will be binding 
on the physician. The physician, on the other hand, 
should be able to practice his profession without fear 
that due to informational chaos, their decisions might 
subject them to civil, disciplinary, or criminal liability.
An argument against the introduction of this 
regulation consists of the narrow catalogue of 
entities capable of making such declarations of will. 
As mentioned above, pro futuro statements are not 
only objections to medical services that sustain vital 
functions in the event of incapacity to consent. Nar-
rowing the catalogue to a single situation may be 
perceived as unjustified and consequently deepen 
the legal and terminological chaos in the field of pro 
futuro statements. Without a doubt, the possibility of 
judicial review of pro futuro statements in the event 
of significant changes in circumstances, for example, 
a patient’s change of religion if the statement was 
dictated by religious reasons and the patient did not 
have time to change the statement in the register, 
should be provided for in the regulations.
Summary
The issue of broadly understood pro futuro state-
ments is extremely important yet complex. Addressing 
all legal aspects of statements in the event of inca-
pacity to consent is a significant challenge. Without 
a doubt, the Polish legislators should reattempt regu-
lating the issue of pro futuro statements, with future 
ratification of the Oviedo Convention being a poten-
tial measure to accelerate this process. Examples of 
countries having introduced legal regulations on pro 
futuro statements may provide ground for in-depth 

www.journals.viamedica.pl/palliative_medicine_in_practice
37
Zofia Barbara Olszewska, Statements for the event of incapacity to consent
reflection. Comprehensive regulation of the issue in 
question may contribute to reducing medical pater-
nalism and expanding the patients’ awareness of their 
rights [29, 30]. In the longer run, it may also contribute 
to the elimination of legal chaos and a greater sense 
of security for physicians.
Article information and declarations
Acknowledgements
None.
Author contributions
Zofia Barbara Olszewska — sole author.
Conflict of interest
The author declares that there is no conflict of interest.
Funding
None.
Supplementary material
None.
References
1.	
Ustawa z dnia 5 grudnia 1996 r. o zawodach lekarza i le-
karza dentysty (Dz.U. z 1997 r., nr 28, poz. 152).
2.	
Postanowienie Sądu Najwyższego z dnia 27.10.2005 r., 
sygn. akt III CK 155/05.
3.	
Janiszewska B. Praktyczne problemy oświadczeń pro futuro 
(uwagi po rozstrzygnięciu sprawy). Prawo i Medycyna. 
2009(4): 46–60.
4.	
Pascalev A, Vidalis T. ‘Vague Oviedo’: autonomy, culture and 
the case of previously competent patients. Bioethics. 2010; 
24(3): 145–152, doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8519.2009.01791.x, 
indexed in Pubmed: 20136823.
5.	
Jonsen AR. Dying right in california — The Natu-
ral Death Act. Clin Toxicol. 1978; 13(4): 513–522, 
doi:  10.3109/15563657808988256, indexed in Pub-
med: 747909.
6.	
Docker C. Advance Directives / Living Wills: McLean SAM, 
Współczesne problemy z zakresu prawa, medycyny i etyki. 
Dartmouth 1996.
7.	
Syska M. Medyczne oświadczenia pro futuro na tle prawno-
porównawczym. Wolters Kluwer Polska, Warszawa 2013: 
36–39.
8.	
Konwencja o prawach człowieka i biomedycynie (Przyjęta 
przez Komitet Ministrów w dniu 19 listopada 1996 roku) 
ETS164Polish.pdf (coe.int).
9.	
Safjan M. Prawo polskie a Europejska Konwencja Bioetycz-
na. Prawo i Medycyna. 2009(5).
10.	
Bosek L, Sobolewski P. Oświadczenia na wypadek utraty 
zdolności do wyrażenia zgody na zabieg medyczny. SPP. 
2015(3).
11.	
Brać pod uwagę — definicja, synonimy, przykłady uży-
cia.  https://sjp.pwn.pl/slowniki/bra%C4%87%20pod%20
uwag%C4%99.html (10.07.2023).
12.	
Resolution 1859 (2012) on protecting human rights and 
dignity by taking into account previously expressed wishes 
of patients Resolution 1859 (2012) Final version.
13.	
Recommendation CM/Rec (2009)11 adopted by the Com-
mittee of Ministers of the Council of Europe on 9 December 
2009. Recommendation CM/Rec(2009)11 of the Commit-
tee of Ministers to member states.
14.	
Syska M. O charakterze prawnym oraz dopuszczalności 
oświadczeń pro futuro. Prawo Med. 2010(1): 56–57.
15.	
Janiszewska B. Dobro pacjenta czy wola pacjenta — dylemat 
prawa i medycyny (uwagi o odmowie zgody na leczenie 
oraz o dopuszczalności oświadczeń pro futuro). Prawo 
Med. 2007(2): 36–37.
16.	
Olszewski T. Stańczyk I. Glosa do postanowienia SN z dnia 
27 października 2005 r., III CK 155/05, PS 11-12/2008.
17.	
Tymiński R. Glosa do postanowienia SN z dnia 27 paździer-
nika 2005 r., III CK 155/05, PS 3/2008.
18.	
Ustawa z dnia 23 kwietnia 1964 r. Kodeks cywilny (Dz. U. 
z 1964 r, nr 16, poz. 93).
19.	
Kulesza J. Glosa do postanowienia SN z dnia 27 paździer-
nika 2005 r., III CK 155/05, Palestra 2007, Nr 3–4.
20.	
Wyrok Sądu Najwyższego z dnia 11 kwietnia 2006 r., sygn. 
akt. I CSK 191/05.
21.	
Smyk K. Charakter prawny zgody pacjenta na gruncie 
prawa cywilnego. Folia Iuridica Universitatis Wratislavien-
sis. 2017; 6(1): 132.
22.	
Sośniak M. Znaczenie zgody uprawnionego w zakresie 
cywilnej odpowiedzialności odszkodowawczej. Zeszyty 
Naukowe Uniwersytetu Jagiellońskiego. Prace prawnicze 
1959 (z. 6): 141.
23.	
Ustawa z dnia 6 listopada 2008 r. o prawach pacjenta 
i Rzeczniku Praw Pacjenta (Dz. U. z 2009 r., nr 52, poz. 417).
24.	
Projekt ustawy o ochronie genomu ludzkiego i embrionu 
ludzkiego oraz Polskiej Radzie Bioetycznej i zmianie innych 
ustaw (druk sejmowy VI kadencji Nr 3467) z 28.8.2009 r.
25.	
Pawłowska N, Syska M. Testament życia, str. 489, Monitor 
Prawniczy 9/2009; Urbańska A. Refleksje o oświadcze-
niach pro futuro. Voluntas aegroti lex esto? Współczesne 
wyzwania bioetyczne. Bosek L, Królikowski M [red.]: War-
szawa 2010.
26.	
Syska M. Zgoda na zabieg medyczny oraz oświadczenia 
pro futuro w ustawodawstwie i orzecznictwie francuskim 
i belgijskim, cz. 1. Prawo Med. 2011: 59.
27.	
Śliwka M. Debata: Wokół testamentu życia 23.11– 
–30.11.2009 r. Testament życia i inne oświadczenia pro 
futuro — przyczynek do dyskusji (Microsoft Word — te-
stament 277ycia wz363r) (ptb.org.pl).
28.	
Pacian J. Oświadczenia „pro futuro” — dylematy 
prawne. Zeszyty Prawnicze. 2014; 14(4): 171–181, 
doi: 10.21697/zp.2014.14.4.08.
29.	
Ostrowska A. Paternalizm czy partnerstwo? Relacje mię-
dzy pacjentami a lekarzami w Europie. In: Domański A, 
Ostrowska A, Sztabiński PB. ed. W środku Europy? Wyniki 
Europejskiego Sondażu Społecznego. Wydawnictwo IFIS 
PAN, Warszawa 2006.
30.	
Świderska M. Obowiązek informacji i zgoda pacjenta na 
zabieg medyczny w prawie francuskim. Kwartalnik Prawa 
Prywatnego. 2003(4): 817.