5
A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
Abstract 
In tertiary education a lack of a qualitative leap in the learning of some Czech students 
of English has been a phenomenon noted by the authors of the article. This trend has 
been confi rmed by a survey the results of which are presented below. Most students 
seem to reach a plateau of their spoken and written English (approximately of B2 profi -
ciency level) at the start of their university studies. This article considers the limitations 
of the prevailing methods of instructions and suggests a change in the approach engag-
ing the processes of confi dence, creativity and experimentation. The impact of such 
changes can be observed to some extent in the students´ responses to the survey cited 
here. The article discusses the didactics of teaching English. However, the aim of the 
questionnaires applied is not to quantify and evaluate teaching methods. The authors 
attempted to fi nd out whether these methods off ered room to increase confi dence 
and the associated processes of creativity, experimentation and willingness to take 
responsibility for one’s own learning. 
Keywords: tertiary education, methods of instruction, a qualitative leap, confi dence. 
Articles

 
II/2023
6
Absence kvalitativního posunu ve výuce angličtiny 
jako cizího jazyka
Abstrakt
Autoři článku, který se zabývá výukou angličtiny, upozorňují na to, že v terciárním vzdě-
lávání je u některých studentů zřetelná absence kvalitativního posunu v mluveném i 
psaném projevu. Tento trend byl potvrzen průzkumem, jehož výsledky jsou uvedeny 
v textu. Zdá se, že většina studentů dosáhne na začátku vysokoškolského studia určité 
setrvalé hladiny znalosti angličtiny (přibližně na úrovni B2).  Tento článek se zamýšlí 
nad omezeními převládajících metod výuky a navrhuje změnu přístupu, který bude 
podporovat mj. sebedůvěru, kreativitu a využívat experiment. Autoři se snažili zjistit, 
zda tyto metody nabízejí prostor pro zvýšení sebedůvěry a s tím spojených procesů 
tvořivosti, experimentování a ochoty převzít odpovědnost za vlastní učení.  Dopad 
těchto změn, pokud jsou uplatněny ve výuce, lze do jisté míry pozorovat na odpovědích 
studentů v citovaném průzkumu. 
Klíčová slova:  terciární vzdělávání, metody výuky, kvalitativní posun, sebedůvěra.
DOI: 10.5507/epd.2023.006
Introduction
For the last two decades we have been observing that after three or fi ve years of uni-
versity instruction there has been little qualitative change in the language skills and 
knowledge of students of English, there has been an obvious lack of the expected 
qualitative leap. They enter tertiary education with a low level of writing skills, low 
awareness of spoken styles (varieties of language) and negligible theoretical knowl-
edge about the structure of language. This empirical fi nding has been confi rmed both 
by research among almost 200 English language students refl ecting on their English 
language skills and knowledge, and by Bachelor of Arts, and in many cases Master of 
Arts fi nal examinations. Our research suggests an adaptation of the prevailing meth-
ods used, supplementing them with activities related to confi dence, creativity and 
experimentation is necessary. The students’ fi rst reactions to these support activities 
are mostly positive.
The missing qualitative leap has been attributed by some authors to the prevailing 
GrammarTranslation Method (GTM) of instruction. The criticism of the GTM is over-
whelming; Anderson, Valešová and Duda (2020, 116) suggest that the popularity of 
the Grammar-Translation approach rests in its relatively low-eff ort character. Their more 

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
7
signifi cant observation deals with the effi  cacy of the GTM for beginners (2020, 116): 
“Grammar is useful and is an eff ective approach to language learning – especially for 
beginners.” In such a case there might be a direct relationship between the GTM and an 
absence of progress in the student language skills taught consistently by the GTM, or 
for that matter between the GTM and the numerous “false beginners”. Each rigorously 
applied method creates its own limitations. This conclusion is confi rmed by the practical 
application of English taught by the GTM Marks (2007) has compiled 10 objections to 
teaching through translation as a sole method. He lists three main shortcomings of GT 
methodology: “When I fi rst went to countries where the languages are spoken, I found 
that: it was hard to understand what people were saying, it was hard to marshal my 
knowledge and to formulate what I wanted to say at a reasonable speed and there were 
lots of essential everyday words and expressions that I simply didn’t know”. 
The approaches designed to overcome the GTM shortcomings, namely the com-
munication activities, may seem to be successful when the spoken English of the fi rst-
year students is considered but it is becoming obvious that these communicative skills 
have been obtained outside the lower secondary and secondary classrooms. Translation 
activities in the classroom should not be identifi ed with the Grammar-Translation Meth-
od: students make mistakes when writing in English because they translate,  Leonardi 
(26,2010) repeats that “asking students to think into the target language without using 
their own mother tongue is not natural”. A more complex text is always unique, while 
spoken English is idiom-based and pattern repetitive. With increased profi ciency of 
spoken English, we just increase the number/variety of patterns that we repeat, while 
naturally increasing the effi  cacy of our communication. Translation is diff erent as it is 
based on linguistic awareness.
Our assumption about a lack of qualitative leap in EFL refers to the resources that 
would have been diffi  cult to obtain twenty years ago. We believe that contemporary 
academic debate must take into account respected blogs and popular websites pro-
duced by language educators. Their resources are currently refl ecting a variety of as-
pects of the EFL practice. This apparent concession to the academism of resources may 
signifi cantly enrich and accelerate theoretical eff orts.
Kaye in an article at www.teachingenglish.org.uk points out: “Translation in groups 
can encourage learners to discuss the meaning and use of language at the deepest pos-
sible levels”. For Czech learners a mindful translation into English is necessary because 
e. g., of the syntactical typological diff erences explained for Czech by the functional 
sentence perspective and the historically fi xed word order in English. Kaye (n. d.) stresses 
that “few coursebook writers off er ideas and materials for this area”. Obviously, however 
well-designed the generic English coursebooks are, they cannot be language specifi c. 
Without going into detail here, only through translation e. g., the intrinsic relation-
ship between the English category of determinism and the Czech word order can be 
explained. 

 
II/2023
8
Since translation must be a frequent strategy for Czech students, they should be 
made continuously aware of the lexical and grammatical consequences of the typo-
logical diff erences. The favourite translation exercise of metaphors is less relevant for 
learning English and more relevant for accenting the language as a cultural phenom-
enon. Some useful translation activities used independently of the Grammar-Translation 
Method suggested by Kaye (n. d.): the project work when learners translate the script of 
a scene from a fi lm and dub over the scene itself in the L2, or develop a webpage or blog 
with their own translated work have been practised voluntarily outside the classroom 
with rogue scripts or “fansubbing” for at least two decades now. 
Having analysed the obvious shortcomings of the translation-based teaching as 
a method Anderson, Valešová and Duda (2020, 116) discuss Communicative Language 
Teaching (CLT) emphasising situational and social contexts with Task-based learning 
(TBL) and the CLIL as some of the teaching methods resulting from the CLT. Frost (n. d.) 
compares the advantages of the TBL to the still prevalent traditional Present, Practice, 
Produce method of instruction (PPP). The three steps of the PPP, presenting an item 
of language within a specifi c context, practising it and fi nally producing the target 
language item in a free practice seem not to raise the plateau barring the qualitative 
leap. As Frost suggests and our teaching practice and coursebook experience confi rm, 
students a few lessons after a PPP lesson are not able to assimilate the previously learnt 
item to produce the language correctly, they tend to overuse the target structure and 
most importantly they fi nd they are able to communicate in their existing language 
paraphrasing or rephrasing the previously practised new item. 
The Task-based Learning is discussed by Anderson, Valešová and Duda (2020) as 
one of the widely popular teaching methods within the general Communicative Ap-
proach. The TBL advantages according to Frost (n. d.) is its natural context, an absence 
of students’ language control, a wide exposure to a whole range of lexical phrase and 
to what Frost calls “patterns” and intensive communication among students. The TBL, 
as interpreted by Frost, overlaps with the Lexical Approach (Harmer 2015, 62) based 
on learning quantities of formulaic expressions. 
The discussion concerning the Lexical Approach must include language typology. 
Analytical languages can benefi t from teaching by the LA, e. g., most English verbs need 
to be taught as formulaic expressions with prepositions determining their valency, the 
arguments controlled by a predicate. One of the authors studying English in the late 60s 
had been exposed to syntactic and lexical drills, the methodology expected the learners 
to contextually adapt memorized archetypical utterances. He can still remember and 
properly pronounce the sentences like “The sun makes water evaporate” or “It is useless 
to insist on drinking fresh water in the town,” but there does not seem to have been an 
occasion for using or adapting them. The obvious limitations of the Lexical Approach 
are non-existent comparison with the mother tongue and a potential lack of creativity. 
Both may prevent the student from achieving the qualitative leap. 

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
9
This article deals with commonly known methods and approaches to EFL teaching. 
In fact, the authors suggest that any methods, even proven ones, may be the cause of 
the barriers preventing a qualitative leap. Our article focuses on the practical employ-
ment of activities that can remedy these limitations. 
2 The plateau of communicative methods
The Task-based Approach seems to be in direct contrast with the presented regimental 
PPP instruction. However, they both seem to lack the ability of achieving the qualitative 
leap. Although, the TBL supports communication, it is less concerned with the students’ 
conscientious eff ort to overcome the plateau of the previously acquired language skills. 
Only too often it has been a case of a sudden drop in motivation and interest when 
a “suffi  cient” level of communication has been achieved, eff ectively becoming an ob-
stacle for further learning. 
Nevertheless, Frost (n. d.) describes the TBL as “a strong communicative approach”. 
According to Anderson, Valešová and Duda it belongs to the strong version of Com-
municative Language Teaching (CLT) “promoting learning through communicating in 
the classroom with less emphasis on traditional teaching principles” (2020, 117). The 
weak version of the CLT, more frequent in course books, instead of exploiting natural 
context and practising minimum students’ language control, designs didactically ap-
proved themes and topics and creates specifi c situational contexts to support learning. 
The generic English language course books with specifi c themes and topics, a specifi c 
situational context, may become restrained by the demands to use materials that are 
culture sensitive and context-appropriate. Abd Rashid and Ibrahim (2018), the authors 
of English Language Textbooks and Portrayal of Culture: A content analysis dealing with 
the texts that relate to Muslims and Islam in selected textbooks recommend that pub-
lishers consult experts on the cultures depicted in their textbooks so that they can be 
suitable and do not come across as off ensive to certain groups. They add that another 
option that these particular publishers should consider, and many today have done 
so, is to publish local editions of their textbooks in order to make the contents more 
culturally responsive to students’ needs. Although religious and cultural concerns need 
to be observed, the contents of course books are easily amendable and the potential 
local editions should be primarily revised from the view of the language typology and 
possibly the prevailing local teaching conventions. 
It has been suggested that textbooks with authentic texts creating “meaningful 
classroom situations” may eff ectively present “false realities” (Anderson, Valešová and 
Duda 2020, 117). We believe that the most relevant learning context is not the context 
of the course book but the learning environment of the classroom, the context of the 
study group. Designing tasks and situations “bringing the outside or real world to the 

 
II/2023
10
class” (Anderson, Valešová and Duda 2020,118) has a low effi  cacy in the digital envi-
ronment. “The historic centrally-controlled classroom with the textbook as its major 
instrument has been made obsolete by the Internet deleting spatial and temporal 
limitations, the electronic environment has made the textbook archaic with most pu-
pils permanently involved as fulltime authors, photographers and players” (Řeřicha, 
and Práger 2018, 25). They show there is strong evidence of students developing bias 
against the traditional classroom and the attempts to modernize it are not only coun-
terproductive, but manifestly destructive. The distrust of traditional education has been 
also confi rmed by research carried out among secondary school graduates / university 
freshmen with regard to their experience with learning English in and out of a school 
classroom (Práger, and Řeřicha 2019, 14). 
The attempts of adjusting the approaches to language learning to the digital en-
vironment, from revising the contents of course books to writing with a clear purpose 
and publishing on websites (Kaye n. d.) and integrating ICT in e. g., the British Council 
CPD framework for teachers are the last gasps of English instruction based on the 
learning methods of the previous lineal text environment. Although signifi cantly more 
advanced and effi  cient then GT and PPP methods they do not implement the desired 
qualitative leap. 
Having discussed context, mostly viewed as motivation, we had mentioned the 
learning environment of the study group. As the qualitative leap is diffi  cult to achieve by 
the lineal text environment-based approaches we need to focus on individual students 
and study group dynamics. In English programmes writing is the most diffi  cult subject 
to teach. Paul Kaye (n. d.) accents its low attractiveness for both learners and teachers, 
students fi nd writing diffi  cult even in L1. Most of his “ideas for communicative writing 
tasks” are concerned with fi nding the audience, readers. He mentions, however, that 
writing is “more fun” by doing group writing activities and group correction and editing 
of work”, in principle, Kaye turns the “writers” into “readers” and vice versa. 
Most of the described methods of the English instruction at tertiary level have 
a common purpose, to practice diff erent ways how to make students repeat, remem-
ber and reproduce specifi c parts of the L2. Kaye’s suggestion of making writing more 
interesting deviates from these methods by creating a learning context involving the 
whole study group. Group writing activities and group correction and editing of work, 
we have been applying in our courses last two years, have a number of consequences. 
Kaye (n. d.) does not enlarge on them but they might contribute to the implementation 
of the missing qualitative leap. 
Based on the long-term experience of teaching writing in the L2 we will describe 
some of the fi ve processes that we have been trying to develop to overcome the plateau 
preventing the qualitative leap. The processes can be described as Creativity, Refl ection, 
Exploration, Confi dence and Responsibility. 

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
11
3  Methods, their specifi c techniques – 
and processes as agents of change
This article aims to show that when teaching English as a foreign language there is 
another level/layer of processes besides the GT, PPP, CLT and Lexical Approach and 
the techniques/activities they use. Each of these approaches and their specifi c tech-
niques should be continually considered from the viewpoint of the fi ve more generic 
processes of Creativity, Refl ection, Exploration and Responsibility with the central pro-
cess of Confi dence. If these are not implemented consciously, if the awareness of their 
all-pervasive presence is missing in teaching, the passive acceptance of the traditional 
methods prevails, the progress of learning may be slow or completely absent and the 
character of the learning environment will not be changed. 
The fi ve processes may be implemented by diff erent specifi c techniques, in some 
cases two or more of the processes make use of a single technique as e. g., a small 
group work. We believe that any techniques, from e. g., small groups, multiple choice 
and translation to free communication, will not contribute to the qualitative leap if 
not becoming an integral part of the layer of the generic processes. This layer then 
becomes the agent of the qualitative change. We are very well aware of the diff erent 
quality and usability of the “techniques” (cf. Aryanto 2020, Řeřicha and Práger 2020) 
and their diff erent acceptance but to accent the importance of the agents of change 
we fi nd it useful to refer to a) techniques, b) (didactic) methods and c) the processes. 
4 Small group work technique
There is a common agreement with Hamann, Pollock and Wilson (2012, 65) assessing 
student perceptions of the benefi ts of discussions in small-group, large-class, and online 
learning contexts that “small discussion groups elicited the highest student satisfac-
tion and scored highest in critical thinking skills”. The group collaboration benefi ts are 
relevant for our seminars focused on writing. 
The approach of “writing-for-writing” (Harmer 2015, 369) has been applied since the 
seminars are focused on building the students’ writing skills rather than on writing for 
language practice. Of the roles of the instructor the one of “feedback provider” (Harmer 
2015, 369) has been predominant but not exclusive, because of the recent teaching 
having to be mostly supported by digital media. The prevalent corrective feedback 
was suppressed and the priority was given to the feedback developing the processes 
Creativity, Refl ection, Exploration, Confi dence and Responsibility. 
Small group work is just a part, a tool in our overall approach to learning and cre-
ating the safe environment from which we work. The dominant model used in our 

 
II/2023
12
practice is based on Tuckman’s group development model (Tuckman 1965, Tuckman 
and Jensen 1977, Tuckman and Jensen 2010.). 
The process of forming small groups is as varied and complex as any individual 
group member. Small groups have been traditionally described to move through four 
developmental stages: forming, storming, norming, and performing. 
Our research and practice are simultaneously a reaction to Tuckman’s and Jensen’s 
comment (Tuckman and Jensen 2010, 43) about a lack of empirical testing of existing 
models of group-stage development and their “discovery that recent research posits 
the existence of a fi nal discernible and signifi cant stage of group development – ter-
mination. Because the 1965 model was a conceptual statement determined by the 
literature, it is reasonable, therefore, to modify the model to refl ect recent literature” 
(Tuckman and Jensen 47, 2010). The completed model includes forming, storming, 
norming, performing, and adjourning 
Tuckman developed the 4-stage model that infl uences the way we work with stu-
dents today. However, the 5th stage he refers to as “adjourning” introduced in 2010 is not 
relevant for our practice as the groups are not single task or project specifi c. Rather, we 
see our groups as permeant or at least semi-rigid. However, we do recognise that there 
are times when the cohesion of the group could be disrupted, triggering the adjourn-
ing stage Truckman refers to. i.e., half term breaks, transitioning from 1st to 2nd or 2nd to 
3rd years. Consequently, we recognised some time ago that ours is a practice-based 
working methodology not a therapy and as there are times when group members could 
feel uncertain about the future we have implemented an element of continuity assur-
ance; i.e., we inform and regularly re-enforce information to students even if they are 
satisfi ed with this methodology we can continually review its eff ectiveness, make any 
alterations as the small group may deem necessary and continue to use a model with 
a proven record of success as a part of the bigger picture we have outlined throughout 
this article. 
5 The experience of small groups
Our practice in the school years 2019–2021 since the establishment of the small groups 
has shown that new groups are unclear of their purpose and members don’t know what 
to expect, they need time for introductions to get to know each other and to deal with 
and establish issues of trust. 
Therefore we spend the fi rst 2 or 3 lessons talking about their expectations, what 
areas / language skills would they like to practice, and prioritising them; how this can 
be achieved, and who would be responsible for the learning that takes place (for many 
students this is a totally new educational experience in itself). 

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
13
The aims and objectives of the instructor had to consider the following: 
1. Are they task, outcome, objective driven? 
2. Are they person – centred, geared towards the personal growth and development 
of individual members? 
3. Are they equally balanced from the viewpoint of ability, gender, sexual orientation, 
ethnicity? 
4. Are they prescribed or freely chosen? 
When we decided to establish the small groups in the winter term 2019 in our English 
language seminars, we planned for fi ve to seven groups of four to six students. In the 
forming stage it had been suggested that initially students form safe social, friend-
ship groups, this often avoids the caution that the social, group norms and dynamics 
individual team members would feel whilst establishing their position in a new group. 
It also reduces issues of confl ict (storming, the second stage of group development). 
With minimal training the small groups were functioning and the response to small 
group work was mostly positive. The following students’ quotes amplify the learning 
that is taking place: 
Andrea; Brings the group together; we now talk together in English, even on Facebook. 
Jakub; We can share the work and produce a better presentation. 
Klara; We all have our task but always help each other, it is more demanding, more fun, 
less stressful. 
Barbora; We practiced our pronunciation together which made us look more profi cient. 
As alluded to above, with our approach, the diff erence between stages 1 and 2 is small 
as members of the small groups themselves were ready to target their energies towards 
working together to achieve the task, be it group presentations as per the course cur-
riculum, or peer evaluation of other groups’ presentations. Again, it has been refl ected 
by students in a continuing vain: 
Nikola; Because I knew more about the subject I took the lead, then we decided we 
should take turns being lead and share the responsibility. 
Libuše; When we know the task we can plan, prepare and deliver it in our own way (we 
know we can come to you if we get into trouble) but we like to resolve it ourselves. We 
can also ask other classmates. 
The 3rd stage, norming, may be the most complex of the 4 stages of group development. 
It is at this stage where explicit or implicit norms of behaviour are developed and mem-
bers identify with their groups and develop acceptable ways to complete assignments, 
resolve diff erences, make decisions and solve problems. It is at this stage where we can 
negotiate the inclusion of a new member from other groups that have been through 
a similar process in their class, so you can expect them to reach agreement on roles and 

 
II/2023
14
tasks, and norms of behaviour, where you can expect individual members to shift from 
power struggles to affi  liation; from confi dence to clarity; from personal advantage to 
group success; and from detachment to involvement. The following short case study 
demonstrate the ease in which the transition of new members can be made. 
We asked one group (containing Klára and her friend Klára) to invite Tereza to join 
their group, gently get her to communicate and get to know a little about her. Tereza 
is a girl who always sits alone, when asked to join a group does not communicate or 
contribute, if we go to talk with her, she immediately wells up and becomes emotional. 
After two classes we know she enjoys writing, her parents had her in their 50s when 
her other three siblings had left home and she has no friends and prefers to be alone. 
We will see if she participates in a group presentation.
By stage 4, performing small group work takes on a whole diff erent meaning; be-
cause the groups have successfully moved through issues of membership, purpose, 
structure and roles, they will now be able to focus their energies on group performance: 
completing tasks and solving problems together. This is where the initial investment in 
time, preparing the students pays dividends to the instructor who now has a coherent 
and fully functioning unit equipped for making that qualitative leap. Our role after four 
semesters of group work is largely symbolic, the quality of students’ work and under-
standing has increased dramatically, as has their teaching style, technique, confi dence 
and ability. Students’ refl ections as deliverers and as recipients are indicated below. 
The quotations, come directly from student feedback to questions in the evaluation 
questionnaire (cf. the description of the survey in the Chapter 6, on the results of the 
self-evaluation questionnaires).
Jan; It is a lot more work, because there are three people who must agree that it is good 
enough. Katka; Peer assessment was a terrifying concept but in reality, proved to be 
very informative, helpful and interesting (people wanted to help). 
Lenka; It is like having 27 teachers to help you. 
Lenka failed to mention that she was the 28th teacher, which is another qualitative leap. 
6  Self-evaluation questionnaire confi rming confi dence 
as a central agent of change
To verify the eff ectiveness of the set system incorporating the small group technique, 
we have been systematically applying feedback with the help of relatively simple 
questionnaires. The sample is representative for the students of English courses at the 
Department of Foreign Languages of Silesian University in Opava. 
In the school year 2019 -2020 the pre-evaluation questionnaires were submitted to 
all of 120 students registered in the Practical English course and out of 120 question-

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
15
naires 62 were considered (twenty-one students did not return the questionnaires, 
twenty-six dropped out of school and nine questionnaires were not completed cor-
rectly). In the winter term of 2021 the end of term evaluation questionnaires were 
distributed to all registered students as follows; 116 pre-evaluation questionnaires were 
sent to fi rst year Practical Language students and 82 were returned. 52 evaluation 
questionnaires were sent to second year Practical Language students with 30 returns 
and 16 evaluation questionnaires were sent to third year Practical Language students 
with 7 returns. The decreasing number of questionnaires is proportional to the number 
of students in a given year. 
When analysing the self-evaluation questionnaire (see below) submitted to the stu-
dents of the English programme at Silesian University in Opava before the winter term 
2019 confi dence has kept emerging as central to the processes functioning as agents 
of change. The questionnaire was focused on their self-evaluation and expectations. 
The students answered the following four questions: 
 
1. How would you describe your level / use of English now?
 
Interestingly, 48% of students rate themselves as A2 (13) and B1 (17) which is below 
the entry requirements for the course. The students who rated themselves A2 describe 
their reasons as a lack of confi dence, fi nding it diffi  cult to speak in public and being 
afraid of making mistakes. Jiří; I can read eff ortlessly; I can speak to myself. Speaking to 
someone like writing is work in progress. 

Ϯϳ
ϭϳ
ϭϯ
ϱ
,KttKh>zKh^Z/zKhZ>s>ͬ
h^K&E'>/^,EKt͍
Ϯ
ϭ
Ϯ
Ϯ

 
II/2023
16
Berenika; I would like to have the confi dence to speak, but I get heart attack before 
I can speak. 
Eliška; I am shy and don’t have the confi dence to speak and talk without the words 
and vocabulary. 
The students that graded themselves B1 off ered similar reasons, namely a low con-
fi dence in speaking and writing, insuffi  cient knowledge of sentence construction and 
grammar and not enough practice using language. 
Josef; My reading and listening are good but when it comes to writing and speak-
ing, I can’t express myself. 
Matěj; I think my lack of confi dence to speak English is more a fault of social anxiety. 
Kateřina; I consume media daily mainly in English, but I am self-conscious about talking 
and mistakes and grammar. 
Alexandra; I think my English is a little worser but I try to speak a little bit fl uent. 
Students who identifi ed at B2, although more overall confi dent with passive skills 
share the same lack of active skills and confi dence, the recurring theme is missing self-
confi dence in public speaking and with foreigners, a lack of practice. 
Denisa; I have a B2 certiffi  cate, my reading and grammar are good but I don’t have 
the confi dence or vocabulary to speak English. 
Aneta; I don’t have a problem speaking English with friends but have a great prob-
lem speaking in public (I avoid it whenever possible, I have even said I can’t speak 
English. 
Jakub; ‘If I could speak without the stress, shame and nervous, I would be more 
confi dent. 
Surprisingly the same lack of confi dence is identifi ed, with a few exceptions, by 
students of C2 who may have better language skills but cite the low confi dence as an 
obstacle for their development. 
Petra; I’m a lazy person but would like to improve my confi dence in starting a con-
versation. 
Petr; I could be more confi dent, I have a certifi cate and I don’t mind speaking Eng-
lish already. 
Michal; When I was in high school I am confi dent to speak English. But now I know 
my English is not one of the best and have to practice not to make mistakes. 
Anna; I am pretty confi dent speaking English, quite fl uent and capable in most 
situations. 

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
17
2. How would you describe your confi dence to speak English now? 

Ϯϭ
ϮϬ
ϭϱ
ϲ
Ϭ
ϱ
ϭϬ
ϭϱ
ϮϬ
Ϯϱ
,ŽǁǁŽƵůĚǇŽƵĚĞƐĐƌŝďĞǇŽƵƌĐŽŶĨŝĚĞŶĐĞƚŽƐƉĞĂŬŶŐůŝƐŚ
ŶŽǁ͍
EŽƚĐŽŶĨŝĚĞŶƚϮϭ
EŽƚsĐŽŶĨŝĚĞŶƚϮϬ
ŽŶĨŝĚĞŶƚϭϱ
sŽŶĨŝĚĞŶƚϲ
Again, it is signifi cant to see that two thirds of students consider their lack the 
confi dence to speak English. The students’ quotes below show the dramatic mixed 
ability range (approximately 50% of students consider themselves below average), but 
they are beginning to accent the importance of the layer of agents of change with the 
central process of confi dence. 
Barbora; Poor, I do not like to speak English in front of people, so I think I will have 
to improve my speaking skills. 
Krystýna; I think my confi dence is really bad because in my head all possible things 
can go wrong. 
Jakub; My confi dence and my English has improved because I felt safe being pushed 
out of my comfort zone. 
Ivana; I was always afraid of making mistakes and people would make fun of me, 
I am now getting better because we can all learn through our mistakes. 
Tereza; My speaking and confi dence is not suffi  cient for what I would like because of 
the new speaking practice I am improving, I do not have to concerned about mistakes. 

 
II/2023
18
3. How would you describe your vocabulary 1/10 

,KttKh>zKh^Z/zKhZ
sKh>ZzϭͬϭϬ
^ƚƵĚĞŶƚƐƌĞƐƉŽŶĚŝŶŐϱĂŶĚďĞůŽǁсϭϯ
ϲсϮϬ
ϳсϭϵ
ϴсϵ
Listening to the students in the classroom we are aware of their extremely limited 
vocabulary. Although the term vocabulary as it is used in the questionnaire has to be 
necessarily subjective, it confi rms our assumption about the limitations of the prevail-
ing Grammar-Translation Method whose low-eff ort character may be the reason for 
developing false beginners who are unable to achieve the qualitative leap. The students’ 
vocabulary remains limited because at a certain level it seems to become suffi  cient for 
their communicative needs. Even a relatively simple level of communication in a foreign 
language can fully meet the language needs of its participants. Achieving a qualitative 
leap is complicated by the fact that complex issues can be discussed at a simple level if 
specifi c terminology is not needed. Most teaching methods do not force participants 
to leave this 
(comfortable) level. However, the process of refl ection (the learner becoming aware 
of the limitations of their own language skills) can become a possible agent of change. 

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
19
4. What do you want to improve 

From the student questionnaire it is abundantly clear throughout (and verifi ed 
every day in class) that speaking and confi dence are re-occurring themes everyone 
identifi es with accounting for over half the responses submitted. 
Aleš; I really want to get better at using advanced words in conversation and writing 
and don’t rely on basic English sentences I learned at elementary school. 
Michal; My English has already improved just by listening to you and having the 
confi dence to talk with you. 
Denisa; I would like to improve speaking, in particular, the fear of speaking. 
Zuzana; I would like to have better vocabulary, improve my pronunciation and 
speak without many mistakes. 
Matyas; If my writing would not get better I would be ashamed and mad by myself. 
We are aware of the subjective character of the question 3, the purpose of the 
questionnaire was to obtain a general snapshot of the fi rst-year students’ self-evaluation 
and expectations. In the questionnaire investigating students’ expectations before the 
fi rst semester of their English programme, students mostly indicated language skills. 
However, in the second place, even before vocabulary, writing, grammar and pronuncia-
tion etc., they indicated the need to increase their confi dence in English. The need for 
confi dence, self-esteem is repeated in each context investigated by the questionnaire. 
As we wrote above, confi dence emerges central to all the other processes, expected to 
support the qualitative leap in learning. Some authors dealing with the processes (or 
methods) may present their experiences with Creativity, Refl ection, Experimentation, 
Confi dence and Responsibility without pursuing it further or drawing relevant conclu-

 
II/2023
20
sions for learning. Mumford, and Dikilitaş (2020, 114) describing “pre-service language 
teachers refl ection development through online interaction in a hybrid learning course” 
off er a short case study of a pre-service teacher Canan and mention that she “is held 
back by her own lack of faith in her second language ability, which prevents her writ-
ing contributions”. 
Self-confi dence as a specifi c and important process in foreign language learning is 
a frequent topic of contemporary research in English studies but one which is rather ne-
glected in the articles written by Czech authors. Self-confi dence is stressed by Novotná 
as an important feature of personal development that “may be supported by teacher’s 
assessment in students´ written communication” (Novotná 2018, 37). Although self-
confi dence is referred to in the recent Czech methodology theses as lacking in students 
or exaggerated in case of some more experienced teachers, very rarely it is a specifi c 
topic of research as in Kubalová, K. (2010) with her focus on students’ self-confi dence 
and correcting spoken English. In the cultures where foreign language teaching has 
been infl uenced by the English-speaking countries tradition self-confi dence is often 
the main focus of research ( Xu 2011, Hummel 2013, Krulatz and Iversen 2020 and 
many others). Self-confi dence may be a more general issue among Czech students, 
e. g. in Vonkova, Papajoanu, and Kralova, 2022 show that grammar school students 
signifi cantly underestimate their online communication skills. 
The learner’s self-esteem is a vital element of success and the language activities 
should be examined for their support of self-esteem. “One of the ways of provoking ex-
citement and self-esteem is by increasing the students’ expectation of success” (Harmer 
2015, 92). The students supported by the concept of scaff olding can move from one 
“success” to another (Harmer 2015, 151).  
Conclusion 
More often than not, we take it for granted that our students are self-confi dent. The 
other extreme the authors have met with is the attitude that ‘’it is not our job or respon-
sibility; we have a syllabus to complete’’. However, in our language seminars we accept 
that for many of our students the low selfconfi dence (or even misplaced self-confi dence 
or chauvinism) may be a real issue of self-doubt, a fear of failing, be passive or submis-
sive, have diffi  culty trusting others, etc. Yet we know, having high or low self-confi dence 
is rarely related to one’s actual abilities, and mostly based on one’s perceptions, and it 
is these perceptions, we need to reverse. 
We have attributed a lack of a qualitative leap in the learning of some Czech stu-
dents to the didactic methods that on one hand enable students to reach a certain 
plateau of language skills, but on the other hand the methods themselves will prevent 
students from breaking through it. The limitations of the prevailing methods of instruc-

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
21
tions as the Grammar-Translation, Task-based Learning, Present, Practice, Produce and 
Communicative Language Teaching methods and Lexical Approach have been consid-
ered and the need of further agents of change has become apparent. The students in 
the questionnaire below and in the classroom mention a lack of confi dence as a major 
obstacle of further learning. This process of students’ refl ection on their own learning 
is the fi rst step to the desired change. The other processes of Creativity and Experimen-
tation result from Confi dence and should lead to students’ conscious acceptance of 
responsibility for their own learning. This third layer of processes is not systematically 
supported by the present-day English language curricula which may be viewed as 
a signifi cant omission in the foreign language teaching methods. 
References 
Abd Rashid, R. S. A. & Engku, H. E. I. (2018). English language textbooks and portrayal of cul-
ture: A content analysis. MATEC Web of Conferences. Vol. 150. EDP Sciences. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1051/matecconf/201815005076. 
Anderson, K., Valešová, L. & Duda, O. (2020). Taken out of context: understanding English language 
teaching and learning and the signifi cant role of context. In Hrdinová, E. M. Kdopak by se 
překladu bál? Překlad jako didaktický nástroj pro výuku cizích jazyků II. Univerzita Palackého 
v Olomouci. 
Aryanto, C. B. (2020). Do you remember the words? Dual-coding method on long-term memory. 
Jurnal Psikologi, 19(4), 314–322. DOI:10.14710/jp.19.4.314-322
Frost, R. (n. d.) A task-based approach. [on-line] Retrieved from: https://www.teachingenglish.org.
uk/article/a-task-based-approach. 
Hamann, K., Pollock, P. H. & Wilson, B. M. (2012). Assessing student perceptions of the benefi ts of 
discussions in small-group, large-class, and online learning contexts. College Teaching 60(2), 
65–75. 
Harmer, J. (2015). The Practice of English Language Teaching. Pearson Education Limited. 
Hummel, K. M. (2013). Target-language community involvement: Second-language linguistic self-
confi dence and other perceived benefi ts. Canadian Modern Language Review 69(1), 65–90. 
Kaye, P. (n. d.) Translation activities in the language classroom. [on-line] Retrieved from: https://
www.teachingenglish.org.uk/article/translation-activities-language-classroom 
Frost, R. (n. d.) A task-based approach. [on-line] Retrieved from: https://www.teachingenglish.org.
uk/article/a-task-based-approach 
Kubalová, K. (2010). Vliv způsobu opravování chyb v mluveném projevu na sebedůvěru žáka. 
Mgr. diss., Charles University. 
Krulatz, A. & Iversen, J. (2020). Building inclusive language classroom spaces through multilingual 
writing practices for newly-arrived students in Norway. Scandinavian Journal of Educational 
Research 64(3), 372–388. 
Leonardi, V. (2010). The role of pedagogical translation in second language acquisition: From theory 
to practice. Peter Lang. 
Marks, J. (2007). Methodology – the grammar translation method. [on-line] Retrieved from:
https://www.onestopenglish.com/ask-the-experts/methodology-the-grammar-translation-
method/146406.article 
McCabe, A. & O’Connor, U. (2014). Student-centred learning: the role and responsibility of the 
lecturer. Teaching in Higher Education 19(4), 350–359. 

 
II/2023
22
Mumford, S. & Dikilitaş, K. (2020). Pre-service language teachers refl ection development through 
online interaction in a hybrid learning course. Computers & Education (144), 103706. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103706.
Novotná, K. (2018). Korektivní zpětná vazba v písemném projevu ve výuce anglického jazyka. PhD. 
diss., Charles University. 
Práger, L. & Řeřicha, V. (2019). Classroom as a playground. e-Pedagogium 19(4), 7–18. DOI: 10.5507/
epd.2019.034. 
Quinton, S. & Smallbone, T. (2010). Feeding forward: using feedback to promote student refl ection 
and learning–a teaching model. Innovations in Education and Teaching International 47(1), 
125–135. 
Řeřicha, V. & Práger, L. (2018). Lamenting the transitional moment of literacy environment. Silesian 
Studies in English 18, 18–26. 
Řeřicha, V. & Práger, L. (2020). Didactic Connotations of Text-book Pictorial Adjuncts. e-Pedagogium 
20(4), 7–13. DOI: 10.5507/epd.2021.012. 
Tuckman, B. W. (1965). Developmental sequence in small groups. Psychological bulletin, 63(6), 
384399. 
Tuckman, B. W., & Jensen, M. A. C. (1977). Stages of Small-Group Development Revisited. Group & 
Organization Studies, 2(4), 419–427. https://doi.org/10.1177/105960117700200404.
Tuckman, B. W. & Jensen, M. A. C. (2010). Stages of small-group development revisited. Group 
Facilitation: A Research & Applications Journal 10: 43–48. 
Üstünlüoğlu, E. (2009). Autonomy in language learning: Do students take responsibility for their 
learning? Journal of Theory & Practice in Education 5(2), 148–169. [on-line] Retrieved from: 
https://dergipark.org.tr/tr/download/article-fi le/63225 
Vonkova, H., Papajoanu, O. & Kralova, K. (2022). Student online communication skills: Enhancing 
the comparability of self-reports among diff erent groups of students. Educ Inf Technol 27, 
2181–2205. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-021-10685-y. 
Xu, J. (2011). Second language learners and their self-confi dence in using English: A social con-
structive perspective. Asian EFL Journal 13(3), 246–271. 
Contact: 
Steven Morris, M.A.
Department of English and American Studies, 
Institute of Foreign Languages, Faculty of Philosophy and Science
Silesian University in Opava
Masarykova třída 343/37, 746 01 Opava
Czech Republic
E-mail: steven.morris@fpf.slu.cz
doc. PhDr. Václav Řeřicha, CSc.
Institute of Foreign Languages, 
Faculty of Education
Palacký University in Olomouc
Žižkovo náměstí 5, 771 40 Olomouc
Czech Republic
E-mail: vaclav.rericha@upol.cz 

A Lack of Qualitative Leap in EFL 
Steve Morris, Václav Řeřicha
  
23
Steve Morris is a lecturer at the Institute of Foreign Languages, Faculty of Philosophy and Sci-
ence in Opava. Qualifi ed at Durham, Leeds/Bradford and East London universities he worked 
as a consultant educationalist in UK and Europe and for the British council as a SALTO European 
trainer. His interests lie in effi  cient classroom communication and educational excellency. 
Václav Řeřicha is Associate Professor of the English language at Palacký University in Olomouc. 
The focus of his research and papers are contrastive Czech-English studies, communication and 
learning in digital environment and translation. Since 1989 he has given lectures at universities 
and colleges in Florida, Tennessee, North Carolina, Slovakia, Austria, Luxembourg, Italy, Poland 
and the UK and published a popular series of Czech English phrasebooks at Lexus Ltd., Glasgow, 
UK. He has been involved in the national Digital Literacy Development project.