DINIKA 
Academic Journal of Islamic Studies 
Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
ISSN: 2503-4219 (p); 2503-4227 (e) 
https://doi.org/10.22515/dinika.v8i2.6686 
 
 
Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah: A Study of Yudian Wahyudi's 
Thought 
 
 
Shofiyullah Muzammil 
Universitas Islam Negeri Sunan Kalijaga Yogyakarta 
e-mail: shofiyullah.mz@uin-suka.ac.id 
 
Waryani Fajar Riyanto 
Universitas Islam Negeri Sunan Kalijaga Yogyakarta 
e-mail: waryanifajar@gmail.com 
 
Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
Universitas Islam Negeri Sunan Kalijaga Yogyakarta 
e-mail: nurediprabha@gmail.com 
 
Abstract  
This article describes Yudian Wahyudi's thoughts regarding Maqasid al-Syari’ah as a 
method of solving contemporary problems in Indonesia. The primary data of this 
research was obtained from Yudian's writings about Maqasid al-Syari’ah. The 
secondary data were obtained from authoritative, up-to-date, and relevant 
literature sources. This study finds an Indonesian Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory, which 
is different from the Classical and Contemporary Maqasid al-Syari’ah. Indonesian 
Maqasid al-Syari’ah wants to harmonize between Maqasid al-Syari’ah (five primary 
needs or zharuriyyat al-khams) and Indonesian Maqasid (based on Pancasila). 
Maqasid al-Syari’ah Yudian's idea rests on four pillars, namely: tauhidul 'ulum (unity of 
knowledge) between Ayat Qur’aniyah, Kauniyah, and Insaniyah (zharuriyat ats-tsalasah) 
as the embodiment of the slogan al-Ruju' ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah (Return to the 
Qur'an and Sunnah), the theory of pairing in Islamic law (ilahi-wad'i, absolute-
relative, universal-local, eternal-temporary, and literal-meaning), method (Maqasid 
al -Syari'ah as an analytical knife or point of view to read the reality that is around 
us), and matters related to Indonesia. Meanwhile, Maqasid Indonesia is based on 
the five basic values of the goals of the Indonesian nation as embodied in Pancasila 
(Salam Pancasila): divinity (hifdz al-din), humanity (hifdz al-nafs), unity (hifdz al-nasl), 
deliberation and wisdom (hifdz al-’aql), and social justice (hifdz al-mal). The results 
of this study can have implications for the development and alignment factors of 
the Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory, which is unique to Indonesia. Indonesian Maqasid al-
Syari’ah is a strengthening of the foundation of Usul al-Fiqh and Indonesian Fiqh. 
 
Keywords: Maqasid al-Syari’ah; Indonesia; Yudian Wahyudi; Pancasila 

179                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Abstrak  
Artikel ini mendeskripsikan pemikiran Yudian Wahyudi tentang Maqasid al-Syari'ah 
sebagai metode penyelesaian masalah-masalah kontemporer di Indonesia. Data primer 
penelitian ini diperoleh dari tulisan-tulisan Yudian mengenai Maqasid al-Syari'ah. Data 
sekunder diperoleh dari sumber-sumber literatur yang otoritatif, terkini, dan relevan. 
Penelitian ini menemukan teori Maqasid al-Syari'ah Indonesia yang berbeda dengan teori 
Maqasid al-Syari'ah klasik dan kontemporer. Maqasid al-Syari'ah Indonesia ingin 
menyelaraskan antara Maqasid al-Syari'ah (lima kebutuhan primer atau zharuriyyat al-
khams) dengan Maqasid Indonesia (yang berlandaskan Pancasila). Maqasid al-Syari'ah 
gagasan Yudian bertumpu pada empat pilar, yaitu: tauhidul 'ulum (kesatuan ilmu) antara 
Ayat 
Qur'aniyah, 
Kauniyah, 
dan 
Insaniyah 
(zharuriyat 
ats-tsalasah) 
sebagai 
pengejawantahan slogan al-Ruju' ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah (kembali kepada al-Qur'an 
dan Sunnah), teori berpasangan dalam hukum Islam (ilahi-wad'i, absolut-relatif, universal-
lokal, abadi-sementara, dan literal-makna), metode (Maqasid al-Syari'ah sebagai pisau 
analisis atau cara pandang untuk membaca realitas yang ada di sekitar kita), dan hal-hal 
yang berkaitan dengan Indonesia. Sementara itu, Maqasid Indonesia didasarkan pada 
lima nilai dasar tujuan bangsa Indonesia yang terkandung dalam Pancasila (Salam 
Pancasila): ketuhanan (hifdz al-din), kemanusiaan (hifdz al-nafs), persatuan (hifdz al-
nasl), permusyawaratan dan kebijaksanaan (hifdz al-'aql), dan keadilan sosial (hifdz al-
mal). Hasil penelitian ini dapat berimplikasi pada pengembangan dan penyelarasan 
faktor-faktor teori Maqasid al-Syari'ah yang khas Indonesia. Maqasid al-Syari'ah Indonesia 
merupakan penguatan terhadap fondasi Usul al-Fiqh dan Fiqh Indonesia. 
 
Kata Kunci: Maqasid al-Syari’ah, Indonesia; Yudian Wahyudi; Pancasila 
 
Introduction  
Indonesia faces life problems in various sectors (Wanto, dkk. 2020), such as the 
issue of religious tolerance, humanity and Human Rights (HAM), education, economy, 
and health from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, family problems, and the 
development of science and technology. Ridhwan (2020) One of these problems can be 
solved through contemporary ijtihad. (Takim 2021) Ijtihad is a fundamental concept that 
developed in the discipline of Usul al-Fiqh. (Wahyudi 2006) The essential theme in the 
study of Usul al-Fiqh is Maqasid al-Syari’ah (Wahyudi 2007). Maqasid al-Syari’ah is the 
heart of the science of Usul al-Fiqh (Parrey 2015). In a general sense, Maqasid al-Syari’ah 
is a shari'ah goal whose goals are set to realize benefit for humans in this world and the 
hereafter. (Alias 2021) The human benefit is realized by maintaining five basic needs 
(zharuriyat al-khamsah): religion, soul, lineage, reason, and property. Based on the 
development and expansion of the meaning of the five basic needs in Maqasid al-

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  180 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Syari’ah, (Auda 2007) the complex phenomena of Indonesia can be portrayed through 
these five indicators. The benefit of maintaining religion (hifdz al-din) can be interpreted 
as tolerance for religious freedom, believing in God, and avoiding conflict in the name 
of religion. (Roibin, dkk. 2021) However, history in Indonesia shows facts related to 
religious conflicts that spread in several areas, such as the conflict in Poso (1992), the 
Sunni and Shi'i conflict in East Java (2006), and the religious conflict in Bogor related 
to the construction of the GKI Yasmin (2000) (Muharam 2020). 
Regarding the maintenance of the soul (hifdz al-nafs), cases of human rights 
violations are often found in Indonesia. There are three Komnas HAM notes to the 
government regarding this issue. First is the settlement of cases of serious human rights 
violations in the past that have not been completed. Second, many cases are still related 
to agrarian conflicts that involve violence. Third, there are still many cases of 
intolerance and violations of freedom of expression (Sobarnapraja 2020). 
In addition to facing human rights issues, Indonesia is also still facing problems 
of resilience, welfare, and family functions (hifdz al-nasl), which are not yet optimal 
during the Covid-19 pandemic. (Riany, dkk. 2021) Understanding and awareness about 
the function of the family in Indonesia are still low. This slowness is due to the 
problems and difficulties faced by the family affecting the functioning of the family. 
(Kumala, dkk. 2021) Family dysfunction will create a non-conducive family 
environment, such as less harmonious relationships among family members, lack of 
parental control over children's behaviour, and lack of warmth and support among 
family members. Another problem that has an impact on family dysfunction is the 
poverty factor (Herawati 2021). 
Indonesia also faces problems in the education sector (hifdz al-’aql), especially in 
this era of the Covid-19 pandemic.  (Prasetia 2021) For example, the “study from 
home” policy in response to the Covid-19 pandemic seriously impacted 68 million 
students and 3.2 million teachers. Distance learning runs the risk of hampering or even 
stopping the learning process for schools in remote areas due to limited internet access 
and each student's costs. Schools and students who do not have adequate facilities have 
difficulty continuing the teaching and learning process. This difficulty can increase the 
disparity or inequality of education in Indonesia (Santosa 2020). 

181                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Not much different from the education sector, the economic sector (hifdz al-
mal) is also affected by the Covid-19 pandemic in Indonesia. The Covid-19 pandemic 
has slowed Indonesia's economic growth rate (Nasution, dkk. 2020). The Covid-19 
outbreak has also had a significant impact on the pace of household consumption in 
the short term. The decline in consumption made Indonesia's gross domestic product 
growth slump. This figure is far below the assumption of the 2020 State Revenue and 
Expenditure Budget. On the other hand, millions of affected workers in Indonesia have 
lost their work relationships and were laid off due to the pandemic (Sina, 2020).  
These are the five problematic phenomena in Indonesia today from the point 
of view of Maqasid al-Syari’ah (zharuriyat al-khamsah). The origin of the Maqasid al-Syari’ah 
theory is often attributed to one of the companions of the Prophet Muhammad, 
namely Umar bin Khattab (Yurron 2021). Furthermore, in the classical era, through the 
guidance of al-Juwaini, (Rizqi, 2021) Al-Ghazali developed the theory of Maqasid al-
Syari’ah, even for handling deradicalization (Mukri, dkk. 2020). Later in the hands of Al-
Syathibi, the theory became famous throughout the world, especially in the 
development of contemporary Islamic economics (Mansyur 2020). In modern times, 
Muhammad Abduh and Rashid Rida in Egypt, as well as al-Maududi in India (later 
Pakistan), encouraged Muslims to study Maqasid al-Syari’ah in Al-Syathibi's Kitab al-
Muwafaqat al-Ahkam (Kurniawan 2021). 
Through Abduh and Rida, several Indonesian Islamic reformers introduced the 
theory of Maqasid al-Syari’ah. Unfortunately, their efforts were nothing more than 
repeating Al-Syathibi's opinion (Wahyudi 2006). Meanwhile, in the contemporary era, 
Ibn 'Asyur and Jasser Auda developed and expanded the scope of Maqasid al-Syari’ah, 
from the individual to the social (Ni’ami, dkk. 2021). However, in contrast to classical 
and contemporary thinkers in the study of Maqasid al-Syari’ah, this research examines 
the thoughts of Yudian Wahyudi, one of the Islamic-cum-nationalist Muslim thinkers 
from Indonesia. Yudian succeeded in combining Eastern (Occidentalism) and Western 
(Orientalism) ideas (Wahyudi 2003) to develop his idea of Maqasid al-Syari’ah as a 
method for solving contemporary problems in Indonesia. (Wahyudi, 1995). The theory 
of Maqasid al-Syari’ah Yudian's idea is unique and distinctive because it harmonizes 
Islam and things about Indonesia. The idea can be read in three historical contexts: 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  182 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory, the still abstract idea of Al-Syathibi, Indonesian fiqh, Hasbi's 
idea, which is still theoretical, and Yudian's current capacity as Head of the Pancasila 
Ideology Development Agency. Therefore, this research aims to explain how Yudian 
Wahyudi thinks regarding Maqasid al-Syari’ah as a method of solving contemporary 
problems in Indonesia. 
Method 
This research is a study of the character's thoughts, which wants to explain how 
Yudian's thoughts are related to Maqasid al-Syari’ah as a method of solving 
contemporary problems in Indonesia. The research data is divided into primary and 
secondary data. The primary data of this research was obtained from Yudian's writings 
about Maqasid al-Syari’ah. The secondary data were obtained from authoritative, up-to-
date, and relevant literature sources. This research's object includes two things: material 
objects and formal objects (Parluhutan, 2020). The material object of this research is 
Yudian's thoughts through his writings on Maqasid al-Syari’ah. A formal object is a 
thoughtful approach (Harahap, 2006). 
Sources of data in this research were collected from Yudian's works, both 
personally and collectively (anthologies), regarding Maqasid al-Syari’ah (as primary data). 
This research also explores the works of others (including in encyclopedias) about 
Yudian on Maqasid al-Syari’ah (as a secondary data source). This research uses 
interpretation, coherence, and historical analysis methods (Jensen, 2020). Interpretation 
attempts to achieve a correct understanding of facts, data, and symptoms. Coherence is 
a proper understanding of Yudian's thought concepts, seen from the harmony between 
one idea and another. Historical is connecting Yudian's thoughts to the history of his 
life, his historical environment, and the influences he experienced and his life journey 
(Harahap, 2006).  
Yudian Wahyudi's Intellectual Biography 
Yudian was born in Balikpapan, East Kalimantan, Indonesia, on April 17, 1960, 
the son of a santri and a soldier (Riyanto, 2021). While studying in the undergraduate 
program, Yudian studied two scientific fields, Islamic legal philosophy at UIN Sunan 
Kalijaga (Riyanto, 2013) and philosophy at Gadjah Mada University (1982-1987) 

183                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
(Anam, 2021). As for the postgraduate program at McGill University, Yudian studied 
Indonesian fiqh (1993) (Najib, 2020) to compare three world thinkers in three countries 
(2002) (Wahyudi, 2002). Yudian is a master, (Wahyudi, 1993) doctor, and professor in 
the field of Islamic legal philosophy. Currently, Yudian is the Head of the Pancasila 
Ideology Development Agency in Indonesia. Yudian is one of the independent, original 
Indonesian Muslim thinkers, and his reputation and scientific authority have been 
recognized internationally. Yudian moved from a follower (muqallid) to a comparison 
(muttabi'), then became an academic mujtahid (Tarigan, dkk., 2019). 
The figure of Yudian is the integration between turats and tajdid, "santri in a 
sarong" and "doctor in a toga", Arabic and English-French-German, East and West, 
spiritual and rational, ushuluddin and shari'ah, philosophy, and ushul fiqh, interpretation, 
and hermeneutics, Islam and nationalism (Riyanto, 2021). Through this link, Yudian 
gives a new meaning to the basic concepts in Islam through the theory of Ushul al-Fiqh 
and Maqasid al-Syari’ah so that it is more grounded and academic (scientific). Yudian 
thought regarding Ushul al-Fiqh, and Maqasid al-Syari’ah was highly appreciated by the 
Western thinker, Kersten, when compared to the ideas of Sahal Mahfuz (Rasyid, 2021) 
and Masdar F. Mas'udi (Mushthafa, 2020). 
Referring to Kersten, Yudian has formulated the most consistent argument for 
making the sub-field of Islamic legal thought (Maqasid al-Syari’ah) an epistemological 
method and a legal doctrine. In addition, Yudian also tries to change Ushul al-Fiqh into 
a hermeneutic that is more philosophical than juridical oriented (Kersten, 2015). 
Making Ushul al-Fiqh and especially Maqasid al-Syari’ah more philosophical-methodical 
than juridical-doctrinal is very important. The importance is because the weakness of 
Islamic reasoning in Indonesia is that Ushul al-Fiqh and Maqasid al-Syari’ah are rarely 
used as methods and approaches to solving various problems (Wahyudi, 2007).  
Referring to Kersten, Yudian is an Indonesian Muslim thinker who has 
demonstrated the potential of Ushul al-Fiqh and Maqasid al-Syari’ah as a method of 
thought and an epistemology that is essentially Islamic and thus becomes an example of 
intellectual creativity from within Islam. Yudian is considered to have emphasized the 
importance of Ushul al-Fiqh and Maqasid al-Syari’ah as methods of analysis in the 
dialectical process between Scripture and human habits shaped by history and culture. 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  184 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
As an expert on Ushul al-Fiqh and Maqasid al-Syari’ah studies, Yudian concluded that 
compared to countries such as Turkey, India, and Morocco, Indonesia was more 
successful in balancing national and religious values (Kersten 2015). 
Theoretical Debates in Maqasid Al-Syariah 
There are two periods of development of Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory. First, the 
classical period is exclusive, individual, and Madaniyah. Second, the contemporary 
period is characterized by its inclusive, progressive, social, and Makiyah (Nawawi, dkk., 
2020) The classical Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory was pioneered by Iman al-Juwaini (478 
H/1085 AD) as the originator of the theory of "Public Needs", which was continued 
by Al-Ghazali (505 H/1111 AD) as the originator of the theory of “The Levels of 
Necessity” (Rahmi, 2018). Al-Juwaini offers maqasid levels, namely al-zharurat, al-hajat al 
'ammah, al-makrumat, and al-mandubat (Al-Juwaini, 1971). Al-Ghazali then continued the 
theory through five levels of maqasid, namely hifdz al-dn, hifdz al-nafs, hifdz al-nasl, hifdz al-
’aql, and hifdz al-mal (Al-Ghazali, 1996). After the period of Al-Juwaini and Al-Ghazali, 
the theory of Maqasid al-Syari’ah was developed by Ash-Syathibi (790 H/1388 AD) 
through three important transformations. First, from “free benefits” (al-masalih al-
mursalah) to “legal principles” (al-masalih al-nassiyah); Second, from the “wisdom behind 
the rules” to the “basic rules”; and third, from “uncertainty” (zanniyyah) to “belief” 
(qath'iyyah) (Asy-Syathibi, 1990). By Ash-Syathibi, Maqasid al-Syari’ah is classified into 
three variants of needs (al-kulliyat al-syari'at), namely: zharuriyat (primary), hajjiyat 
(secondary), and tahsiniyat (tertiary). In the zharuriyat, it is shown that the purpose of the 
Shari'a is to maintain the existence of five things (zharuriyat al-khamsah), namely: hifdz al-
din (maintaining religion), hifdz al-nafs (guarding the soul), hifdz al-mal (guarding 
property), hifdz al-’aql (guarding the mind), and hifdz al-nasl (guarding offspring) (Asy-
Syathibi, 1990). After the Ash-Syathibi era, this theory stagnated before Muhammad 
Abduh, Rashid Rida, and al-Maududi finally recommended their students to study Al-
Syathibi's al-Muwafaqat fi Ushul al-Ahkam (Wahid, 2018). 
In the contemporary era, the classical Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory, which is 
exclusive and individual, was developed and expanded toward inclusive, progressive, 
social and development of family institutions, society, nationality, and even the unity of 
humankind as a whole (Auda, nd). For example, Ibn 'Asyur (1325 H/1907 AD) 

185                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
prioritized maqasid related to the interests of the nation or ummah, over maqasid 
regarding individual interests (Hasanuddin, 2020). Rasyid Rida includes reform issues 
and women's rights in his maqasid theory (Hadi, 2013). Yusuf al-Qaradawi also 
discussed human dignity and rights in his maqasid studies (al-Qaradhawi, 2007). 
The expansion of the reach of the classical maqasid, referring to Auda, allowed it 
to respond to global issues and evolve from the wisdom behind legal decisions to 
practical and strategic plans for reform and reform (Auda 2007). Ibn 'Asyur and Auda 
(Ni’ami, 2021) then developed the contemporary Maqasid al-Syari'ah theory with four 
main principles: First, the realization of the independence of Maqasid al-Syari’ah as a 
separate scientific discipline to prosper and maintain human peace and tolerance 
(Zaprulkhan, 2020). Second, consider the scope of the law, which includes general 
maqasid such as Makiyah values: justice and universality (Lantong, 2018). Third, 
expanding the concept of maqasid from an individualistic orientation to society, the 
nation, and even humans. Fourth, it succeeded in proposing a new universal maqasid 
which was deduced directly from the Qur'an and Al-Hadith, not from the literature of 
the Islamic jurisprudence school (Auda, 2007).  
Referring to Ibn 'Asyur and Auda, Maqasid al-Syari’ah must go beyond the 
historicity of fiqh decisions and represent the values and general principles of the texts. 
Thus, detailed laws (ahkam tafsiliyat) can be extracted from comprehensive principles 
(kulliyat) (Ibn Asyur, 2016). Ibn 'Asyur has opened the door for contemporary scholars 
to develop the theory of Maqasid al-Syari’ah in various new ways (Auda, 2007). The 
contemporary Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory of Ibn 'Asyur is based on four main universal 
goals of Islam, namely fitrah, samahah, musawah, and hurriyah (Ibn ‘Asyur, 2015). Fitrah is 
a principle bestowed on all human beings regardless of race, social culture, geographical 
conditions, and even religion. Samahah means al-'adl or al-tawassuth (moderate) (Ni’ami, 
dkk., nd). Musawah is a combination of the main moral values, such as honesty, balance, 
virtue, equality, harmony, proportionality, and modesty. Hurriyah is the freedom that is 
the right of all creatures in the universe as long as its implementation does not cause 
harm to other parties or oneself (Effendi, 2020). 
In contrast to Ibn 'Asyur, Auda, through a Systems Approach (cognition, 
holism, openness, multidimensionality, and purpose), widens and expands the scope of 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  186 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
the classical Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory (Sidiq, 2017). The expansion is based on 
safeguarding and protecting development and human rights. Second, the development 
of human resources as maqasid (Auda, 2007). Its development and growth are as 
follows: hifdz al-din is expanded to protect, protect, and respect freedom of religion and 
belief; hifdz an-nafs is expanded to maintain and protect human dignity; safeguard and 
protect human rights; hifdz al-mal is expanded to prioritize social care; pay attention to 
economic development; promote human well-being; eliminate the gap between rich 
and poor; hifdz al-’aql is expanded to multiply the mindset and scientific research; 
prioritize travel to seek knowledge; suppressing the mindset that prioritizes the 
criminality of the mob; avoiding attempts to underestimate the workings of the brain; 
Hifdz al-nasl was expanded as a theory-oriented to the protection and development of 
the family; more concern for the institution of the family (Abdullah, 2012). 
Among the two characteristics of the classical Maqasid al-Syari’ah schools 
(exclusive, individual, centred on fiqh, Madaniyah, partial, and hierarchical) and 
contemporary (moderate, tolerant, the object of study includes various sciences, 
general, Makiyah, inclusive, multidimensional, and progressive), this research places the 
position of the Maqasid al-Syari’ah theory of Yudian, which is different from the two 
schools. Methodologically, the development of Maqasid al-Syari’ah from Yudian rests on 
four pillars of integration, namely: tauhidul ‘ulum (unity of knowledge between 
theological-cosmic-cosmic pillars or between Qur’aniyah, Kauniyah, and Insaniyah verses), 
as the embodiment of the slogan al-Ruju’ ila al-Qur'an was al-Sunnah; pair theory in 
Islamic law (ilahi-wad’i, absolute-relative, universal-local, eternal-temporary, literal-
meaningful, exclusive-inclusive, partial-general, Madaniyah-Makiyah, fiqh-shari'ah, 
individual-social); method (Maqasid al-Syari’ah as an analytical knife or glasses to read 
the reality that is around us); and Indonesianness (precepts of Pancasila). 
Slogans of Al-Ruju’ ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah, Tauhidul 'Ulum, and 
Redefinition of Islamic Shari'ah 
For Muḥammad ibn 'Abd al-Wahhab, al-Ruju' ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah is to 
leave heresy such as religious practices that are not taught in the Qur'an and Al-Hadith 
(Al-fadl, 1930). Therefore, Wahhabis often quote a hadith that reads, "Kullu bid'atin 
dalalatin wa kullu dalalatin fi an-Nar" (Every innovation is going-astray and every going-

187                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
astray leads to Hell). Al-Afghani is of the view that in this modern era, Muslims are 
obliged to al-Ruju' ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah, which is equipped with ijtihad and purifies 
the heart and revives noble character (Aulia, 2019). By referring to these three, Muslims 
will progress (Nasution, 1990). Ahmad Dahlan uses the statement al-Ruju' ila al-Qur'an 
wa al-Sunnah as anti-syncretism (Arifin, 1987). The statement was then criticized by 
three world thinkers (Wahyudi, 2022) namely Hasan Hanafi from Egypt through the 
project al-Turats wa al-Tajdid (Heritage and Modernity) (Hanafi, 1980), Muhammad 
'Abid Al-Jabiri from Morocco through the project al-Turats wa al-Hadatsa (Heritage and 
Modernity) (al-Jabiri, 1991) and Nurcholish Madjid from Indonesia through the project 
"Islam, Modernity, and Indonesianness" (Madjid, 1987). 
Referring to Yudian, the slogan al-Ruju' ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah as the primary 
source of Islamic teachings, the meaning is tauhidul ulum Islamiyah (unity of Islamic 
sciences), namely the unity of knowledge between the verses of the Qur’aniyah, Kauniyah, 
and Insaniyah (Wahyudi, n.d). Etymologically, according to Yudian, Islam comes from 
the word aslama-yuslim-islam-salam-salamah, namely submitting to the will of Allah SWT, 
in order to achieve salam/salamah (safety or peace) in this world and in the hereafter 
(Wahyudi, nd). The process is called Islam, and the perpetrators are called Muslims. So, 
Islam is a process, not a result. Yudian's "Islamic Process" is undoubtedly different 
from Nurcholish Madjid's "Islam of resignation". According to Madjid, Islam is a form 
of mashdar, a verb in the form of an object that means surrender to Allah (Rachman, 
2012). Referring to Ibn Taimiyah, converting to Islam means that a person surrenders 
himself and his heart to the will of Allah (Madjid, 1984). What is often forgotten in 
explaining the meaning of Islam is what is the will of Allah. When it is followed, it will 
lead to safety and peace in this world and the hereafter, and vice versa? Allah's will is 
expressed in three different but complementary verses, namely Qur’aniyah, Kauniyah, and 
Insaniyah (Wahyudi, n.d). 
Maqasid al-Syari’ah, developed by Yudian consists of the integration of three 
pillars, namely the verses of Qur’aniyah, Kauniyah, and Insaniyah. First, the Qur'aniyah 
verse, namely the signs of God's greatness in the Qur'an (and Sahih Hadith) (Wahyudi, 
2020). In this category, each religion is different because it has its holy book. Referring 
to Jabiri, the Qur'aniyah verse can be paralleled with the bayani tradition (Riady, 2020) or 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  188 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
hadarat an-nass in the language of integration-interconnection (Riyanto, 2013). There are 
three most important laws in the Qur'aniyah verse, namely monotheism (oneness of 
Allah), justice (positive and negative pair law or maslahat and mafsadat), and morality 
(morality) (Wahyudi, 2020). For Yudian, morality is a unified concept of akhlaq-iqra'-
rabb. Morals are a balanced and professional combination of the technical expertise of 
the prophets, imbued with the values of rubbish and iqra' so that they become prophets 
of all people. No one can ignore the morality (weltanschauung) of this worldview 
(Wahyudi, 2019). 
Second is the Kauniyah verse, namely the signs of God's greatness in the 
universe (cosmos) (Wahyudi, 2019). The most important sign of God's greatness is the 
law of pairing (zaujiyah) in every natural object. The law of spouses is sunnatullah 
(natural law) (Nurwanis, 2020) which plays a crucial role in determining safety or peace 
in the world. There are two forms of sunnatullah, namely sunnah kauniyah (natural law) 
and sunnah ijtima'iyah (social law) (Mauluddin, 2021). Sunnah kauniyah are the laws of 
Allah that run in the universe (al-Ashfahani, 1970). In comparison, the sunnah ijtima'iyah 
are the laws of God that run for humans in their social life. The two sunnah have a 
similar character: they are always stable and never experience deviations, either in the 
past, present or the future. He applies to all humans, whether believers or unbelievers 
because humans in this framework are seen as complete figures who are constantly 
bound by positive and negative laws (al-Qaradhawi, 2002). 
Referring to Yudian, Islam balances every object's negative and positive 
potential at the natural level. Islam here can be drawn to the point of maximizing the 
positive potential and minimizing the negative potential of an object. This natural law 
applies to anyone regardless of human boundaries, such as race, religion, and social 
status. At this level of natural law, all religions are the same, because God must punish 
anyone who violates the law of the couple. On the other hand, anyone who obeys or 
submits to the law of this couple will be rewarded by God, namely salvation (Wahyudi, 
2020). Yudian then gave an example of the application. For example, if there is a 
person of any religion crossing the ocean by swimming (without a balancing device), 
surely he will be punished by God. He can drown or die because he has committed an 
infidel and unjust (denying and destroying the law of gravity). On the other hand, if an 
atheist crosses the ocean by boat, he will be safe because he is a Muslim. In essence, he 

189                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
believes in the law of spouses that governs the life of the cosmos so that he attains 
security (Wahyudi, 2019). 
The third is the Insaniyah verse, namely God's laws governing human life 
(cosmic) (Wahyudi, 2020). The law of spouses is the most important law here (sunnah 
ijtima'iyah) (Mohd, 2021). Islam and iman (safe and secure) at this level are balancing 
positive and negative potentials, namely creating balance and social justice. Allah has 
delegated this law to humans through the principle of mutual agreement. In the context 
of inter-religious relations, it is called agree in disagreement (McMahon, 2009). Social 
errors must first be resolved between the parties involved. The position of the Insaniyah 
verse is in the middle. It is more specific than the Qur'aniyah verse (Allah easily forgives 
vertical sins) but more flexible than the Kauniyah verse because social mistakes can be 
forgiven, but honest mistakes are often unforgivable. For example, if someone swims 
and dies, he cannot return to life (his genuine repentance is rejected) (Wahyudi, 2020). 
So, according to Yudian, Islam is Tauhid, in the sense of integrating the three 
equally essential wills of God (zharuriyat ats-tsalasah), which are in the Scriptures, the 
universe, and humans, so that they are free from theological, cosmos, and cosmic 
disasters (Wahyudi, 2007). In Hinduism, for example, it is called "Tri Hita Karana": God 
(parahyangan), human (pawongan), nature (palemahan) (Sena, 2020). Yudian calls the theos-
cosmos-cosmic relationship as piety, the culmination of which is called ihsan. This is 
what Yudian calls the Kaffah Islam. That is the union between theos-cosmos-cosmic. 
Not in any other sense (Bujuri, 2020). 
Yudian then gave an example of the application of Islam Kaffah. For example, 
because of carrying out the commands of the Holy Qur'an, a person performs the 
pilgrimage (Qur'aniyah verse). The command must be carried out by plane (Kauniyah), 
not a camel. He will die if he rides a camel and become a "kafir" 'alamiyah. To board the 
plane, he must obtain a visa and purchase a plane ticket as an administrative 
requirement determined by the Indonesian government (verse Insaniyah). If not, then he 
will become an Insaniyah "kafir". If the person fulfills all these requirements, he will be 
safe (islam) and (iman) to the destination. So, be the Muslim Kaffi (Holistic Muslim) or 
Insan Kamil (Perfect Man). Therefore, Muslims must become believers and Muslims at 
all levels, Qur’aniyah, Kauniyah, and Insaniyah at once (Wahyudi, 2007). So according to 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  190 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Yudian, the zharuriyat are not only hifdz al-dn, hifdz al-nafs, hifdz al-nasl, hifdz al-’aql, and 
hifdz al-mal. However, integrating the three verses is legally zharuri for Muslims. 
Couple Theory in Islamic Shari'ah 
The law of spouses must bind the three verses of the Qur’aniyah, Kauniyah, 
and Insaniyah. Couple law is the primary law that regulates Islamic law, so it is known 
as the principle of no maslahat (goodness; mercy) without mafsadat (badness; slander). 
On the other hand, there is no mafsadat without benefit (Hermanto, 2017). Every object 
contains both of these elements at once. Referring to Yudian, there are five pairs of 
characteristics in Islamic law: ilahi and wad'i, absolute as well as relative, universal as 
well as local, eternal as well as temporary, and literal as well as meaningful (Wahyudi, 
2007). From the perspective of the philosophy of science, this relationship is called 
“dyadic” (Mahzar, 2005). Islamic cosmology calls it a model of complementarity or 
polarity of active and opposing principles, as in the characteristics of Islamic law 
(Mahzar, 2004). 
First, Islamic law is divine but at the same time wad'i (humane; positive; secular) 
Wahyudi, 2019). The involvement of the pillars of humanity in Islamic law is 
symbolized by the appointment of humans as khalifah (representatives) of Allah on 
earth. According to Yudian, there are two requirements to become Khalifah: mastering 
or having knowledge of al-asma' and winning a match or coming out as a winner in the 
competition (Wahyudi, 2019). Based on Sahiron's research, khalifah, in Yudian's view, 
refers to all professional positions related to human life (Djidin, dkk., 2019). In 
Indonesian, Pancasila is both ilahi (theos) and wad'i (anthropos). Therefore, to make it 
happen must involve locality and humanity. If it is drawn into the context of religion, 
for example, the command to perform the pilgrimage is ilahi (hifdz al-din) because the 
source and purpose are explained in the Holy Qur'an (Qur'aniyah verse). However, 
how to carry out the pilgrimage is wadi, which involves elements of humanity (verse 
Insaniyah) and technology (verse Kauniyah). This kind of relationship is what Yudian 
refers to as “secular”, but not “secularism” (Riyanto, 2013). 
Second, Islamic law is absolute but, at the same time, relative (Wahyudi, 2019). 
For example, the command to carry out justice is a divine and absolute commandment, 
but the implementation and evaluation of justice is never separated from the 

191                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
differences in space, time, cause and the perpetrator of justice itself. In the perspective 
of science, it is called absolute space and relative space (relatively-absolute) (DiSalle, 
2020). The Qur'an also distinguishes between the absolute justice model with the term 
'adl and relative justice with the term qisth (Yasmanto, 2021). Third, universal but local 
at the same time (Wahyudi, 2019). For example, the command to carry out justice 
applies to all Muslims who are capable of law (mukallaf), but how to carry out this order 
is very concerned about differences in conditions, space, time and actors. It is necessary 
to place the concept of universal shari'ah and local fiqh in this context (Mashuri, 2020). 
Fourth, Islamic law is eternal but at the same time temporary (Wahyudi, 2019). 
For example, the order to carry out justice is a duty that remains until the Day of 
Judgment, but in an emergency, for example, the order can be suspended. This 
flexibility is formulated in a rule of Islamic law; "Emergencies allow legal subjects to 
leave the applicable provisions" (Muiz, 2020). Fifth, Islamic law is both literal and 
meaningful. In this case, Umar bin Khattab did not cut the hand of someone who stole 
because he had to (Hisan, 2020). On the other hand, he caught an older man who went 
out at night when the state imposed a curfew for fear of disguising himself as a spy. 
Using Yudian’s lens, it can be understood that Islamic law is not only about 
halal and haram. The law moves flexibly between halal (beneficial if done), haram 
(dangerous if done), makruh (more beneficial if abandoned), mandub or sunnat (more 
beneficial if it is done) and mubah (legal subjects are welcome to choose to do or leave 
because the benefits or harms of the act are very personal. The perpetrator knows 
better and is welcome to face the consequences. In order to realize the ilahiyah values of 
Islamic law in real life, jurists (philosophers of Islamic law) proclaimed the theory of 
Maqasid al-Syari’ah (goals of Islamic law). They formulate that the purpose of Islamic 
law is to save people from this world to the hereafter. 
Yudian also explains three complementary aspects of Maqasid al-Syari’ah. First, 
zharuriyat or “necessities,” namely something that must exist for the survival of human 
life (Wahyudi, 1995). If that something does not exist, human life will indeed be 
destroyed. The goals of the zharuri are to save religion, soul, mind, property, lineage, 
and self-esteem. For example, in order to save lives, the Qur'an commands humans to 
eat but not to overdo it. Second, hajjiyat or "needs". That is, something is needed for 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  192 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
human survival. If something does not exist, human life will not experience 
destruction, but difficulties will be in the way. For example, people need cooking 
utensils to eat. Without a stove, humans can still cook rice, but the presence of a stove 
will facilitate achieving the goal of cooking rice. Third, tahsiniyat or decorative-
ornamental processes. That is, the absence of decorative-ornamental things will not 
destroy the purpose of the zharuri, but its presence will beautify the achievement of the 
goal of the zhaturi. For example, people are free to choose any colour for their favourite 
stove decoration. This is where artists are given the broadest opportunity (Wahyudi, 
2007). 
Maqasid al-Syari'ah: From Doctrine to Method Towards Nationality 
Yudian places Maqasid al-Syari'ah in two conditions, as a doctrine and as a 
method. As a doctrine, Maqasid al-Syari'ah intends to bring benefit to humankind 
(Wahyudi, 2015). For this reason, three complementary priority scales were proclaimed: 
al-zharuriyat, al-hajiyat, and al-tahsiniyat (Idris, dkk., 2021). Zharuriyat (primary goal) is a 
must-have goal, the absence of which would destroy life. Here, there are five interests 
that must be protected: religion, soul, mind, property, and lineage. Masalih al-Khamsah 
represents the core of humankind's need to maintain their life (Riyanto, 2010). Maqasid 
al-Hajjiyat (secondary goal) is something needed by humans to make it easier to achieve 
interests that fall into the zharuriyat category. These secondary goals are needed but not 
necessary. Maqasid al-Tahsiniyat (tertiary goal) is something whose presence is neither 
necessary nor needed; its purpose is to beautify the process of realizing the zharuriyat 
and hajjiyat goals. 
As a method, Maqasid al-Syari'ah is intended as an analytical framework to 
examine our social circumstances (Wahyudi, 2015). For example, to protect our 
religion, we are required to perform Hajj. To support the implementation of the 
primary objective (in this case, performing hajj), the Government of Indonesia must 
implement several regulations. Hajj regulations in Indonesia have been regulated in Law 
Number 8 of 2019 concerning the Implementation of Hajj and Umrah, one of which 
regulates transportation (Mulkin, 2021). Without means of transportation, people can 
still perform the pilgrimage but will face obstacles. At the tertiary level, everyone can 
choose the means of transportation he or she prefers. Perhaps some choose land 

193                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
transportation by camel, car, and train. Some choose sea transportation by boat and 
boat. There are also those who use air transportation by plane (Wahyudi, 2015). 
Islamic teachings oblige humans to maintain their health as a way to protect 
human life (Wahyudi, 2015). Realizing this primary goal requires various facilities, the 
most important of which are health service facilities and sports activities organized by 
the Government of Indonesia. In the Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 36 of 
2009 concerning Health, Article 49, it has been explained related to sports health 
(Koswara, 2018). Without exercise, people can still maintain their health, but doing 
exercise will help improve their health. At the tertiary stage, everyone can choose the 
type of sport he likes. Perhaps some choose land sports, such as badminton and 
football. Some may prefer water sports, such as swimming, diving, rowing, and 
windsurfing. There are also those who choose aerospace sports, such as skydiving and 
aerial acrobatics (Wahyudi, 2015). 
To protect the intellect, Islam requires humans not to stop learning throughout 
their lives (Wahyudi, 2015). To support these primary goals, educational systems and 
institutions are needed. The Government of Indonesia has regulated this educational 
system and institution in the Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 20 of 2003 
concerning the National Educational System (Jayanti, 2021). At the tertiary level, 
everyone may choose the field and level of education that he will take based on his 
preferences and financial and physical abilities. Perhaps some choose formal education 
(primary, secondary, and higher), non-formal, and informal (family education) at every 
level and type. Maybe there are also those who choose a bachelor's, master's, to 
doctorate. Some choose the social sciences or natural sciences. Perhaps some choose a 
public school or a religious school. Each person can choose based on interests and 
talents because forcing people to only focus on specific areas of specialization will lead 
to mafsadat (Wahyudi, 2015). 
Islam requires people to manage and store their property properly (Wahyudi, 
2015). To facilitate these primary objectives, it is necessary to have good financial 
facilities such as banks. Banks as financial facilities for the people have been regulated 
by the Indonesian government in Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 10 of 
1998 concerning Amendments to Law Number 7 of 1992 concerning Banking and Law 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  194 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
of the Republic of Indonesia Number 21 of 2008 concerning Sharia Banking (Oktarina, 
dkk., 2020). Without banks, people can still save their money, for example, keep it 
under the bed and in a piggy bank. However, banks will make it easier for people to 
manage and store their assets. Everyone can choose a bank according to their 
preferences at the tertiary level. Some people will choose government-owned banks, 
private banks, or Islamic banks. Require people only to save money in certain places 
will lead to mafsadat (Wahyudi, 2015). 
To protect lineage, Islam requires parents to fulfil their children's rights. This 
primary goal can be realized by providing various childcare and care facilities (Wahyudi, 
2015). The Indonesian government has issued a regulation on this issue, namely the 
Law of the Republic of Indonesia Number 34 of 2014 concerning Amendments to Law 
Number 23 of 2002 concerning Child Protection. The regulation emphasizes that child 
protection is all activities to guarantee and protect children and their rights to live, 
grow, develop, and participate optimally in accordance with human dignity and 
protection from violence and discrimination (Aditya, dkk., 2021). Each parent may 
choose the care and care facility at the tertiary level according to their preferences and 
resources (Wahyudi, 2015). Forcing only to use certain types of childcare facilities will 
lead to mafsadat. 
Yudian also uses Maqasid al-Syari'ah as a method to interpret Muhammad 
Hatta's (Wahyudi, 1998) political strategy in the early post-independence period of 
Indonesia (Wahyudi, 2017). According to Yudian, the first step taken by Hatta to 
realize his national politics was to remove the terms "Islam" from the body of the 
Constitution. First, "Preamble" is replaced by "Opening"; Second, the seven words 
“with the obligation to carry out Islamic law for its adherents” were removed, replaced 
with “Belief in the One Almighty God”; Third, Article 6 paragraph 7, "The President is 
a native Indonesian and a Muslim," Hatta deleted the sentence "and is a Muslim" 
(Wahyudi, 2006). According to Yudian, by including "Belief in the One Almighty 
God", Hatta had denied communism and raised the Tawhid flag. This is where Hatta's 
constitutional strategic meaning lies. The first principle (sila), namely Belief in the One 
Almighty God, according to Hatta, is Tawhid for Muslims (so it is natural that he was 
asked to be the Father of Constitutional Uniting when replacing the seven words of 
Pancasila, which was then re-entered the Jakarta Charter with the sentence Belief in the 

195                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
One Almighty God) (Wahyudi, 2006). Those seven words, for Hatta, are lipstick, 
visible but not influential. On the other hand, "Belief in the One Almighty God" is like 
salt because it does not show off an Islamic identity but is very influential. Substance, 
for Hatta, is more important than mere skin (Suwarsa, 2018). 
From the perspective of Ushul al-Fiqh, according to Yudian, Hatta's political 
stance reflects the embodiment of the principle of "preventing any harm", namely the 
possibility of Indonesia breaking up. At the time, there was a threat from Eastern 
Indonesians who would not join the Indonesian state, even though the Dutch were still 
lurking to re-colonize, "takes precedence overtaking advantage", namely establishing an 
Islamic State ruled by a Muslim majority but with the possibility of breaking up into 
many small and weak states (Wahyudi, 1998). So, Hatta avoided a bigger mafsadat by 
taking a less risky action, namely eliminating the seven words representing Indonesian 
Muslims' interests (Wahyudi, 2007). 
Furthermore, Hatta's decision can also be interpreted as implementing the 
principle of "Something that cannot be achieved as a whole", namely establishing an 
Islamic state in Indonesia from Sabang to Merauke, and the principle of "cannot be 
abandoned in its entirely", namely accepting the requirement of non-Muslims from 
Eastern Indonesia so that seven the word is removed for the sake of the unity of the 
territory of an independent Indonesia (Wahyudi, 2007). Hatta needed nationalism as a 
means to realize the masalih zharuriyat of Indonesian Muslims. Hatta is more concerned 
with territorial unity (hifdz al-mal) and soul unity (hifdz al-nafs) over religion in order to 
build pride (hifdz al-'ird) and the next generation (hifdz al-nasl). Hatta succeeded in 
fostering the birth of a republic, constitutional, democratic and egalitarian state for the 
benefit of zharuriyat. Hatta took part in placing religion in a zharuriyat position in the 
development of the Republic of Indonesia because the principle of "Belief in One God 
Almighty" became the philosophical foundation of all laws in Indonesia (Wahyudi, 
2007).  
 
 
 
 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  196 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Conclusion  
This research reveals an Indonesian Maqasid al-Syari'ah, not the classical, 
individualist approaches nor the contemporary universalist approaches to the Maqasid 
al-Syari'ah. Indonesian Maqasid al-Syari'ah wants to harmonize between Maqasid al-
Syari'ah (five primary needs or zharuriyat al-khamsah) and Indonesian Maqasid (based on 
the precepts of Pancasila). Also, the alignment between Islam and Indonesianness, the 
Holy Scriptures and the Constitution, Indonesian Fiqh and positive law, the 
expressions "Assalamu'alaikum" and “Salam Pancasila”. 
Maqasid al-Syari'ah developed by Yudian rests on four pillars, namely: tauhidul 
'ulum (unity of knowledge) between the verses of the Qur'aniyah, Kauniyah, and Insaniyah 
as the embodiment of the slogan al-Ruju' ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah (Return to the 
Qur'an and Sunnah); pair theory in Islamic law (ilahi-wad'i, absolute-relative, universal-
local, eternal-temporary, and literal-meaning); method (Maqasid al-Syari'ah as an 
analytical framework or lens to read the reality that is around us); and national values as 
Maqasid Indonesia. Maqasid Indonesia is based on five fundamental values of salvation 
in Pancasila (Pancasila Salam), namely: divinity (hifdz al-din), humanity (hifdz al-nafs), 
unity (hifdz al-nasl), deliberation (hifdz al-'aql), and social justice (hifdz al-mal). 
The alignment between Maqasid al-Syari'ah (zharuriyat al-khamsah) and Maqasid 
Indonesia (Pancasila) is undoubtedly different from the model of developing and 
expanding the meaning of Maqasid al-Syari'ah in the contemporary era. For example, 
Auda said that the expansion of the range from classical maqasid (hifdz al-din; hifdz al-nafs; 
hifdz al-nasl; hifdz al-'aql; and hifdz al-mal) to contemporary maqasid has enabled him to 
respond to global issues and to make it evolve from mere wisdom behind legal 
decisions to strategic programs for reform and renewal. Examples of contemporary 
maqasid can be seen in maintained and protected religious freedom and belief. Other 
examples are found in maintained and respected human dignity; safeguarded and 
protected human rights. This contemporary maqasid also focuses on theory-oriented to 
the protection and development of the family, showing more concern for family 
institutions. It also multiplies the mindset and scientific research, prioritizes the journey 
to seek knowledge, suppresses the pattern of thinking that prioritizes crowds' crime, 
and avoids attempts to underestimate the brain's workings. Contemporary maqasid also 
prioritizes social care, pays attention to economic development and development, 

197                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
promotes human well-being, and eliminates the gap between rich and poor (Auda, 
2007). 
The findings of this study can contribute to the development and alignment of 
the Maqasid al-Syari'ah theory, which is uniquely Indonesian. Indonesian Maqasid al-
Syari'ah is the strengthening of the foundations of Ushul al-Fiqh and Indonesian Fiqh. In 
the context of this alignment, Yudian has carried out the process of Indonesianizing 
Indonesian fiqh, the idea of Hasbi. Namely, the alignment of the term fiqh in Arabic 
into the Indonesian state structure. For example, the term Ahlul Halli wa al-'Aqdi 
became the Government of Indonesia, Hai'atut Siyasah became the People's Leadership 
Council and the People's Consultative Assembly, Ahlul Ijtihad became the Indonesian 
Ulema Council, Ahlul Ikhtisas became professional institutions such as the Indonesian 
Muslim Intellectuals Association. The Maqasid al-Syari'ah can be harmonized with 
Pancasila. That Pancasila must be the basis of the goals (maqasid) of the Indonesian 
nation. Because we also have a heart, then Muslims should be guided by the slogan al-
Ruju' ila al-Qur'an wa al-Sunnah, not in writing. 
References 
‘Asyur, Ibn. (2015). Maqasid al-Syari’ah al-Islamiyyah. Cairo: n.d. 
———. (2016). Usul an-Nizam al-Ijtima’ fi al-Islam. Cairo: n.d. 
Abdullah, M. Amin. (2012). Epistemologi Keilmuan Kalam dan Fikih Dalam Merespon 
Perubahan di Era Negara-Bangsa dan Globalisasi: Pemikiran Filsafat Keilmuan 
Agama Islam Jasser Auda. Media Syari’ah: Wahana Kajian Hukum Islam dan 
Pranata Sosial 14 (2): 123. https://doi.org/10.22373/jms.v14i2.1871. 
Aditya, Rizky Irfano, and L.B. Waddington. (2021). “The Legal Protection Against Child 
Marriage 
in 
Indonesia.” 
Bestuur 
9 
(2): 
126. 
https://doi.org/10.20961/bestuur.v9i2.55144. 
Agung, Kurniawan, Hamsah Hudaf. (2021). “Konsep Maqasid al-Syari’ah Imam Asy-
Syathibi Dalam Kitab al-Muwafaqat.” Al-Mabsut 15 (1). 
Al-Asfahani. (1970). Al-Mufradat. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr.  
Al-Fadl, Khaled Abu. (2002). The Authoritative and Authoritarian in Islamic Discourses: A 
Contemporary Case Study. Alexandria, VA: Al-Saadawi Publications.  
Al-Ghazali. (1996). Al-Mustasfa fi ‘Ilm al-Usul. Beirut: n.d.  
Al-Juwaini. (1971). Al-Burhan fi Ushul al-Fiqh. Cairo: Dar al-Fikr. 
Alfinnas, Shulhan. (2018). “Membangun Academic Self-Concept Mahasantri Pesantren 
Nawesea.” Education and Human Development Journal 3 (2): 191–98. 
https://doi.org/10.33086/ehdj.v3i2.59. 
Alias, Muhammad Nazir. (2021). “A Review of Maslahah Mursalah and Maqasid al-Syari’ah 
as Methods of Determining Islamic Legal Ruling.” Turkish Journal of Computer 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  198 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
and 
Mathematics 
Education 
(TURCOMAT) 
12 
(3): 
2994–3001. 
https://doi.org/10.17762/turcomat.v12i3.1331. 
Alwi, H.S, Muhammad, and Nur Hamid. (2020). “Relasi Kelisanan Al-Qur’an dan Pancasila 
Dalam Upaya Menjaga dan Mengembangkan Identitas Islam Indonesia.” 
International Journal Ihya’ 'Ulumuddin. https://doi.org/10.21580/ihya.21.1.4833. 
Anam, Khoirul. (2021). Mengenal Lebih Dekat Sosok dan Pemikiran Kepala BPIP RI: 
Prof. Drs. K.H. Yudian Wahyudi, M.A., Ph.D. Yogyakarta: Suka Press. 
———. (2021). Pembaruan Islam Yudian Wahyudi: Komparasi Dengan Hasbi Ash-
Shiddiqie, Hazarain, Nurcholish Madjid, dan Quraisy Shihab. Yogyakarta: Suka 
Press. 
———. (2021). Salam Pancasila Sebagai Salam Kebangsaan: Memahami Pemikiran Kepala 
Badan Pembinaan Ideologi Pancasila Yudian Wahyudi. Yogyakarta: Suka Press. 
Arifin. (1987). Gerakan Pembaruan Muhammadiyah Dalam Pendidikan. Jakarta: Dunia 
Pustaka Jaya. 
Auda, Jasser. (2007). Maqasid al-Syari’ah as Philosophy of Islamic Law: A Systems 
Approach. 2007th ed. London: The International Institut of Islamic Thougth.  
Aulia, Rohmatul Maulidiana. (2019) “Pemahaman Prinsip Gerakan Muslim Modern al- 
Ruju ila al-Qur’an wa al-Sunnah.” Ushuluddin 5 (1). 
Bujuri, Dian Andesta, Nurul Hidayah, Yuli Yanti, Fikriansyah, and Masnun Baiti. (2020). 
“Kaffah Islam in the Context of Indonesia, Between Fundamental and Moderate 
Islam.” Proceedings of the 1st Raden Intan International Conference on Muslim 
Societies 
and 
Social 
Sciences 
(RIICMuSSS 
2019) 
492. 
https://doi.org/10.2991/assehr.k.201113.060. 
DiSalle, Robert. (2020). “Absolute Space and Newton’s Theory of Relativity.” Studies in 
History and Philosophy of Science Part B-Studies in History and Philosophy of 
Modern Physics 71 (xxxx). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.shpsb.2020.04.003. 
Djidin, M., and Sahiron Syamsuddin. (2019). “Indonesian Interpretation of The Qur’an on 
Khilafah: The Case of Quraish Shihab and Yudian Wahyudi on Qur’an 2: 30-38.” 
Al-Jami’ah 57 (1). https://doi.org/10.14421/ajis.2019.57143-166. 
Effendi, Orien. (2020). “Kontribusi Pemikiran Maqasid al-Syari’ah Thahir Ibnu Asyur 
Dalam Hukum Islam.” Bilancia: Jurnal Studi Ilmu Syariah dan Hukum 14 (2). 
https://doi.org/10.24239/blc.v14i2.549. 
Fadliyah, Lia. (2018). “Penafsiran Yudian Wahyudi Terhadap Surat Ad-Duha dan 
Signifikansinya pada Kehidupan.” Skripsi, UIN Sunan Kalijaga Yogyakarta. 
Faris, Musthofa Habibullah. (2020). “Analisis Wacana Kritis Pada Media CNN Indonesia: 
Studi Deskriptif Kualitatif Pemberitaan Kontroversi Kepala BPIP Yudian Wahyudi 
Tentang Agama Musuh Pancasila.” Thesis. Universitas Muhammadiyah Yogyakarta. 
Hadi, Khoirul. (2013). “Pemikiran Politik Rasyid Ridha Dalam Fikih Munakahat.” Jurnal 
Studia Islamika 10 (2). https://doi.org/10.24239/jsi.v10i2.27.221-236. 
Hanafi, Hassan. (1980). AI-Turats wa al-Tajdid: Mawqifuna min al-Turats al-Qadim. Cairo: 
Al-Markaz al-’Arablli al-Baqth wa al-Nashr. 
Harahap, Syahrin. (2006). Metodologi Studi Tokoh Pemikiran Islam. Jakarta: Istiqamah 
Mulya Press. 
Hasanudin, Fuat. (2020) “Review Buku Maqasid al-Syari’ah Ibn ‘Asyur: Rekonstruksi 
Paradigma 
Ushul 
al-Fiqh.” 
Jurnal 
Islam 
Ulil 
Albab 
1 
(1). 
http://abhats.org/index.php/abhats/article/view/5.  

199                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Herawati, T., D.K. Pranaji, R. Pujihasvuty, and E.W. Latifah. (2020). “Faktor-Faktor Yang 
Memengaruhi Pelaksanaan Fungsi Keluarga di Indonesia.” Jurnal Ilmu Keluarga 
dan Konsumen 13 (3). https://doi.org/10.24156/jikk.2020.13.3.213. 
Hermanto, Agus. (2017). “Konsep Maslahat Dalam Menyikapi Masalah Kontemporer: 
Studi 
Komparatif 
Al-Tufi 
dan 
Al-Ghazali.” 
Al-’Adalah 
14 
(2). 
https://doi.org/10.24042/adalah.v14i2.2414. 
Idris, Muh., Finsa Adhi Pratama, and Lian Mulyani Muthalib. (2021). “The Using of 
Maslahah 
Mursalah 
Method 
as 
Hujjah.” 
Al-’Adl 
14 
(2). 
https://doi.org/10.31332/aladl.v14i2.2793. 
Insani, Sains, Siti Nurwanis Mohamed, Monika Munirah, Abd Razzak, and Najihah Mohd 
Hashim. (2020). “Elements of Balance in Plants According to the Al-Qur'an: A 
Preliminary Review.” Ulumuna. 
Al-Jabiri, (1991). Muhammad Abid. Al-Turats wa al-Hadatsa: Dirasat wa Munaqasat. 
Beirut: Markaz Dirasat al-Wahdah al-’Arabiyya. 
Jansen, Klaus Bruhn. (2020). “The Qualitative Research Process.” In Qualitative and 
Quantitative Methodologies. London: Routledge. 
Jayanti, Gita Dwi, Farid Setiawan, Rivaldo Azhari, and Nursaima Putri Siregar. (2021). 
“Analisis Kebijakan Peta Jalan Pendidikan Nasional 2020-2035.” Jurnal Pendidikan 
Dasar dan Keguruan 6 (1). https://doi.org/10.47435/jpdk.v6i1.618. 
Kersten, Carool. (2015). Islam in Indonesia: The Contest for Society, Ideas, and Values. 
London: Hurst & Company. 
Koswara, Indra Yudha. (2018). “Perlindungan Tenaga Kesehatan Dalam Regulasi 
Perspektif Bidang Kesehatan Dihubungkan dengan Undang-Undang Nomor 36 
Tentang Kesehatan dan Sistem Jaminan Sosial.” Jurnal Hukum POSITUM 3 (1).  
Kumala, Rini, and Sylvia Veronica Siregar. (2021). “Corporate Social Responsibility, Family 
Ownership and Earnings Management: The Case of Indonesia.” Social 
Responsibility Journal 17 (1). https://doi.org/10.1108/SRJ-09-2016-0156. 
Lantong, M. Bekti Khudari. (2018). “Konsep Makkiyah dan Madaniyyah Dalam Al-Qur’an: 
Sebuah 
Analisis 
Historis-Filosofis.” 
Potret 
Pemikiran 
20 
(1). 
https://doi.org/10.30984/pp.v20i1.746. 
Madjid, Nurcholish. (1984). “Ibn Taymiyya on Kalam and Falsafah: A Problem of Reason 
and Revelation in Islam.” Dissertation. University of Chicago. 
———. (1987). Islam, Kemodernan, dan Keindonesiaan. Bandung: Mizan. 
Mahzar, Armahedi. (2004). “Dari Tao Fisika Ke Tao Kehidupan: Evolusi Pemikiran Fritjof 
Capra.” In The Tao of Physics: Menyingkap Kesejajaran Fisika Modern Dan 
Mistisisme Timur. Yogyakarta: Jalasutra. 
———. (2005). “Integrasi Sains dan Agama: Model dan Metodologi.” In Integrasi Ilmu 
dan Agama: Interpretasi dan Aksi. Bandung: Mizan. 
Mansyur, Zaenudin. (2020). “Implementasi Teori Maqasid al-Syari’ah Asy-Syathibi Dalam 
Mu'ammalah 
Kontemporer.” 
Jurisdictie 
11 
(1). 
https://doi.org/10.18860/j.v11i1.7675. 
Mashuri, Ilham. (2020). “Pendekatan Sistem Dalam Teori Hukum Islam: Perspektif Jasser 
Auda.” 
Jurnal 
Kajian 
Ilmu-Ilmu 
Keislaman 
5 
(1). 
https://doi.org/10.24952/fitrah.v5i1.1106. 
Mauluddin, M. (2021). “Sunnatullah Dalam Kisah Musa dan Fir’aun.” Al Furqan: Jurnal 
Ilmu 
al-Quran 
dan 
Tafsir 
4. 
http://ejournal.iai-
tabah.ac.id/index.php/Alfurqon/article/view/638. 

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  200 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
McMahon, 
Christopher. 
(2009). 
“Agreement 
and 
Disagreement.” 
Reasonable 
Disagreement. https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511596742.004. 
Mohd, Khadijah, Khambali Hambali, and Nur Hidayah. (2021). “Islamic Perspective on 
The Concepts of Interaction Among Multicultural Society Department of Aqidah 
and Islamic Thought." AFKAR Journal of Aqidah and Islamic Thought 23 (2).  
Muharam, Ricky Santoso. (2020). “Membangun Toleransi Umat Beragama di Indonesia 
Berdasarkan 
Konsep 
Deklarasi 
Kairo.” 
Jurnal 
HAM 
11 
(2). 
https://doi.org/10.30641/ham.2020.11.269-283.  
Muiz, Abdul. (2020). “Landasan dan Fungsi al-Qawa’id al-Fiqhiyyah Dalam Problematika 
Hukum Islam.” Al-Afkar Journal 3 (1).  
Mukri, Moh., and Imam Mustofa. (2020). “Deradicalizing Islam in Indonesia through the 
Perspective of Al-Ghazali’s Maqasid al-Syari’ah: Purposes of Islamic Law.” 
Proceedings of the 1st Raden Intan International Conference on Muslim Societies 
and 
Social 
Sciences 
(RIICMuSSS 
2019) 
492. 
https://doi.org/10.2991/assehr.k.201113.043. 
Mushthafa, M, and F Khunaini. (2020). “Pemikiran Masdar Farid Mas’udi tentang Zakat 
(Pajak), Cita Keadilan, dan Negara: Menuju Konsep Hubungan Agama-Negara 
Yang 
Transformatif.” 
Jurnal 
Pemikiran 
dan 
Ilmu 
Keislaman 
3 
(1), 
http://jurnal.instika.ac.id/index.php/jpik/article/view/143. 
Nahuddin, Yusuf Eko, and Angga Prastyo. (2020). “Hubungan Agama dengan Pancasila 
Dalam 
Perspektif 
Konstitusi.” 
Jurnal 
Cakrawala 
Hukum 
11 
(3). 
https://doi.org/10.26905/idjch.v11i3.4070. 
Najib, Agus Moh. Pengembangan Metodologi Fikih Indonesia dan Kontribusinya Bagi 
Pembentukan Hukum Nasional. Jakarta: Kementerian Agama RI, 2011. 
———. (2020). “Reestablishing Indonesian Mazhab ’Urf and the Contribution of 
Intellectualism1.” Al-Jami’ah 58 (1). https://doi.org/10.14421/ajis.2020.581.171-
208. 
Najiyah, Senata Adi Prasetia and Siti Firgo. (2021). “The Revitalization of Character 
Education in the Pandemic COVID-19 Era.” Tadris: Jurnal Pendidikan Islam 16 
(1). https://doi.org/10.19105/tjpi.v16i1.4029. 
Nasution, Harun. (1990). Pembaharuan Dalam Islam: Sejarah Pemikiran dan Gerakan. 
Jakarta: Bulan Bintang. 
Nasution, Dito Aditia Darma, Erlina Erlina, and Iskandar Muda. (2020). “Dampak 
Pandemi COVID-19 terhadap Perekonomian Indonesia.” Jurnal Benefita 5 (2). 
https://doi.org/10.22216/jbe.v5i2.5313. 
Ni’ami, Mohammad Fauzan, and Bustamin Bustamin. (2021). “Maqasid al-Syari’ah Dalam 
Tinjauan Pemikiran Ibnu ‘Asyur dan Jasser Auda.” Jurnal Ilmiah Syari'ah 20 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.31958/juris.v20i1.3257. 
Oktarina, Amimah, and Asnaini Asnaini. (2020). “Potensi Kontribusi Institusi Pendidikan 
Islam Terhadap Perkembangan Bank Syari’ah di Indonesia.” Al-Intaj: Jurnal 
Ekonomi dan Perbankan Syari'ah 6 (1). https://doi.org/10.29300/aij.v6i1.2834. 
Opisman. (2020). Living Qur’an: Studi Kasus Atas Majlis Ayat Kursi Prof. Drs. K.H. 
Yudian Wahyudi, M.A., Ph.D. Yogyakarta: Lembaga Ladang Kata. 
Parluhutan, Alboin. (2020). “Objek Formal dan Material Filsafat Ilmu serta Implikasinya 
Dalam Pendidikan.” Jurnal Pionir LPPM Universitas Asahan 7 (3). 
Al-Qaradhawi, Yusuf. (2002). Al-Sunnah Masdaran li al-Ma’rifah wa al-Hadarah. Cairo: Dar 
al-Syuruq. 

201                   Shofiyullah Muzammil, Waryani Fajar Riyanto, Nur Edi Prabha Susila Yahya 
 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
———. (2007). Dirasah fi Fiqh Maqasid al-Syari’ah: Baina al-Maqasid al-Kulliyah wa al-
Nusus al-Juz'iyyah. Cairo: n.d.  
Rachman, Budhy Munawar. (2012). Ensiklopedi Nurcholish Madjid. Jakarta: Yayasan 
Demokrasi.  
Rahmi, Nispan. (2018). “Maqasid al-Syari’ah: Melacak Gagasan Awal.” Jurnal Hukum dan 
Pemikiran 17 (2). https://doi.org/10.18592/sy.v17i2.1970. 
Rasyid, Moh. (2021). “Nalar Fikih Sosial Sahal Mahfuz dan Relevansinya dengan Konsep 
Ekonomi Syariah.” Jurnal Hukum Ekonomi Syariah 4 (2).  
Riany, Yulina Eva, and Alina Morawska. (2021). “Financial and Work Burden, Psychosocial 
Functioning, and Family Interactions During the COVID-19 Pandemic in 
Indonesia: Effects on Child Outcomes.” Child Psychiatry and Human 
Development. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10578-021-01251-1. 
Ridwan, Muannif. (2020). “Ijtihad pada Era Kontemporer: Konteks Pemikiran Islam 
Dalam Fikih dan Maqasid al-Syari’ah.” Jurnal Masohi 1 (2).  
Riyanto, Waryani Fajar. (2013). Integrasi-Interkoneksi: Biografi Intelektual M. Amin 
Abdullah. Yogyakarta: Suka Press. 
———. (2021). Biografi Yudian Wahyudi: Intelektual, Spiritual, dan Internasional. 
Yogyakarta: Suka Press. 
Roibin, Erik Sabti Rahmawati, and Ifa Nurhayati. (2021). “A Model for Acculturation 
Dialogue between Religion, Local Wisdom, and Power: A Strategy to Minimize 
Violent Behavior in the Name of Religion in Indonesia.” Journal of Southwest 
Jiaotong University 56 (1). https://doi.org/10.35741/issn.0258-2724.56.1.1. 
Sadari. (2021). Di Balik Kemampuan Ada Kesempatan, Di Balik Kesempatan Ada 
Kemampuan: Menjadi Orientalis “Plus” Bersama Prof. K.H. Yudian Wahyudi., 
M.A., Ph.D. Tangerang Selatan: Iqralana. 
Santosa, Ari Budi. (2020). “Potret Pendidikan di Tahun Pandemi: Dampak COVID-19 
Terhadap Disparitas Pendidikan di Indonesia.” CSIS Commentaries. 
Sena, I Gusti Made Widya. (2020). “Relasi Manusia, Alam, dan Tuhan Dalam Harmonisasi 
Semesta.” Sphatika: Jurnal Teologi 9 (1). https://doi.org/10.25078/sp.v9i1.1598. 
Sidiq, Syahrul. (2017). “Maqasid al-Syari’ah dan Tantangan Modernitas: Sebuah Telaah 
Pemikiran Jasser Auda.” In Right 7 (1).  
Sina, Peter Garlans. (2020). “Ekonomi Rumah Tangga di Era Pandemi COVID-19.” 
Journal of Management : Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) 12 (2). 
https://doi.org/10.35508/jom.v12i2.2697. 
Sobarnapraja, Agus. (2020). “Penegakan Hukum Pelanggaran Hak Asasi Manusia di 
Indonesia.” Jurnal Ilmu Kepolisian 14 (1).  
Supriatman, Yan Yan. (2017). “Pendidikan Pesantren Menurut Cak Nur dan Yudian 
Wahyudi.” TAJDID: Jurnal Pemikiran Keislaman dan Kemanusiaan 1 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.52266/tadjid.v1i1.6. 
Suwarsa, Luvi Febri. (2018). “Pemikiran Politik Mohammad Hatta Tentang Demokrasi dan 
Kedaulatan Rakyat.” Thesis. Universitas Siliwangi.  
Asy-Syathibi, Abu Ishaq Ibrahim. (1990). Al-Muwafaqat fi Usul al-Syari‘ah. Beirut: n.d.  
Takim, Liyakat. (2021). “Islamic Law and the Neoijtihadist Phenomenon.” Religions 12 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/rel12010006. 
Tarigan, Azhari Akmal, dan Sidurrahman. (2019). Rekonstruksi Peradaban Islam Perspektif 
Prof. KH. Yudian Wahyudi, MA., Ph.D. Jakarta: Kencana.  

Indonesian Maqasid Al-Syari’ah                                                                                  202 
 
 
Dinika, Volume 8, Number 2, July - December 2023 
Wahid, Abd. (2018). “Reformasi Maqasid al-Syari’ah Klasik Menuju Perspektif 
Kontemporer.” Syaikhuna: Jurnal Pendidikan dan Pranata Islam 9 (2). 
https://doi.org/10.36835/syaikhuna.v9i2.3260. 
Wahyudi, Yudian. (1993). “Hasbi’s Theory of Ijtihad in The Context of Indonesian Fiqh.” 
Thesis. Montreal: Institute of Islamic Studies Mc Gill University.  
———. (1995). “Maqasid al-Syari’ah Sebagai Doktrin dan Metode.” Al-Jami’ah 58.  
———. (1998). “Introduction: Was Wahid Hasyim Really Just A Traditionalist?” In K.H. 
Abdul Wahid Hasyim: His Contribution to Muslim Educational Reform and 
Indonesian Nationalistm during the Twentieth Century. Yogyakarta: Indonesian 
Academy Society. 
———. (1998). “Islam dan Politik Pada Masa Demokrasi Terpimpin.” In Makalah Yang 
Disampaikan Dalam Program Pembibitan Calon Dosen IAIN Se-Indonesia, 
Semarang. 
———. (2002). “The Slogan Back to the Qur’an and the Sunna a Comparative Study of 
the Response of Hasan Hanafi, Muhammad ’Abid Al-Jabiri and Nurcholish Majid.” 
Dissertation. The Institut of Islamic Studies McGill University.  
———. (2003). “Hanafi’s Muqaddima fi al-Istighrab,” Muslim World.  
———. (2006). Dekonstruksi Kata Pengantar: Mengamati Islam dari McGill Menuju 
Harvard dan Tufts. Yogyakarta: Pesantren Nawesea Press.  
———. (2006). Islam dan Nasionalisme Sebuah Pendekatan Maqasid al-Syari’ah. 
Yogyakarta: Pesantren Nawesea Press. 
———. (2006). Ushul al-Fiqh versus Hermeneutika: Membaca Islam Dari Kanada Dan 
Amerika. Yogyakarta: Pesantren Nawesea Press.  
———. (2007). “Benarkah K.H. Wahid Hasyim Hanya Seorang Tradisionalis?” In Maqasid 
al-Syari’ah Dalam Pergumulan Politik: Berfilsafat Hukum Islam dari Harvard ke 
Sunan Kalijaga. Yogyakarta: Pesantren Nawesea Press.  
———. (2015). Hukum Islam Antara Filsafat dan Politik. Yogyakarta: Pesantren Nawesea 
Press. 
———. (2019). Dari McGill Ke Oxford: Bersama Ali Shari’ati dan Bint al-Shati’. 
Yogyakarta: Pesantren Nawesea Press. 
———. (2020). Jihad Ilmiah Dua: Dari Harvard ke Yale dan Princeton. Yogyakarta: 
Pesantren Nawesea Press. 
Wanto, Anjar, and Jaya Tata Hardinata. (2020). “Estimations of Indonesian Poor People as 
Poverty Reduction Efforts Facing Industrial Revolution 4.0.” IOP Conference 
Series: Materials Science and Engineering 725 (1). https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-
899X/725/1/012114. 
Yasin, Yusuf Abdillah. “Pemikiran Hazairin dan Yudian Wahyudi Terhadap Teori 
Receptie,” n.d. http://yayua.blogspot.co.id. 
Yasmanto, A. (2021). “Keadilan Dalam Poligami: Studi Pemikiran Fazlur Rahman dan M. 
Quraish Shihab.” Journal of Islamic Law and Family Studies 4 (1). 
http://ejournal.uin-malang.ac.id/index.php/jilfas/article/view/11841.