journal homepage: http://kont.zsf.jcu.cz
DOI: 10.32725/kont.2024.001
Professionalism from the perspective of nurses with 
advanced practice
Katarína Žiaková       , Dominika Kohanová *            , Juraj Čáp            , Radka Kurucová
Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Department of Nursing, Martin, Slovak Republic
Abstract
Introduction: Professionalism is a multidimensional and dynamic concept that can be understood and interpreted differently depending 
on time, job position, or culture context.
Objective: To investigate how nurses with advanced practice interpret and understand professionalism in the Slovak sociocultural context. 
Methods: This qualitative study adopted an interpretative design. The sample consisted of seven advanced practice nurses (APNs). Data 
were collected between November 2021 and December 2022 using semi-structured interviews. Data were analyzed using reflexive 
thematic analysis.
Results: Professionalism was interpreted through five meaningful themes: Management support; Professional socialization; Nurse 
professional; Challenges and problems of professionalism in nursing; Relationships. Advanced practice nurses interpreted professionalism 
as a multidimensional concept that encompasses several interconnected attributes. Nurses highlighted the role of professional 
organization, the importance of professional socialization, education, and lifelong learning as important attributes in building and 
maintaining professionalism – and considered the nurse shortage to be one of the biggest challenges that threatens professionalism.
Conclusion: Advanced practice nurses contribute to the sustainability of the health system. Their understanding and interpretation of 
professionalism may support the nursing profession in general.
Keywords: Advanced practice nurse; Hospital care; Professionalism reflexive thematic analysis; Qualitative study
* Corresponding author: Dominika Kohanová, Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, 
Department of Nursing, Malá Hora 5, 036 01 Martin, Slovak Republic; e-mail: dkohanova@ukf.sk
http://doi.org/10.32725/kont.2024.001
Submitted: 2023-07-06 • Accepted: 2023-10-18 • Prepublished online: 2024-01-11
KONTAKT 26/1: 2–8 • EISSN 1804-7122 • ISSN 1212-4117
© 2024 The Authors. Published by University of South Bohemia in České Budějovice, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences.  
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license.
Original research article
 
Introduction
Although the concept of professionalism has been discussed 
in the literature for decades, many nursing researchers agree 
that the phenomenon needs to be further investigated. A con-
siderable number of interpretations of professionalism have 
led to the development of several conceptual frameworks. Hall 
(1967; 1968) was the first researcher to describe attributes of 
professionalism, including using the professional organization 
as a major referent, belief in public service, belief in self-regu-
lation, sense of calling to the profession, and autonomy. Hall’s 
framework for interpreting and evaluating professionalism 
has been used to investigate professionalism in various fields 
(Kim-Godwin et al., 2010). However, it has been shown that 
due to the specifics of nursing, the framework does not meet 
the indicators of professionalism in nursing. Miller (1988) de-
veloped The Wheel of Professionalism in Nursing. The core of 
the wheel illustrates university education and scientific back-
ground of nursing. The model illustrates eight essential aspects 
of nursing professionalism. Ghadirian et al. (2014) developed 
another framework. They identified the cognitive, attitudinal, 
and psychomotor dimensions of nursing professionalism.
The meaning of professionalism varies across time, con-
texts, or cultures, so it is challenging to define or measure 
professionalism (Cao et al., 2023). The multidimensional and 
dynamic nature of professionalism and its various interpre-
tations lead to many definitions of this concept (Johnson, 
2015). The definitions show that professionalism encompass-
es several different attributes, and these identify and define 
the nursing profession or the nurse professional. The char-
acteristics of professionalism and the relationships between 
them are necessary for the provision of quality nursing care, 
but also for the development of the professionalism of nurs-
es (Al-Eraky et al., 2015). Professionalism is the core element 
of providing competent, safe, and effective care that includes 
mutual interaction with the patient, family, community, and 
healthcare team (Kim-Godwin et al., 2010; Marcinowicz et al., 
2020). Minimal attention has been paid to professionalism in 
the sociocultural context of Slovakia. However, the concept of 
professionalism in nursing remains vague, poorly developed, 
and under-researched in our sociocultural context.
Nursing faces many professional and moral challenges re-
lated to the global shortage of nurses. These changes create a 
new environment that requires professional nursing and stim-
ulates research into this phenomenon. In 2005, the Interna-
  Kontakt  /  Journal of nursing and social sciences related to health and illness
n u r s i n g

Žiaková et al. / KONTAKT
3
tional Council of Nurses (ICN, 2005) provided an official state-
ment on advanced nursing practice. Advanced nursing practice 
and different levels of advanced nursing are growing in provid-
ing various health services around the world (Schober, 2016). 
ANP refers to quality extended healthcare services and inter-
ventions provided by nurses whose advanced capacities influ-
ence clinical healthcare outcomes and provide direct health 
services (ICN, 2020). These nurses significantly contribute to 
the advancement of a profession based on adequate educa-
tion. Implementing advanced practice is related to the status 
of nursing in a country, and its ability to introduce a new role 
or level of nursing (European Federation of Nurses Associa-
tions, 2022). In line with the growing demand for healthcare 
services, the need to implement advanced practice has also 
become evident in Slovakia. In 2018, Regulation No. 95/2018 
Coll of the Ministry of Health of Slovakia was issued (Ministry 
of Health of the Slovak Republic, 2018). This regulation con-
sidered education and the length of nurse clinical experience 
in the position in terms of competencies. Nurses were divided 
into four categories (nurse, specialist nurse, nurse with ad-
vanced practice, and nurse manager). A nurse with advanced 
practice (APN) is defined as a nurse with a master’s degree in 
nursing, specialization in the relevant field, and at least five 
years of clinical experience. APN can be further defined as a 
nurse with a master’s degree in nursing and at least eight years 
of clinical experience. The new competencies of these nurses 
should improve the nurse’s position as an equal partner of the 
physician and contribute to greater autonomy. APNs partici-
pate, for example, in managing the work of the nursing team, 
verifying and analyzing records in the nursing documentation, 
making decisions, and taking responsibility for implementing 
interventions that meet the patient’s needs, and following the 
treatment plan prescribed by the physician. APNs are charac-
terized by the integration and application of a wide range of 
theoretical and evidence-based knowledge that occurs as part 
of nursing university education (ANA – American Nurse As-
sociation, 2012; Hamric and Tracy, 2019) and are one of the 
main healthcare professionals that can improve high-quality of 
healthcare. Supporting advanced nursing roles has increased 
quality, safety, and cost-effectiveness of healthcare delivery.
In Slovakia, APNs play the most critical role in strength-
ening professionalism (Schober, 2016). The role has improved 
healthcare management, patient care efficiency, health out-
comes, and contributes to the sustainability of the health sys-
tem.
 
Materials and methods
Aim
Our study aimed to investigate how nurses with advanced 
practice interpret and understand professionalism in the Slo-
vak sociocultural context.
Design
This qualitative study adopted an interpretative design with 
the aim of adding to the understanding of how APNs interpret 
professionalism in the Slovak context. The study was carried 
out according to the COREQ checklist (Tong et al., 2007) and 
was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Jessenius Fac-
ulty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius University in Bratislava 
(EC no. 79/2021).
Sample
A university hospital in Slovakia was asked to participate in 
the research study. After granting consent, participants were 
selected from the given hospital using the purposeful meth-
od. Our study included a sample of APNs. Inclusion criteria for 
APNs were: (a) worked in an adult care unit; (b) had a master’s 
degree in nursing; (c) completed a specialization training in 
the field of practice; (d) had work experience of at least 5 years. 
APNs were not included if they: (a) did not provide informed 
consent; (b) occupied a managerial position or administrative 
management role. The sample consisted of seven APNs. All 
participants provided written informed consent prior to en-
rollment in the study. The sample characteristics are reported 
in Table 1.
Table 1. Sample characteristics
Participant
Position
Gender
Age
Nurse experience  
(in years)
Unit
APN1
Advanced practice nurse
Female
38
10
Orthopedic
APN2
Advanced practice nurse
Male
33
11
Intensive surgical
APN3
Advanced practice nurse
Female
39
17
Intensive surgical
APN4
Advanced practice nurse
Female
48
25
Pneumological
APN5
Advanced practice nurse
Female
51
33
Surgical
APN6
Advanced practice nurse
Female
42
21
Cardiological
APN7
Advanced practice nurse
Female
36
12
Orthopedic
Data collection
Data were collected between November 2021 and December 
2022 using in-depth, semi-structured, face-to-face interviews, 
which lasted up to 52 minutes. The main interview questions 
focused on the interpretation of professionalism in nursing, 
the characteristics of professional and unprofessional aspects 
of the work of nurses, the professional status of nurses, and 
the challenges of professionalism in Slovakia. The interviews 
were conducted by an experienced researcher at the conven-
ience of the participants (time and location). Data were col-
lected until the achievement of the study´s information power 
(Braun and Clarke, 2022). All interviews were recorded on an 
audio recorder and transcribed verbatim.
Data analysis
Data were analyzed by two independent researchers (DK, KŽ) 
using Atlas.ti 9. Reflexive thematic analysis was used in the 
data analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2022). Reflexive thematic 

Žiaková et al. / KONTAKT
4
analysis offers an accessible and robust method for develop-
ing, analyzing, and interpreting patterns in a qualitative data 
set. Moreover, reflexive thematic analysis has a six-step pro-
cess which includes (1) familiarization with data, (2) coding 
the data, (3) generating initial themes, (4) developing and 
reviewing themes, (5) refining, defining, and naming themes, 
and (6) integral writing. The triangulation of investigators and 
peer debriefing was followed to ensure rigor and credibility. To 
improve the trustworthiness of the study, the peer debriefing 
included an expert in qualitative research (JČ) and a member 
of the research team (RK) in four phases of reflexive thematic 
analysis (phases 3, 4, 5, and 6). Reflexive thematic analysis led 
to the development of themes and subthemes.
 
Results
The concept of professionalism was reflected by the APNs in 
five main themes: Management support; Professional sociali-
zation; Nurse professional; Challenges and problems of profes-
sionalism in nursing; Relationships (Scheme 1).
The theme of Management support was specified by two 
subthemes: Approach of nurse managers and Professional or-
ganization.
In the first subtheme, the requirements and demands of 
APNs for the approach of managers were illustrated, according 
to which managers should direct work and individual activi-
ties: “… there should probably be support from the management 
as well… The management of the leading nurses, that is also im-
portant” (APN7). This, however, was often absent: “… they do 
their own things in the office, their work, they have no reach and no 
overview of what will be done…” (APN6). Ensuring material and 
technical equipment or repairs did not allow NMs to perform 
the tasks arising from their competences. Absent management 
support in resolving conflicts in the physician-nurse relation-
ship had a negative effect on the relationships among nurses: 
“… You do not have those in the workplace who will stand up for 
you in front of those physicians… what the physician says is holy” 
(APN4).
In the second subtheme, APNs mainly reflected on unful-
filled expectations of the professional organization. According 
to the nurses, promotion of nursing profession and retention 
 
Scheme 1. Professionalism from the perspective of APNs

5
of nurses in the profession are important roles of the Slovak 
professional organization: “They should also work a little… They 
have the means, everything, so that the management can motivate 
those people … attract new ones… to know how to support them” 
(APN7). In addition to improving their financial situation, it 
was also important for nurses to increase their social status: 
“They still only deal with salaries… I cannot even listen to it any-
more when our representatives in the media express themselves… 
They should rather focus on the professional status of nurses” 
(APN4). Nurses expressed a positive opinion about the profes-
sional organization: “… I see this effort… that they will listen to 
those ministries, that yes it will be, and we simply see the develop-
ment of those tendencies… but I cannot say anything negative in 
this regard…” (APN2).
The theme Professional socialization was specified by three 
subthemes: Nurse education, Role of mentor, Adaptation pro-
cess.
The first subtheme illustrated the necessity and impor-
tance of education, which was supported by the following 
statement: “… education or every course for nurses can actually 
increase their qualities” (APN6). The importance of education 
was also confirmed by another nurse: “… I am a more valuable 
nurse for them (doctors) when I know what we are talking about 
and I can also oppose them, … so I can justify it” (APN1). In this 
context, lifelong learning also stood out, representing the path 
of self-improvement and professional growth of every nurse: 
“… to acquire new information, knowledge, and practical skills. 
These are such challenges that we must always, constantly improve 
in our profession… we must not stagnate in one place” (APN4).
In the second subtheme, APNs reflected on the demands 
placed on a mentor and the importance of a positive role mod-
el for students. Leadership of students and organization of 
practical teaching by experienced nurses was considered a vital 
component of the professional training of nurses: “I have been 
mentoring for about 10 years, I can change my habits or behavior, 
communication, and it is certainly important that I can influence 
the student” (APN6). They should also be good at demonstrat-
ing their professionalism: “… you just have to maintain yourself, 
so that it does not happen that you do not know how to answer the 
students’ questions, you just do not know how to show them some-
thing, you do not know how to expand their knowledge… and that 
forces you to always do something” (APN3).
The third subtheme illustrated the integration of novices 
into the new work environment. A personal role model was 
important for professionalism. One of the nurses described a 
positive experience with the training nurse: “She taught me… 
She treated the patient nicely, was skilled, had knowledge, also the 
human approach, but also towards me as a younger nurse… Even 
though I messed up something, she never humiliated me” (APN4). 
Nurses perceived the positive and negative role of team co-
operation in the adaptation process: “There is a good team and 
there is a bad team, you will join a bad team and you will simply do 
the work… but when the team wants to improve then you will feel 
good about the work” (APN3).
The theme of Nurse professional was specified by the fol-
lowing subthemes: Professionalism in situations, Personal as-
sumptions, Requirements for nurse.
The first subtheme reflected the behavior of nurses in sit-
uations that occur in practice. Nurses should be prepared to 
handle even challenging situations, often influenced by the 
patient’s health condition: “… yelling at the patient when we 
know that the patient can be agitated, aggressive… being able to 
engage in communication with the patient, I will not yell at them 
(patients)…” (APN2). One nurse described a situation during 
the round when the nurses disrupted the very process and at-
mosphere: “… that they just talk to each other, it is disturbing, 
it is extremely unprofessional and disrespectful to the patient... 
we dishonor the profession” (APN3). During the round, there 
were also situations where the patient’s privacy was violated: 
“… they uncovered the wound, the others saw it too… it has a bad 
effect on both the other patients and the patient himself/herself… 
it is shocking” (APN5).
In the second subtheme, APNs expressed their expec-
tations of what personal assumptions and qualities nurses 
should have to cope with the profession: “They should be em-
pathetic, so communicative, assertive that they can stand up for 
their opinions, and know to hold one’s position and function… some 
kind of benevolence, solidarity. There should also be the nice ap-
pearance of the nurse…” (APN7). Another nurse described what 
she expected from a nurse and what she/he considered impor-
tant: “… she/he loves her/his job and performs every single task 
humanely and very professionally” (APN1).
In the third subtheme, participants expressed their de-
mands for the professional requirements that nurses must 
meet, for example, with respect to education: “Definitely edu-
cation also, so nurses need to know what they can do within the 
profession, how to work in a team, they should be skilled, have 
communication skills at some level… some degree of self-reflection” 
(APN2). One nurse considered the requirement for a function-
al team to be important to professionalism and commented 
on this in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic: “… definitely 
be collegial on the team. I think now after the pandemic, the rela-
tions have worsened… Many teams have broken up… simply, do 
not play for yourself, but simply be there for the team, because since 
the nurses cannot do anything by themselves, the team has to be 
here” (APN3).
The theme Challenges and problems of professionalism 
was specified by three subthemes: Opportunity to change 
something, Nurse shortage, Motivation of society.
The first subtheme pointed out that the impossibility of 
changing something is frustrating and suppressed nurses’ pro-
fessional development and motivation for change: “… young 
people who want to change something… are so pushed into line 
that they basically do not stand out because we are unfortunately 
used to such a system and we will not change it” (APN2). One of 
the APNs drew attention to the need to change the stereotypes 
that affect the professionalism of the nurse: “There are nurses 
who have graduated from vocational school, and they do not go any 
further. I also have colleagues… they are really skilled, but when we 
are discussing some topics, they fumble…” (APN4).
The second subtheme reflected on the issue of the insuffi-
cient number of nurses in the healthcare system, the quality 
of care provided, and the professionalism of the nurses’ work: 
“… If a nurse had two rooms like that, she/he could be a profession-
al nurse, otherwise when a nurse has 18 patients, she will never be 
a professional. Because she has no opportunity to be a professional 
nurse…” (APN5).
In the third subtheme, participants reflected on their pro-
fessional position. The societal status of the profession has not 
increased and it has not received the importance it deserves. 
Even the COVID-19 pandemic has not improved it, in fact the 
opposite: “… well, bad…, because people thought that we were 
only killing patients…, so when you got to the hospital, you auto-
matically got ventilation. At that time, many people with ventila-
tion died…and people thought that we (personnel) did not threat 
them” (APN4). One of the APNs said: “… they dishonor the pro-
fession, especially society, politicians, the public, physicians. No 
one respects that nurse” (APN2). Another of the nurses thought 
that the evaluation of nurses was mainly related to a person’s 
age: “… the older generation sees nurses as nurses with a capital N, 
Žiaková et al. / KONTAKT

6
and there are younger generations, that is, in our society, who see a 
nurse as a nurse with a small N, who is basically like a supplement 
to the physician” (APN6).
The theme of Relationships was specified by the following 
subthemes: Relationships between physicians and nurses, Re-
lationships between nurses and patients, Relationships among 
nurses.
In the first subtheme, APNs reflected on the quality of 
their relationships with physicians, which could not be char-
acterized as equal: “… an old physician does not allow himself as 
much as a young one… I do not like that, because I do not think I 
should be underestimated, but they take it that way, God, you are 
just a nurse, hey, but I think we are on the same level, everyone has 
their responsibilities, but after all, we are also one team” (APN3). 
However, according to nurses, respect for other professions 
was absent among physicians: “… that society educates those 
physicians in the context that I am a physician. And when those 
young physicians come, even if they have 20 years of experience... 
because they are physicians and nurses cannot help them” (APN4).
In the second subtheme, the relationships between APNs 
and patients were illustrated as follows: “… that the profession 
of nursing has declined… how patients treat nurses, how relatives 
treat them… I do not know if the profession once had as much 
weight as it does now” (APN3). Relationships could also be af-
fected by generational differences: “… we had such an older pa-
tient, … how she perceived what the nurse said, … she respected 
everything. You had a patient who was ten or twenty years young-
er, and he was already like, what are you going to tell me, what do 
you want me to do... so we can already see the generational differ-
ences in the perception of this profession” (APN2).
The relationships among nurses are illustrated in the third 
subtheme. The nurses who made up the team expected respon-
sibility and professional behavior. One of the APNs described 
the relationships as follows: “… that is exactly the pressure, sim-
ply one cannot keep up, does not comply… also some conflicts in 
the team. Then we have the provision of care itself, when we know 
that this must be done aseptically and, at that time, it will not be 
done as it should be. This is actually a violation of professionalism 
for me... using dishonorable words, treating patients like they are 
nothing, not respecting dignity…” (APN7). Another APN ex-
pressed it as follows: “… Teamwork fails, e.g., the handoffs about 
the patient are insufficient… that can actually endanger the pa-
tient as well, some nurse forgets, withholds information during the 
handoffs” (APN5).
 
Discussion
In our study, nurses with advanced practice understood pro-
fessionalism as a multidimensional and dynamic concept that 
covers several interconnected attributes. APNs emphasized 
professional organization, professional socialization, the re-
quirements for a professional nurse, and the social status of 
nurses.
The nurses highlighted the role of the professional organ-
ization in maintaining the professionalism of nurses in the 
context of unmet organizational expectations. The impor-
tance of professional organization has also been highlighted 
by Hall (1967; 1968), Miller (1988), and Fatemi et al. (2018). 
The APNs in our study expected more support in the propaga-
tion of the nurse profession in society. Although professional 
organizations are making efforts to involve their members in 
health policy (ANA – American Nurses Association, 2012; Ca-
nadian Nurses Association, 2012), this role remains unfilled 
for various reasons (Vandenhouten et al., 2011). Boswell et 
al. (2005) consider the implementation of the nurse’s political 
role, which includes, among other things, knowledge of issues, 
laws, and health policy, being involved in the advancement of 
the nursing profession, and the building of political awareness 
into education. This may contribute to the fact that nurses see 
their role exclusively as providing nursing care to patients and, 
as Cramer (2002) states, this leads to the inability to see the 
“big picture” behind the hospital setting, regarding the factors 
that determine the distribution of health services and how 
policies are generated. The nurses in our study expressed that 
their expectations from the Slovak professional organization 
are mostly unfulfilled. They negatively evaluated the lifelong 
learning process, financial issues, and also described a lack of 
activities that if present could motivate nurses to stay in the 
profession and attract more young people to study nursing. 
They consider increasing social status important; low status 
has a negative impact on clinical and professional autonomy. 
The importance of autonomy and what this means for the per-
formance of the profession have been confirmed by several 
authors (Kramer et al., 2006; Papathanassoglou et al., 2012).
Nurses also highlighted the importance of professional 
socialization. Integration of nursing students into medical 
teams, particularly nursing teams, during their undergraduate 
education is a prerequisite for professional practice. Emphasis 
is placed on the participation of nurse mentors in the profes-
sional preparation of nursing students. The ability of students 
to articulate their core values learned at an early age will help 
them form their own professional identity (Kelly, 2020; Ske-
la-Savič and Kiger, 2015). APNs emphasized the inclusion of 
novice nurses in the work environment and the importance 
of positive personal role models (experienced colleagues, team 
members) for their professionalism. The adaptation process is 
intended to facilitate the period of integration, orientation, 
and familiarization with the new work environment. During 
this period, the nurse solves the conflict that occurs due to the 
transition from graduation to full professional role, which de-
pends on the congruence between the values, norms, and ex-
pectations of education and the reality of work performance. 
Nurses who do not progress beyond the shock stage may never 
fully demonstrate their professionalism (Moradi et al., 2017).
Another important theme APNs highlighted is education. 
Participants emphasized formal education and personal re-
quirements for nurses. Advance practice nurses pointed out 
the necessity and importance of education that supports their 
qualification and qualities. They are convinced that they are 
more valuable to physicians when they can oppose them and 
justify the provision of nursing care. Lifelong learning repre-
sents a path to self-improvement and professional growth. 
Dingwall and Allen (2001) state that the caring and emotion-
al aspects of nursing are somewhat devalued in society today. 
Nursing is becoming increasingly ‘technical’ due to advanced 
medical technology and nurses are expected to develop mainly 
‘technical competence’. However, a nurse’s acceptance by pa-
tients, colleagues, and co-workers is essential to build their 
self-confidence.
A significant theme was the nurse shortage, which APNs 
consider a threat to professionalism and professional perfor-
mance. The persistent difficulties of insufficient nursing staff 
have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. The APNs 
pointed out that it is not possible to be professional if nurses 
care for a large number of patients. Delegating tasks to nursing 
assistants without the appropriate competences will not solve 
this problem, but instead deepens this problem and endangers 
professionalism of nurses even more. However, nurses in our 
study perceived that COVID-19 pandemic positively influ-
Žiaková et al. / KONTAKT

7
enced the public awareness of how many nurses are missing 
in the healthcare system. Since the problem of nurse shortage 
is persisting for a long-time, nurses have experienced exhaus-
tion and fatigue. Therefore, Slovak nurses expect time off rath-
er than higher salaries. The shortage of nurses, the impact on 
quality and safety of care, and patient outcomes are reflected 
in several studies and reports (Chan et al., 2013; ICN, 2023). 
The shortage of nurses can lead to unprofessional behavior in 
nurses. Nurses should be prepared to handle challenging sit-
uations, often influenced by the patient’s health condition. 
APNs demonstrated unprofessional behavior through absent 
communication skills, inappropriate communication with a 
student or patient, private problems interfering with work, 
ineffective care, disrespect for intimacy, or interference of the 
nurse’s personal opinions or prejudices in the nurse’s behavior 
toward the patient.
The study has several limitations. One of these is the selec-
tion of only one university hospital in Slovakia; therefore, the 
results might be influenced by the organizational characteris-
tics of this one hospital and the similar professional values of 
nurses included in our study.
 
Conclusion
Professionalism is considered a fundamental aspect of nursing 
and a key element in providing quality and safe nursing care. 
Based on the results of our study, in the Slovak sociocultural 
context, professionalism can be understood and interpreted as 
a multidimensional and dynamic concept that includes several 
main attributes, such as the role of professional organization, 
the importance of professional socialization, education, and 
lifelong learning. Several challenges and problems, such as a 
nursing shortage or lack of nurse motivation, can negatively 
affect the maintenance of professionalism.
Funding statement
This work was supported by the Cultural and Educational 
Grant Agency of the Ministry of Education, Science, Research 
and Sport of the Slovak Republic [the project of the KEGA pro-
ject no. 008UK-4/2021 Professionalism and Ethics in Nurs-
ing].
Conflict of interest
The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available 
from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Ethics approval statement
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Jess-
enius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius University in 
Bratislava (EC no. 79/2021).
 
References
  1.	 Al-Eraky MM (2015). Twelve Tips for teaching medical 
professionalism at all levels of medical education. Med Teach 
37(11): 1018–1025. DOI: 10.3109/0142159X.2015.1020288
  2.	 ANA – American Nurses Association (2012). About ANA. 
[online] [cit. 2023-05-13]. Available from: http://www.
nursingworld.org/FunctionalMenuCategories/ AboutANA
Žiaková et al. / KONTAKT
  3.	 Boswell C, Cannon S, Miller J (2005). Nurses’ political 
involvement: responsibility versus privilege. J Prof Nurs 21(1): 
5–8. DOI: 10.1016/j.profnurs.2004.11.005.
  4.	 Braun V, Clarke V (2022). Thematic analysis: A practical guide. 
London: Sage Publications, 376 p.
  5.	 Canadian Nurses Association (2012). Nursing and the political 
agenda. [online] [cit. 2023-05-13]. Available from: http://www. 
Cnaaiic.ca/en/advocacy/nursing-and-the-political-agenda
  6.	 Cao H, Song Y, Wu Y, Du Y, He X, Chen Y, et al. (2023). What is 
nursing professionalism? a concept analysis. BMC Nurs 22(1): 
34. DOI: 10.1186/s12912-022-01161-0.
  7.	 Chan ZC, Tam WS, Lung MK, Wong WY, Chau CW (2013). 
A systematic literature review of nurse shortage and 
the intention to leave. J Nurs Manag 21(4): 605–613. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2834.2012.01437.x.
  8.	 Cramer ME (2002). Factors influencing organized political 
participation in nursing. Policy Polit Nurs Pract 3: 97–107. 
DOI: 10.1177/152715440200300203.
  9.	 Dingwall R, Allen D (2001). The implications of healthcare 
reforms for the profession of nursing. Nurs Inq 8(2): 64–74. 
DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1800.2001.00100.x.
10.	 European Federation of Nurses Associations (2022). EFN 
Policy Statement on EU Advanced Practice Nursing [online] 
[cit. 2023-05-18]. Available from: https://efn.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2022/04/EFN-Policy-Statement-on-APN-April-2022.
pdf
11.	 Fatemi NL, Moonaghi HK, Heydari A (2018). Exploration of 
nurses’ perception about professionalism in home care nursing 
in Iran: a qualitative study. Electron Physician 10(5): 6803–
6811. DOI: 10.19082/6803.
12.	 Ghadirian F, Salsali M, Cheraghi MA (2014). Nursing 
professionalism: An evolutionary concept analysis. Iran J Nurs 
Midwifery Res 19(1): 1–10.
13.	 Hall RH (1967). Some organizational considerations in the 
professional-organizational relationship. Adm Sci Q 12(3): 
461–478. DOI: 10.2307/2391315.
14.	 Hall RH (1968). Professionalization and Bureaucratization. Am 
Sociol Rev 33(1): 92–104. DOI: 10.2307/2092242.
15.	 Hamric AB, Tracy MF (2019). A definition of Advanced Practice 
Nursing. In: Tracy MF, O’Grady ET (Eds.) Advanced Practice 
Nursing: An integrative approach. St. Louis: Elsevier, pp. 61–79.
16.	 ICN – International Council of Nurses (2005). The scope of 
practice, standards and competencies of the Advanced Practice 
Nurse. [online] [cit. 2023-05-18]. Available from: http://
cambodiancouncilofnurse.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/
Scope-and-Standards-of-nurse-practitioner_ICN.pdf
17.	 ICN – International Council of Nursing (2020). Guidelines on 
advanced practice nursing. [online] [cit. 2023-05-18]. Available 
from: https://www.icn.ch/system/files/documents/2020-04/
ICN_APN%20Report_EN_WEB.pdf
18.	 ICN – International Council of Nursing (2023). Recover to 
rebuild: investing in the nursing workforce for health system 
effectiveness. [online] [cit. 2023-05-21]. Available from: https://
www.icn.ch/news/icn-report-says-shortage-nurses-global-
health-emergency
19.	 Johnson JA (2015). Nursing professionalism: innate, taught, 
or caught? J Nurs Prof Dev 31(2): 114–115. DOI: 10.1097/
NND.0000000000000149.
20.	 Kelly SH (2020). The hidden curriculum: Undergraduate 
nursing students’ perspectives of socialization and 
professionalism. Nurs Ethics 27(5): 1250–1260. 
DOI: 10.1177/0969733019881714.
21.	 Kim-Godwin YS, Baek HC, Wynd CA (2010). Factors influencing 
professionalism in nursing among Korean American registered 
nurses. J Prof Nurs 26(4): 242–249. DOI: 10.1016/j.
profnurs.2009.12.007.
22.	 Kramer M, Maguire P, Schmalenberg CE (2006). 
Excellence through evidence: the what, when, and where 
of clinical autonomy. J Nurs Adm 36(10): 479–491. 
DOI: 10.1097/00005110-200610000-00009.
23.	 Marcinowicz L, Shpakou A, Piatrou S, Fejfer-Wirbal E, 
Dudzik A, Kalinowska P, et al. (2020). Behavioural categories of 
professionalism of nurses in Poland and Belarus: A comparative 

8
survey. J Clin Nurs 29(9–10): 1635–1642. DOI: 10.1111/
jocn.15226.
24.	 Miller BK (1988). A model for professionalism in nursing. 
Today’s OR nurse 10(9): 18–23.
25.	 Ministry of Health of the Slovak Republic (2018). Regulation 
No 95/2018. [online] [cit. 2023-05-21]. Available from: http://
www.epi.sk/zz/2018-95/znenie-20180401#Share
26.	 Moradi Y, Mollazadeh F, Jamshidi H, Tayefeh T, Zaker MR, 
Karbasi F (2017). Outcomes of professional socialisation in 
nursing: A systematic review. J Pharm Sci Res 9(12): 2468–
2472.
27.	 Papathanassoglou ED, Karanikola MN, Kalafati M, 
Giannakopoulou M, Lemonidou C, Albarran JW (2012). 
Professional autonomy, collaboration with physicians, and 
moral distress among European intensive care nurses. Am J Crit 
Care 21(2): e41–e52. DOI: 10.4037/ajcc2012205.
Žiaková et al. / KONTAKT
28.	 Schober M (2016). Introduction to Advanced Nursing Practice. 
An International Focus. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 178 p.
29.	 Skela-Savič B, Kiger A (2015). Self-assessment of clinical nurse 
mentors as dimensions of professional development and the 
capability of developing ethical values at nursing students: 
A correlational research study. Nurse Educ Today 35(10): 
1044–1051. DOI: 10.1016/j.nedt.2015.04.003.
30.	 Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J (2007). Consolidated criteria for 
reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist 
for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual 19(6): 349–357. 
DOI: 10.1093/intqhc/mzm042.
31.	 Vandenhouten CL, Malakar CL, Kubsch S, Block DE, 
Gallagher-Lepak S (2011). Political Participation of 
Registered Nurses. Policy Polit Nurs Pract 12(3): 159–167. 
DOI: 10.1177/1527154411425189.