This work is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0 
Web: https://e-journal.usd.ac.id/index.php/theoicon  
Email: theoicon@usd.ac.id  
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON 
THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
Vol. 1, No. 1, June 2024 (59-72) 
 
Gender Equality in Batak Toba Society in the 
Lights  of the Theological Thoughts of Ivone 
Gebara 
Rina Elysa Sinurata,1 Moses Putra Gautamab Andreas Ama Kelenc  
YB. Heru Prakosad  
a,b,c,d Faculty of Theology, Universitas Sanata Dharma, Indonesia 
1Corresponding Email: rinasinuratfse@gmail.com 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.24071/tic.v1i1.8468 
Abstract 
In the shadow of strong traditional customs, Batak Toba women are subjected to the authority of 
men, whether husbands or male relatives, and are conƦƪned to the role of parhobas (servants) for 
every family event. Ivone Gebara’s thoughts would provide inspiration to address the challenges of 
gender inequality through empowering women and inclusive human values in open dialogue, 
aiming for personal and social transformations that are inclusive, just, and sustainable, following 
the social-cultural context of Batak Toba in Indonesia. The focus of Ivone Gebara’s theological 
thought aligns with the principles of Liberation Theology, emphasizing the importance of efforts to 
connect the Christian faith with the lives of communities affected by social and economic injustice, 
along with solidarity with the poor and oppressed. This research used a literature review method 
by examining recent articles on Ivone Gebara’s thoughts. She critically observes the patriarchal 
structures in society and the Church, advocating for the need for critical reƤlection in inclusive and 
egalitarian interpretations of women’s experiences to promote gender equality. Gebara’s thoughts 
serve as a foundation to enrich public narratives and support education and feminist awareness 
for social change within the Batak Toba community. Contextualizing Gebara’s ideas in Indonesia, 
particularly in the Batak Toba culture, can support movements and awareness regarding religious 
norms and encourage open discussions about women’s roles in diverse societies. 
Keywords 
Liberation Theology, Gender, Feminism, Batak Toba 
INTRODUCTION 
The Batak community is a tribe that steadfastly preserves its customs and 
culture to this day. Wherever they are, the Batak people adhere to their traditions and 
customs. In Batak Toba Society, traditions and culture play a crucial role in shaping 
the social structure, including gender roles. In Batak Toba culture, women often face 
gender inequality in education, customs, and inheritance rights. In customary life as 

 
60 
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
well, women are frequently subjected to unfair treatment, such as in the distribution  
of inheritance. In daily life, it is evident that there are still many disparities between 
the roles of Batak women compared to men. This is closely linked to the strong 
inƥƷuence of patriarchal structure, making gender a recurring issue in Batak Toba 
Culture.   
In the Batak Toba tribe, there is a kinship system that embodies a patriarchal 
culture known as Dalihan Na Tolu, translated as “Tungku Nan Tiga” in Indonesian. 
Dalihan Na Tolu consists of three elements: (1) Manat Mardongan Tubu, which focuses 
on maintaining relationships among family members within the same clan, mainly 
male; (2) Elek Marboru, which emphasizes support and care for sisters or daughters; 
(3) Somba Marhula-hula, highlights the respect that women should have for their 
brothers and parents. The Batak people highly value and implement this kinship 
system as a way of interacting with others. 
The portrait of inequality within Batak Toba families is evident in various 
aspects. Firstly, concerning inheritance rights, male children have greater inheritance 
rights compared to female children. Sons have various responsibilities in society that 
legitimize their more signiƧƬcant inheritance rights. In contrast, daughters only have 
limited inheritance rights. Often, these inheritance rights are expressed as gifts based 
on compassion. Women may receive something if the male heir is willing to give a 
small portion of the inheritance when requested by the female party. The compassion 
mentioned here is also when the Inong (ibu) in the family possesses and keeps 
jewellery or valuable items; the female child will inherit these possessions when the 
mother dies.  
Secondly, inequality in the public sphere becomes apparent when women still 
face constraints in decision-making and recognition of their roles. Decision-making 
processes predominantly involve men, while women are placed in the role of decision 
implementers. This results in low participation of women in the public sphere, 
disadvantaging them in various ƧƬelds such as education, health, economy, social 
matters, politics, and culture. In other words, it can be said that men hold control over 
women. 
The issue of gender inequality is not only evident in conƥƷicts with men but also 
within women themselves, as seen in the dual roles played by Batak Toba women. 
They play a signiƧƬcant and crucial part in managing households. Thus, women are 
present and involved and play roles in both the private and public spheres 

 
61 
 
SINURAT, GAUTAMA, KELEN, PRAKOSA: GENDER EQUALITY IN BATAK TOBA SOCIETY 
simultaneously. While they play a signiƧƬcant role in household matters, they face 
several constraints in the public sphere. In addition to inheritance rights and 
decision-making, Batak Toba women also encounter irony regarding recognising of 
their roles and injustices in various aspects of life.  
Recognizing this phenomenon, society has an increasing awareness of 
addressing and understanding the gender disparities present in this structure. One 
interesting approach to examining this issue is adopting a feminist theological 
perspective involving insights from Ivone Gebara. Ivone Gebara is a feminist 
theologian who has made signiƧƬcant progress in developing a theological framework 
that recognizes and opposes gender inequality. 
This paper aims to delve into the feminist theology of Ivone Gebara and assess 
its potential application in Batak Toba society. The paper will explore the key 
principles of feminist theology developed by Ivone Gebara. It will also examine how 
her insights can contribute to addressing gender inequality in Batak Toba society, 
which is vulnerable due to the strong and pervasive inƥƷuence of patriarchal culture. 
By studying Ivone Gebara’s feminist theology, this paper offers a perspective on efforts 
to achieve gender equality in Batak Toba society while serving as a source of 
inspiration to promote positive transformation towards an inclusive and fair society 
for all individuals, regardless of gender. 
METHOD 
This paper employs the method of literature review (Library Research). Library 
research is a research activity conducted by collecting information and data using 
various source materials available in libraries or through the Internet. The steps taken 
by the author involve gathering various recent journal articles (within the last ten 
years) on the phenomenon of inequality in Batak Toba culture and the feminist 
theological thoughts of Ivone Gebara. From these references, the author reads, 
comprehends, and takes notes on ƧƬndings that support the focus of this study. 
RESULT 
Gender Inequality in Batak Toba Culture 
Women in the Family 
The issue of gender inequality in Batak Toba culture, like many other cultures 
in Indonesia and around the world, has become a complex problem with multiple 

 
62 
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
aspects and ongoing developments. Despite the rich cultural heritage and strong 
traditions of Batak Toba, this culture is not exempt from gender gaps deeply 
embedded in its social and cultural framework. Misunderstandings in gender 
perceptions, prevalent among men and women, and the patriarchal kinship system, 
as well as the customs of Batak Toba culture, form the basis for the marginalization of 
women.1 
In everyday life in Batak Toba culture, gender injustice is still evident in various 
aspects, including education, traditional customs, and inheritance rights. Women 
often face limitations in access to education and ƧƬnd themselves constrained by 
patriarchal customary norms, particularly in terms of inheritance rights. The highest 
decisions in this culture are in the hands of men, meaning that women do not have 
the right to speak or make decisions. Inheritance is also owned by men, especially the 
eldest son  (sianghangan) and the youngest son (siampudan). The role of women in 
this life is limited to the role of the petitioner  (sipanjalo), while men are more likely 
to work outside the home, and women focus on domestic work inside the house or 
huta.2      
The lyrics of the song “Holong Mangalap Holong” vividly depict the roles and 
positions of women and men within the family. From the outset, the song portrays 
that the family's positions and division of tasks are predetermined. One of the songs 
that tends to highlight this is the song titled  Holong Mangalap Holong: “di huta 
anggitta siampudan, di parmahanan hahatta panggoaran, amatta nang inanta tu 
balian, ibototta ma patupahon panganan (in the village, the younger brother is the 
smallest, in the pasture, the older brother is the biggest, father and mother in the 
ƧƬelds, our sisters prepare the food).3 In these lyrics, it is clear how tasks are divided 
and the positions of children within the Batak family. In this context, women ƧƬnd 
their place in the domestic realm and household duties. 
In the Batak tribe, sons are highly esteemed and are responsible for preserving 
and passing down the family or clan name. The family name, known as “marga,” holds 
signiƧƬcant importance in Batak culture and is exclusively passed down through males. 
Women in the Batak Toba tribe are valued for their ability to bear heirs for the clan or 
                                                                
1 Harisan Boni Firmando, “Eksistensi Perempuan Batak Toba Ditengah Kemelut Gender Di Tapanuli 
Bahagian Utara (Analisis Sosiologis,” Jurnal Kajian Gender dan Anak 5, 2 (2021): 82. 
2 J. B. Simatupang, “Perempuan dalam Budaya Adat Batak Toba,” Jurnal Pendidikan Tambusai, 5, 3 
(2021): 10288-10289. 
3 Firmando, “Eksistensi Perempuan,” 84. 

 
63 
 
SINURAT, GAUTAMA, KELEN, PRAKOSA: GENDER EQUALITY IN BATAK TOBA SOCIETY 
male lineage. It can be said that not having a son is considered a shortcoming within 
the family, while not having daughters has no impact.  For daughters, their clan 
identity only continues after they marry, and even then, they will be known through 
their husband’s clan. After marriage, daughters fully become part of their husband’s 
families, as women are “bought” through sinamot (dowry), and their responsibilities 
shift entirely to caring for their in-laws, no longer having obligations towards their 
parents. 
Batak Toba Women After Marriage 
In customary events, women are often seen merely as guests who do not 
actively participate in the main traditional ceremonies but instead play roles in the 
kitchen or are referred to as parhobas, meaning servants. On the other hand, sons 
become the focal point and protagonists of these ceremonial events. This distinction 
is absolute. In Toba customary practices, women are considered to be in a secondary 
position, while men hold the main/primary roles and are even regarded as kings. The 
patriarchal nature between husband and wife in the Batak Toba tribe is evident in the 
expectations placed on women/wives within the family. Wives are expected to take 
care of the home and family, serve their husbands well, obey without questioning, and 
show respect to their husbands. Men, as leaders, take charge and actively engage in 
public affairs. 
In this era, an ongoing debate and growing movement challenge and oppose 
patriarchal culture. Like women from other cultures, Batak Toba women are also 
beginning to emerge and participate in various aspects of society. In some cases, Batak 
women are considered stronger and wiser than men, especially in marital 
relationships. However, within customary practices, particularly in the Dalihan Na 
Tolu system, the status of women remains unchanged and is deemed unlikely to 
change. The deeply ingrained customary practices within the Batak tribe have 
perpetuated a patriarchal culture. Some Batak women still accept and believe that 
they should be treated accordingly. All perceptions and concepts assigned to women 
are inseparable from the life philosophy of Batak Toba society, namely Dalihan Na 
Tolu. The Dalihan Na Tolu concept is an integrated kinship system deeply rooted in 
the traditions and values of Batak Toba culture from the beginning.4 
                                                                
4 Grecetinovitria Merliana Butar-Butar, “Eksistensi Perempuan Batak Toba Dalam Budaya Dan Agama,” 
Jurnal Pionir 6, 2 (2020): 193. 

 
64 
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
In this gender crisis, many women persist and undertake dual roles based on 
the complex needs of the modern era. Various issues and demands in the modern age 
require women to maximize self-realization. The existence and capabilities of women 
have been proven and tested, ranging from managing the family and contributing to 
the family’s economy through activities such as farming, weaving (martonun), and 
online trading to being the backbone of the family as professional women, leaders in 
the workplace, and mothers at home. Women deserve to be recognized as promoters 
because, in addition to advancing their families, they can also engage in various ƧƬelds 
that beneƧƬt the wider community. 5Therefore, the stigma traditionally associated with 
Batak Toba women starkly contrasts the reality of their roles and achievements in 
today’s society. 
Liberation Theology and Feminist Theology of Ivone Gebara 
Ivone Gebara is a nun from the Order of Our Lady of Conegas of Saint 
Augustine. Before gaining recognition as a feminist and theologian, Ivone Gebara 
worked in a small town called Camaragibe near the city of Recife in Northern Brazil, 
focusing on the poor and women who were victims of violence.6 Consequently, the 
theological orientation of her thinking is inseparable from her charitable work as a 
nun.  
Ivone Gebara holds a theological perspective that signiƧƬcantly differs from 
most theological orientations. She argues that male groups are too controlling the 
discussions about God. Consequently, this masculine viewpoint, according to Gebara, 
is seen as a way for male groups to maintain an understanding of God and society. 
Gebara suspects that such patterns are utilized by patriarchal leadership as a claim to 
the truth about the understanding of God. If men declare themselves as the group 
holding the whole truth of God, then the voices of women will be silenced. 
Gebara likens this theological phenomenon to clothing. Understanding God's 
true identity is like clothing that humans wear over all their concrete experiences and 
feelings. The issue is that this clothing is made based on the design of only one party 
and never replaced. In other words, masculine theology has been used by the Church 
for too long and has never been taken off. Therefore, Gebara advocates for removing 
                                                                
5 Firmando, “Eksistensi Perempuan,” 83. 
6 Claudio Carvalhaes and Fabio Py, “Liberation Theology in Brazil,” Cross Currents 67, Nr. 1 (2017): 163. 

 
65 
 
SINURAT, GAUTAMA, KELEN, PRAKOSA: GENDER EQUALITY IN BATAK TOBA SOCIETY 
this patriarchal theology and replacing it with a more comprehensive theology. For 
her, God is a mystery that encompasses both men's and women's lives. 
Claudio Carvalhaes and Fabio Py carefully observe the direction and journey of 
Ivone Gebara’s theology. They ƧƬnd that Gebara reƥƷects on patriarchal theology, 
which, in turn, hinders people from recognizing God more fully. Carvalhaes and Py 
express:  
“Theology is a process of knowing and patriarchy has forced us to think in 
univocal ways offering us only one piece of cloth to understand God and 
ourselves. For Gebara, religious experiences are born and lived in and through 
our bodies and it is in these bodies and bodies’ relations that we can ƧƬnd the 
threads of what God might be in our midst. There is a tapestry of solidarity and 
connection that gives us, in different bodies and unique feelings, a sense of what 
and who God might be: a mystery that graces us in many forms and shapes. In 
this mystery, lived in the plural ways of living that begs for different forms of 
knowledge to give different accounts of God, of ourselves and our live 
together.”7 
 
As mentioned above, Ivone Gebara’s theological foundation does not primarily 
arise from the contradiction between masculine and feminine theology. Instead, 
Gebara’s theology initially speaks to the idea that religious experience is always 
grounded in everyday life. The religious experience becomes full when individuals 
discover God's presence and role in their lives. Therefore, humans can better 
understand that God is always present and bestows His grace in various forms and 
shapes. On the almost opposing side, overly masculine theology restricts the 
experience and awareness of God’s presence. The experience and presence of God are 
underpinned by male dominance in all areas of life. Hence, such patriarchal theology 
can hinder humans from getting to know God more deeply and comprehensively. 
Based on this theological foundation, Ivone Gebara sees the strength of women 
in creating and rebuilding all aspects of life amid patriarchal cultures.8 In highly 
patriarchal environments, women continue to advocate for their voices, not just for 
themselves but for the collective good. Gebara observes that women contribute 
signiƧƬcantly to economics, politics, social solidarity, gender, and sexuality. 
                                                                
7 Carvalhaes and Py, “Liberation Theology in Brazil,” 164. 
8 Carvalhaes and Py, “Liberation Theology in Brazil,” 166. 

 
66 
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
Ivone Gebara views the traditional dogma of God the Father and Jesus the Son 
as ‘sacred’ tools for the patriarchal tradition to subjugate women under their 
authority. The Father and the Son are gods whom all humans must obey. However, 
this model is employed by men to promote their dominance over women under the 
guise of obedience. Confronted with this theological situation, Gebara contemplates 
that women need daily salvation and resurrection to overcome such challenges.9 
Gebara is aware that her theological thoughts are within the scope of Latin 
American Liberation Theology. She agrees that Latin American Liberation Theology 
establishes a new relationship between the saving Christ and the social struggles of 
the local community. However, she also criticizes this theology for not recognizing 
the growth of androcentric character within it. Liberation theologians often fail to 
question this androcentric character, thus perpetuating a patriarchal theological 
epistemology.10 In other words, Liberation Theology is seen as too focused on the 
struggle for socio-economic justice, neglecting the ƧƬght for gender justice. For Gebara, 
women’s rights should also be advocated as an integral part of overall social justice. 
Therefore, besides hindering people from understanding God more 
comprehensively, patriarchal theology also closes the possibility for a deeper and 
more comprehensive understanding of justice. Gebara writes: 
“Liberation theologians saw spirituality as the presence of God’s Spirit helping 
us in our initiatives against justice. It was the strength of His Spirit that held us 
together to resist the social and political forms of evil. But, this liberationist 
spirituality never accepted the critique of Christian feminists regarding the 
limited, oppressive and invasive presence of God the Father. Despite their 
coherence in a past contextual situation, those meanings are now challenged 
by the winds of the human right to democratic diversity, to feminism and to 
pluralistic understanding of justice.”11 
Facing a dynamic world and society, Gebara does not deny the reality of diverse 
meanings. However, these meanings are deemed inappropriate if used to perpetuate 
                                                                
9 Ann Lutterman-Aguilar, “A Protestant Feminist Perspective in Response to Our Current Context of 
Violence,” Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion 34, no. 2 (2018): 135. 
10 Alexandra Rodriguez Sabogal, “From Liberation Theology to Feminist Ecotheology,” Chasqui 50, no. 
2 (November 2021): 163. 
11 Ivone Gebara, “Spirituality and Resistance: A Latin American Perspective,” in Feminist Theology 
Reaching New Borders, ed. Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians 39, Nr. 1 (2016): 65. 

 
67 
 
SINURAT, GAUTAMA, KELEN, PRAKOSA: GENDER EQUALITY IN BATAK TOBA SOCIETY 
the process of male domination over women. Religious language, too, opens up a 
space for diverse meanings. As mentioned earlier, Gebara sees that men often use the 
masculinity of God (The Father and The Son) to subjugate women in the name of 
‘divine obedience.’ She suspects that religious languages are used to strengthen the 
throne of capitalist societies. 
Ivone Gebara is also a foundational ƧƬgure in eco-feminism. Eco-feminism 
involves the concern and understanding of women and the dignity of the entire 
natural ecosystem. The patriarchal culture challenged by Gebara ultimately leads to 
the conclusion that men can be identiƧƬed with culture. If men are associated with 
culture, then women are associated with nature. The association between women and 
nature is based on similarities in physical functions such as reproduction, lactation 
(breastfeeding), and childcare.12 Due to the association of these functions, any struggle 
for justice within Liberation Theology must consider this eco-feminist perspective. 
Eco-feminism becomes a crucial pillar within the structure of Latin American 
Liberation Theology because it inspires a perspective that brings a ‘feminine’ touch to 
the struggle for justice. The oppression of the people due to an oppressive government 
needs attention from the world, akin to a mother caring for her child. The signiƧƬcant 
poverty of the people requires the breastfeeding intervention of the world as a mother. 
Just as nature nurtures everything within it, the world should similarly view all those 
who are poor, oppressed, suffering, and marginalized. 
Due to its contribution to collective social justice efforts, Ivone Gebara’s eco-
feminism opens up space for women to have a more liberated voice and express their 
opinions. This is possible because women are seen as the group that understands and 
experiences the functions of maternal physiology most intimately. Consequently, 
Ivone Gebara’s feminist theology has its distinctive features. Unlike most feminist 
theology, which often focuses on discussions about masculinity and patriarchal 
thinking that heavily inƥƷuences human concepts of God, Gebara’s eco-feminism does 
not get entangled in dogma or questions about God as the highest entity or as a single 
spatial entity of pure essence within and of itself.13 In short, Ivone Gebara’s feminist 
                                                                
12 Olga Consuelo Velez Caro, “Ecofeminism: New Liberation Paths for Women and Nature,” Exchange 
44 (2015): 69. 
13 Cyntthia Garrity-Bond, “Ecofeminist Epistemology in Vandana Shiva’s The Feminine Principle of 
Prakriti and Ivone Gebara’s Trinitarian Cosmology,” Feminist Theology 26, no. 2 (2018): 192. 

 
68 
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
theology does not limit itself to the patriarchal background in the concept of God but 
discovers the role of God in caring for and loving all humanity, both men and women. 
Interdisciplinary Approach: Religious and Cultural Perspectives 
In Batak Toba society, tradition and culture play a crucial role in shaping the 
social structure, including gender roles. Women face gender inequality in education, 
customs, and inheritance rights. This section encompasses the theological thoughts 
of Ivone Gebara, emphasizing gender inequality and advocating the need for critical 
reƥƷection through inclusive and egalitarian interpretations of women’s experiences 
to promote gender equality. Ivone Gebara also believes that in a patriarchal culture, 
women play a signiƧƬcant role in creating and reconstructing all aspects of life. 
Therefore, the interdisciplinary approach between religious and cultural aspects in 
this context involves understanding and addressing gender inequality in Batak Toba 
society by studying Ivone Gebara’s feminist theology and offering perspectives on 
achieving gender equality in the Batak Toba community. 
In Batak Toba society, men are positioned as decision-makers in every 
consideration. Both family and community rely on a man’s decision for communal 
actions. On the other hand, women are placed in the position of “parhobas” or 
servants. The legitimacy of such roles points to the privilege of men to subjugate 
women under their authority. Cultural systems like these could silence women's 
voices in Batak Toba society.  
In the realm of Liberation Theology, particularly feminist theology, Ivone 
Gebara identiƧƬes a potential opening in a situation similar to the position of women 
in Batak Toba society. Ivone Gebara recognizes the strength of women in creating and 
rebuilding all aspects of life amidst a patriarchal culture.14 Gebara sees that as women 
become more alienated from society, their rights are increasingly asserted. Like men, 
women also aspire to play a role in economic development. Just as men contribute to 
political progress, women increasingly become involved in state politics. 
Women can ƧƬnd this opening as they discover that an increasingly dynamic 
society generates diversity in meanings. In her theological reƥƷections, Gebara 
observes that men often employ the masculinity of God (Father and Son) to subjugate 
women based on ‘divine obedience.’ She suspects that religious language is used to 
                                                                
14 Carvalhaes dan Py. “Liberation Theology in Brazil,” 166. 

 
69 
 
SINURAT, GAUTAMA, KELEN, PRAKOSA: GENDER EQUALITY IN BATAK TOBA SOCIETY 
solidify the throne of capitalist societies. Gebara offers a new interpretation of the 
nature of God through her ecofeminist perspective. 
Ecofeminism is not entangled in dogma or questions about God as the highest 
entity or as a single spatial entity of pure essence existing within and unto itself.15 God 
is not only portrayed as a powerful Father but also as a Spirit who observes and cares 
for all oppressed humanity. The maternal function of the Spirit of God is emphasized 
here. Thus, the feminine nature is inherent in God. This new interpretation elevates 
the dignity of women to be equal to men’s. 
The fundamental values of ecofeminism are also present in Batak Toba society. 
There are two signiƧƬcant concepts within Batak Toba’s ecofeminism. The ƧƬrst concept 
revolves around a divine entity known as Si Boru Deang Parujar. This belief originates 
from the Tapanuli community in North Sumatra. In Batak Toba culture, it is believed 
that a man and a woman were initially born as twin siblings named Raja Ihatmanisia 
(male) and Boru Itammanisia (female), serving as the ancestors of all humanity on 
Earth. 16Raja Ihatmanisia and Boru Itammanisia were born from the womb of Si Boru 
Deang Parujar. Since Si Boru Deang Parujar gave birth to both male and female 
children, this entity became a symbol of equality’s idea in Batak Toba society. Si Boru 
Deang Parujar is also depicted as a celestial goddess who willingly descended to Earth 
to cultivate the land for human use. Therefore, Si Boru Deang Parujar is not only the 
mother of all humans but also the mother of the Earth. 
Therefore, Si Boru Deang Parujar embodies an idea of equality that transcends 
not only the social and community level but also reaches the cosmological level. The 
cosmological myth of Si Boru Deang Parujar emphasizes the independence of thought 
and action for women as individuals who cannot be interfered with by the injustices 
born from the patriarchal system that originated from the celestial realm. 17Beyond 
that, a noble responsibility is also bestowed upon Batak Toba women as the mothers 
of natural and human life. In essence, the representation of Batak Toba women as 
independent, not oppressed by the patriarchal system, and connected to nature is 
embodied in Si Boru Deang Parujar. 
                                                                
15 Bond, “Ecofeminist Epistemology,” 192. 
16 Roy Charly H.P. Sidabutar, dkk, “Ekofeminisme Batak Toba: Pembacaan Lintas Tekstual Kejadian 1 
dan Kosmologi Si Boru Deang Parujar,” Kurios 9, no. 3 (Desember 2023): 721. 
17 Sidabutar, dkk, “Ekofeminisme Batak Toba,” 725. 

 
70 
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
The second important concept in Batak Toba ecofeminism is Dalihan Na Tolu. 
Dalihan Na Tolu is a framework that encompasses blood relationship connections and 
serves as the basis for kinship relations in Batak Toba society.18 Dalihan Na Tolu 
consists of three elements: (1) Manat Mardongan Tubu, which focuses on maintaining 
relationships among male members of the same clan, (2) Elek Marboru, emphasizing 
the support and care for sisters or daughters, (3) Somba Marhula-hula, highlighting 
the respect that women should have for their sons and parents. This kinship 
framework dictates how women should submit to men within their families. In 
addition to the patriarchal concept embedded in it, this kinship framework also holds 
a deeper meaning. Dalihan Na Tolu implies that humans will continue to exist in space 
and time and are capable of sustaining themselves within the universe.19 The concept 
of Dalihan Na Tolu leads to contemplation of the cosmos in its vast and boundless 
depth: a light emanating from every form of existence and the cosmos as a whole.20 
The contribution of feminist theology and ecofeminism by Ivone Gebara 
signiƧƬcantly enriches the foundation and reference points for the struggle for the 
dignity and equality of women in the context of Liberation Theology. The 
contributions of Gebara’s thoughts can also be applied to the gender inequality 
situation faced by Batak Toba women. Gebara offers a ‘new garment,’ namely the idea 
that the maternal function of the Spirit of God expands and deepens the human 
understanding of God. Batak Toba society also has its ecofeminist thoughts. The idea 
of equality elevated to the cosmological level further underscores the noble dignity of 
Batak Toba women. Thus, ecofeminist thinking in the context of Liberation Theology 
is believed to be more easily applied to the struggle for gender equality among Batak 
Toba women because they share similar thoughts with Gebara’s ecofeminism. 
CONCLUSION 
In the daily life of Toba Batak culture, gender injustice is still evident in various 
aspects, including education, customary traditions, and inheritance rights. Women 
often face limitations in accessing education and ƧƬnd themselves constrained by 
patriarchal customary norms, particularly in terms of inheritance rights. Therefore, an 
                                                                
18 Andi Fransiskus Gultom, “ReƥƷeksi Konseptual Dalihan Na Tolu dan Porhalaan Pada Etnis Batak Toba 
dalam Perspektif Kosmologi,” in Filsafat Islam: Historisitas Dan Aktualisasi (Peran Dan Kontribusi 
Filsafat Islam Bagi Bangsa), Prosiding, vol. 1, cet. 1 (Yogyakarta: FA Press, 2014), 197. 
19 Gultom, “ReƥƷeksi Konseptual,” 220. 
20 Gultom, “ReƥƷeksi Konseptual,” 206. 

 
71 
 
SINURAT, GAUTAMA, KELEN, PRAKOSA: GENDER EQUALITY IN BATAK TOBA SOCIETY 
interdisciplinary approach that incorporates religious and cultural aspects in this 
context involves understanding and addressing gender inequality in Toba Batak 
society by studying Ivone Gebara’s feminist theology. It also offers perspectives on 
efforts to achieve gender equality in Toba Batak society. For Gebara, God is not only 
portrayed as a powerful Father but also as a Spirit who observes and cares for all 
oppressed human beings. For Toba Batak women, a noble responsibility is bestowed 
upon them as the mothers of natural and human life. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Aguilar, Ann Lutterman, “A Protestant Feminist Perspective in Response to Our Current 
Context of Violence”, Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion 34 Nr. 2 (2018): 131-136. 
Aguilar, Ann Lutterman. "A Protestant Feminist Perspective in Response to Our Current 
Context of Violence." Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion 34, no. 2 (2018): 131-136. 
Baugh, Amanda J. "Explicit and Embedded Environmentalism." Worldviews 23, no. 2 (2019): 
93-112. 
Bond, Cynthia Garrity. "Ecofeminist Epistemology in Vandana Shiva’s The Feminine Principle 
of Prakriti and Ivone Gebara’s Trinitarian Cosmology." Feminist Theology 26, no. 2 
(2018): 185-194. 
Butar-Butar, Grecetinovitria Merliana. "Eksistensi Perempuan Batak Toba dalam Budaya dan 
Agama." Jurnal Pionir 6, no. 2 (2020). 
Caro, Olga Consuelo Velez. "Ecofeminisme: New Liberation Paths for Women and Nature." 
Exchange 44 (2015): 64-82. 
Carvalhaes, Claudio, and Fabio Py. "Liberation Theology in Brazil." Black Religions in Brazil 67, 
no. 1 (2017): 157-179. 
Firmando, Harisan Boni. "Eksistensi Perempuan Batak Toba Ditengah Kemelut Gender di 
Tapanuli Bagian Utara (Analisis Sosiologis)." Jurnal Kajian Gender dan Anak 5, no. 2 
(2021): 81-98. 
———. "Status dan Peranan Perempuan Setelah Berumah Tangga dalam Masyarakat Batak 
Toba di Tapanuli Utara (Analisis Sosiologis)." Jurnal Intervensi Sosial dan 
Pembangunan (JISP) 2, no. 1 (2021): 23-38. 
Gebara, Ivone. "Ecofeminism: A Latin American Perspective." Spring 53, no. 1 (2003): 93-103. 
Gultom, Andi Fransiskus. "ReƥƷeksi Konseptual Dalihan Na Tolu dan Porhalaan pada Etnis 
Batak Toba dalam Perspektif Kosmologi." In Filsafat Islam: Historisitas dan Aktualisasi 
(Peran dan Kontribusi Filsafat Islam Bagi Bangsa), Prosiding, vol. 1, cet. 1, 194-207. 
Yogyakarta: FA Press, 2014. 
Harris, Melanie L. "Reshaping the Ear: Honorable Listening and Study of Ecowomanist and 
Ecofeminist Scholarship for Feminist Discourse." Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion 
33, no. 2 (2017): 158-162. 
Gebara, Ivone. "Spirituality and Resistance: A Latin American Perspective." In Feminist 
Theology Reaching New Borders, ed. Ecumenical Association of Third World 
Theologians 39, no. 1 (2016): 61-74. 

 
72 
 
PROCEEDINGS OF THE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON THEOLOGY, RELIGION, CULTURE, AND HUMANITIES 
Ketaren, Desi Ananta Sari. "Penghayatan Identitas Gender pada Perempuan Karir Suku Batak 
Toba Sumatera Utara." Jurnal Inovasi Penelitian 4, no. 2 (2023): 379-390. 
Lengyel, Willa Swenson. "Beyond Eschatology: Environmental Pessimism and the Future of 
Human Hoping." The Journal of Religious Ethics 45, no. 3 (September 2017): 413-436. 
Sabogal, Alexandra Rodriguez. "From Liberation Theology to Feminist Ecotheology." Chasqui 
50, no. 2 (November 2021): 159-174. 
Sidabutar, Roy Charly H.P., dkk. "Ekofeminisme Batak Toba: Pembacaan Lintas Tekstual 
Kejadian 1 dan Kosmologi Si Boru Deang Parujar." Kurios 9, no. 3 (Desember 2023): 715-
729. 
Sinaga, Evan Daniel. "Konstruksi Gender dalam Sistem Pembagian Hak Waris Masyarakat 
Batak serta Implikasinya dalam Perspektif Teologi Kristen." Jurnal Analisa Sosiologi 12, 
no. 2 (2023). 
Simatupang, J. B. "Perempuan dalam Budaya Adat Batak Toba." Jurnal Pendidikan Tambusai 
5, no. 3 (2021): 10288-10296. 
Simanjuntak, R. S. R. "Eksistensi Perempuan Batak Toba di Parlemen Kabupaten Samosir 
dalam Budaya Patriarki." 2021. 
Situmorang, R. O. P. "Isu-Isu Gender dalam Pengelolaan Hutan dan Lahan: Studi Kasus Peran 
Isu-Isu Gender pada Masyarakat Batak di Sub DAS Arun, Kabupaten Samosir." 2015.