East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR) 
Vol. 3, No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436 
 
 
 
2419 
( 
DOI prefix : https://doi.org/10.55927/eajmr.v3i7.9851  
ISSN-E : 2828-1519 (Online) 
https://journal.formosapublisher.org/index.php/eajmr  
The Importance of Learning The Philosophy of Christian 
Religious Education in Theological Colleges 
Marthen Mau1*, Semi Darius Kainara2, and Elieser R. Marampa3 
1Sekolah Tinggi Teologi Injili Arastamar (SETIA) Ngabang, Indonesia 
2Sekolah Tinggi Teologi Arastamar Wamena 
3Sekolah Tinggi Teologi (STT) Ekumene Medan, Indonesia   
Corresponding Author: Marthen Mau marthenluthermau@gmail.com 
 
A R T I C L E I N F O 
A B S T R A C T 
Keywords: Importance, 
Learning, Philosophy, 
Christian Religious Education, 
Theological Colleges 
 
Received : 20, May 
Revised  : 03, June 
Accepted: 04, July 
©2024 Mau, Kainara, Marampa : This 
is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative 
Commons 
Atribusi 
4.0 
Internasional. 
 
Teaching the philosophy of Christian religious 
education to theology students is not wrong and 
sinful, but something that is beneficial for oneself 
and for building up others. For this reason, 
teaching PAK philosophy is very important to be 
taught 
to 
Christian 
theology 
students 
in 
theological schools. The application of PAK 
philosophy learning for theology students is very 
important in order to obtain wise thoughts, 
feelings and hearts because philosophy talks 
about wisdom. PAK philosophy learning has a 
direct relationship with the teachings of the 
Christian Scriptures. Therefore, the Holy Bible is 
the main standard in studying PAK philosophy.. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2420 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Philosophy is a benchmark for human thinking in the academic field as 
common sense reasoning in searching for and deepen a science. Philosophy and 
science knowledge is continuously undergoing transformation which is useful 
for resolving the problems faced simultaneously current development (Fadli, 
2021, p. 132). However, some people argue that philosophy is a teaching that 
confuses everyone's minds and philosophy is also a heretical teaching for 
humans. However, this idea is a wrong idea, because the teaching of the 
philosophy of content has a very urgent meaning for human life, especially in 
solving humanitarian problems. Philosophy in general is a way of thinking 
comprehensively, deeply, radically and rationally about something.  
Philosophy as the mother of science includes Christian religious 
education which provides answers to various problems of life in this world 
(Ediyono, 2022). Adian Husaini wrote that studying philosophy can seek the 
truth. Through constant questions about everything from elephant problems to 
ant problems, from political and legal issues to moral and metaphysical issues 
and so on (Husaini 2013:13). In fact, teaching philosophy is a scientific 
discipline that discusses wisdom. Teaching philosophy makes everyone have 
wisdom in behaving and acting according to principles to uphold human 
dignity. Therefore, teaching philosophy gives birth to a way of thinking for 
each person as a whole based on a process that is carried out without stopping 
to search for truth continuously, so that in fact everyone is able to understand 
everything related to human life. 
If philosophy is compared with PAK, then the teaching of PAK 
philosophy is a step in thinking for each person as a whole regarding the 
processes carried out by humans without stopping to search for truth 
continuously, so that in principle humans will understand the understanding of 
everything that happens which is directly correlated with the meaning of 
human life. Human efforts to seek truth and love wisdom are called 
philosophy. Stephen Tong stated that philosophy is a teaching that is carried 
out continuously so that humans learn to love wisdom (Brown 2005a:i). 
Philosophers in the past usually thirsted for the truth until they found it, but 
PAK teachings always taught the real truth, namely the truth that comes from 
God through Jesus Christ. 
Church figures in the first and second centuries such as Justin Martyr 
and Clement of Alexandria attempted to convince their readers that the pagans 
had been led to true belief through philosophical teachings, so it could be said 
that philosophy was to the Greeks what the OT was to the Jews (Brown 
2005b:4). The church father Tertullian stated that secular philosophy without 
faith would not be able to bring humans to true knowledge in Christ Jesus 
(Brown 2005b:4). PAK teaches the Christian faith so that everyone remains 
faithful to Christ Jesus and brings people to know the truth in Christ, because 
PAK's philosophical teachings are able to bring people to Him. 
Tertullian's thoughts are in accordance with the contents of the New 
Testament, as the apostle Paul warned the readers of God's people in Colossae 
to be careful so that no one influences anyone with his empty and heretical 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2421 
 
philosophical teachings according to the teachings of generations and other 
spirits, however not in accordance with His teachings (cf. Col. 2:8). In line with 
the apostle Paul's warning to God's people in Corinth that the thinking of 
humans in the world is based on God's wisdom, humans do not know God 
through worldly philosophy, so God allows everyone who believes in Christ 
Jesus to be saved through the preaching of the Gospel (cf. 1 Cor. 1: 21). Indeed, 
Christ has the power to purify, redeem, and give wisdom to humans (1 Cor. 
1:30). When humans return to the OT, humans will experience failure to find 
terms in a general sense. Likewise in the teachings of Jesus Christ. 
PAK philosophy is an effort to search for truth or love wisdom taught by 
general philosophers, but Christian philosophers believe that in fact the 
teachings in PAK have been taught that true truth is found in Jesus Christ 
because Jesus is the truth. Tong states that God in Jesus Christ is the source of 
truth, so there is no possibility that the truth in true faith conflicts with the truth 
in essential philosophical teachings (Brown 2005b:ii). The link between 
philosophy and Christian religious education is very necessary because both are 
guidelines and sources of moral behavior that are utilized by society in general. 
For this reason, philosophy needs to be present as teaching material for PAK as 
a science. Philosophy is a method for thinking systematically and critically in 
Christian religious education (Sidabutar, 2020). 
In this regard, what is the importance of studying the Philosophy of 
Christian Religious Education at Theological Colleges? This article will outlines 
the importance of learning the Philosophy of Christian Religious Education at 
Theological Colleges to find again the limits of the true understanding of PAK 
philosophy. 
 
THEORETICAL REVIEW 
Education as a teaching process carried out by adult educators to 
students regarding knowledge, attitudes and skills, so that they become 
students who have the competence to compete healthily in technological 
advances for the sake of fulfilling a better life now and in the future (Mau 
2016a:9). Christian religious education is the effort of people who have spiritual 
maturity, so that they are able to help young people and old people to believe in 
God's providence to respond to God's words in Christ Jesus. Christian religious 
education is a teaching process that is based on the Bible and centered on Christ 
to guide everyone at all age levels to know Christ Jesus in every aspect of life 
and equip everyone for effective service based on the commands of Christ Jesus 
taught to humans mature (Mau 2016b:29). 
According to Tong, for hundreds of years the habit of Greek 
philosophers was to search for truth through teaching philosophy, so that the 
culmination point led to agnosticism as Pilate did when asking Jesus Christ the 
question, “What is truth?” But Christ Jesus responded that "I am the truth 
(Brown 2005a:i). He firmly conveyed the same statement to the apostle Thomas 
that, “Jesus is the way; Jesus is the truth; and Jesus is life. Therefore, no human 
being comes to God the Father, except through Jesus (cf. John 14:6). Basically, 
humans are creatures created by God who are able to make efforts to find 

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2422 
 
Divine wisdom. Tong wrote that everything that is found both within humans 
and within the creation of the universe, all falls into the realm of philosophy 
(Brown 2005a:i). Some people think that philosophy is contrary to the truths 
learned in Christian religious education. Tong wrote about the opinion of 
experts that philosophy is the enemy of the beliefs of Christians who receive 
support from philosophical adherents or philosophy teachers (Brown 2005b:1). 
Tong stated that philosophy should not conflict with the Christian faith 
because philosophical teachings could also be taught in the PAK, thereby 
gaining support from the church fathers of the past (Brown 2005b:1). PAK 
teaches about the Christian faith regarding the believer's response to God's 
revelation in general and specific revelation through His word, that is, having 
the right faith, so that believers are able to stand tall in worshiping the living 
God and are responsible as spiritual beings who love fellow humans (Brown 
2005b:i). Christians are interested in teaching philosophy as a teaching that 
raises doubts and considers the teaching dangerous if it is not based on PAK 
teachings (Brown 2005b:3). Philosophers today have serious doubts between the 
importance of brain intelligence and the belief in Christ Jesus taught in religion 
(Brown 2005b:3). 
 
METHODOLOGY   
This paper used a qualitative type of methodology through the relevant 
literature (Marthen Mau, Junio Richson Sirait, Markus Amid, Yohanes Kotte 
2023:4). Qualitative research methods are scientific procedures in research to 
produce written descriptive data (Runa, Marthen Mau 2022). Meanwhile, 
library research means a study used to collect data and information with the 
help of various literary sources related to the research topic (Mau 2023). So, the 
aim of literature is to obtain data or information needed by the author from 
various sources, for example through books, journal articles and other sources 
that are relevant to the research title (Saenom 2023). Using this method allows 
the author to carry out theoretical analysis from existing sources until 
everything is complete and the author can draw conclusions to answer the 
problem formulation contained in the research title. The data found is divided 
into three stages: collected, reduced, and displayed items. In the first stage, 
researchers collect literature that correlates with the research topic. After 
collecting data, the author selected the literature that was most relevant to the 
research topic. After selecting data, the author analyzes the literature to build a 
conceptual framework to achieve research objectives (Et.al 2023:4).  
The author first carries out an analysis regarding the understanding of 
the use of social media which was stated in the introduction, then the author 
carries out an analysis of the concepts and theories in previous books and 
scientific journals to support this article in providing a contribution to 
knowledge and understanding when using learning media to application can 
be determined in the learning process for students. The method of analysis used 
by the author to show the application of understanding used in technological 
facilities is to find the main points of discussion through reading, taking notes 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2423 
 
and processing research materials (Amid 2021), and abstracted the research 
results and then the author applied them to the learning process for students.   
 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The Importance Of The Nature Of Philosophy 
1. The importance philosophy 
Studying philosophy is in no way inconsistent with faith in Christ Jesus 
(Munir n.d.:2). The term philosophy is used in Arabic (falsafah) and in English it 
is called philosophy. The word philosophy comes from the Greek words 
consisting of the words philein which means love and sophia which means 
wisdom. So, philosophy can mean loving or seeking wisdom (Tung 2013:3). 
Philosophy comes from the Greek philos or philein and sophos or sophia. 
Therefore, philos means love or friend. Jan Hendrick Rapar wrote that the term 
"philos" means love, it can also mean friend (Rapar 1996:14). Philein means to 
love. The term sophos means wise. Meanwhile, Sophia means wisdom (Muzairi 
2009:6). Jan Hendrick Rapar believes that the word "sophia" means wisdom, 
discernment, knowledge (Rapar 1996:14). The words philos and Sophos/sophia 
form a popular compound word, namely philosophia (Sumarna 2004:23) or 
philosophy.  
So literally "philosophia" means loving wisdom as a friend of knowledge 
(Rapar 1996:14) or philosophy can be interpreted as the love of wisdom or 
discernment because it is a friend or friend of knowledge. Seeking wisdom is 
very important for everyone, whether academics or intellectuals, rulers, business 
people, or the elite. So, philosophy means that to seek wisdom, broad thinking is 
needed through a radical and comprehensive way of thinking, a way of thinking 
that explores something as deeply as possible (Suriasumantri 1985:5). Amsal 
Bakhtiar wrote that philosophy is correlated with knowledge because it is carried 
out through the use of reason to investigate the nature of everything that exists, 
its causes, origins and laws (Baktiar 2012:5). 
Philosophy as a science that seeks to present problems that arise and relate 
to everything, both material and immaterial, seriously in order to discover the 
true nature of things, look for the principles of truth, and think rationally-
logically, deeply and freely, so that it can be used to help solve problems in 
human life (Susanto 2011:28). Philosophy is knowledge and investigation with 
reason about the causes, legal principles and so on of everything that exists in the 
universe or regarding the truth and meaning of the 'existence' of something. 
Philosophy is all exclusive learning of the technical and practical arts; a 
scientific discipline consisting of a core of logic, aesthetics, ethics, metaphysics 
and epistemology; the search for a common understanding of values and reality 
by primarily speculative rather than observational means; basic analysis and 
concepts that reveal fundamental beliefs; theories underlying or regarding areas 
of thought activity; the most common beliefs, concepts, and attitudes of an 
individual or group; calmness of temperament and judgment. 
Bertrand Russell wrote that philosophy is nothing more than an attempt to 
answer ultimate questions, not superficially or dogmatically as we do in 

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2424 
 
everyday life and even in science. According to R. Beerling, philosophy is free 
thoughts, inspired by reason, about everything that arises from experience (Anon 
n.d.-a). Karl Popper wrote that I think we all have philosophies and that most of 
our philosophies are not worth much. I think that the main task of philosophy is 
to examine various philosophies critically, which philosophies are held by 
various people uncritically (Anon n.d.-a). 
From the explanation above, it can be concluded that philosophy is a 
system of logical thinking that involves all existing aspects, starting from the 
nature of something, the way of knowing, and the use value of that thing. 
Philosophy is a process that is carried out using everything that can be used to 
obtain something. 
 
2. Objects of PAK Philosophy 
Talking about systematic knowledge, there must be clarity regarding the 
object. Objects are divided into two types, namely material objects and formal 
objects. Each science has its own material objects and formal objects. Likewise 
with philosophy. People often say that one of the differences between empirical 
science and philosophy is this object. 
The material objects of philosophy include everything that exists. 
Everything is God, nature and humans. Compare it with empirical science and 
religious science. The objects of empirical science are only humans and nature. 
Empirical science does not question or study God, but religious sciences 
(theology) mostly contain the study of divinity from the perspective and human 
interpretation of the revelations or teachings of the Prophets. Philosophy studies 
nature, humans and God. Throughout the history of philosophy, the study of 
nature has been in first place, followed by the study of humans and God. In 
medieval Europe, when philosophy became the servant of theology, there were 
many philosophical studies about God. After entering modern times, the focus of 
philosophical studies is humans. 
The formal object (approach point of view) of philosophy is a 
philosophical teaching that attempts to discuss the nature of things. Essence 
means the real or genuine truth, which is essential, not accidental. An example 
can be presented here. Humans as objects of study in science and philosophy can 
be studied from various points of view. Humans can be studied from the 
perspective of their interactions in social life. This is the sociological point of 
view. Humans can also be viewed from their psychological side. This is a 
psychological point of view. Humans can be viewed from their behavior in 
fulfilling life's needs which tend to be unlimited when faced with limited objects. 
This is the economics point of view. However, humans can also be discussed 
from an essential point of view. This is the philosophical point of view. The 
fundamental question is: "Who really is a human being?" There are various 
answers to this question. One of the famous answers from Aristotle is that 
humans are animal rationale (animals that think). 
 
3. Basic Philosophy of PAK 
The term philosopher in Greek is called philosophos only once written in 
the New Testament (Acts 17:18) which is translated according to Interlinear. On 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2425 
 
the other hand, the philosophers who were followers of Epicurus and the Stoics 
argued with him and some said: "What What would this person who pretends to 
know/ who likes to talk say?" Another, He apparently was a herald of foreign 
gods, because he preached the Good News about Jesus and the resurrection. In 
Acts 17:18 it can be understood that philosophers from the Epicurus and Stoic 
groups debated or questioned the apostle Paul regarding the Good News and the 
resurrection of Jesus which was preached by the apostle Paul at that time. The 
preaching of the Good News and the resurrection of Jesus Christ preached by the 
apostle Paul is a basic form of Christian religious educational philosophy. So, the 
apostle Paul was not preaching impersonal foreign gods. 
Be careful, lest anyone be lured by empty and false philosophy according 
to the teachings of generations and the spirit of the world, but not according to 
Christ (Col. 2:8; Gal. 4:3). Therefore, everyone must see to it that no one will be 
taken captive by empty philosophy and deceit, according to human customs, 
according to the spirit of the world, and not according to Christ. God's words, 
especially in Colossians 2:8, provide a firm warning so that everyone who has 
believed in Christ is not easily misled by philosophies that are not in line with the 
teachings of Christ. For this reason, the apostle Paul reminded everyone to be 
wary of all philosophies and belief habits that prioritize human efforts to separate 
themselves from God's revelations written in the Bible. 
 
4. Characteristics of PAK Philosophy 
Philosophy has real characteristics or signs. There are several 
characteristics of philosophy including: First, comprehensive. Comprehensive 
means a philosophy that has broad thinking and does not limit any point of view 
from anywhere. Second, Basic. Fundamental means that philosophy of mind 
does not only discuss understanding/exploring the basics but is more than that. 
Third, Speculative. Speculative means that philosophy is a result which can 
become material/object for further discussion (Anon n.d.-c). 
Experts' views on the characteristics of philosophy are very diverse. 
According to Nur A. Fadhil Lubis, philosophy has three main characteristics, 
namely: First, Universal (comprehensive), namely broad thinking and not just 
certain aspects. Second, Radical (fundamental), namely deep thinking that 
reaches fundamental and essential results. Third, Systematic, namely following 
patterns and methods of thinking that are coherent and logical even though they 
are speculative (Anon n.d.-b). 
Another perspective adds the characteristics of philosophy to be studied 
and known, namely as follows: First, Descriptive, namely a detailed description 
of something, explaining why something does what it does. Second, Critical, 
namely questioning everything (including the results of philosophy), and not 
simply accepting what is seen at first glance, what society says and does. Third, 
Analysis, namely reviewing and studying something in detail and thoroughly, 
including the basic concepts with which we think about the world and human 
life. Fourth, Evaluative, which is also said to be normative, meaning a serious 
effort to assess and respond to all the problems faced by humans. This 
assessment can be in the form of ensuring truth, appropriateness and goodness. 

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2426 
 
Fifth, Speculative, namely the efforts of the human mind which are in the nature 
of speculation, exploration and supposition and are not limited only to sensory 
recordings and external observations. 
 
5. Biblical Basic  
Studying philosophy is one way what should be focused on. Because 
philosophy studies the essence, not the outer shell, which often gives rise to 
hostility and hatred between religious adherents and within religions because of 
doctrinal differences (Surpi & Ardana, 2022). Philosophy means wisdom, 
wisdom and knowledge. Wisdom is a magnet that attracts the attention of many 
people throughout the history of time and space to obtain it. In the Bible, 
Solomon was a figure who really longed for wisdom, wisdom in the hope of 
living his life as a king wisely, so Solomon prayed to God to ask for wisdom from 
Him (1 Kings 3:9; 2 Chron. 1:10). Solomon's action in seeking wisdom from God 
was to direct humans to submit to God's leadership so that God would give them 
true knowledge (Proverbs 1:7). 
According to Aristotle, philosophy was born and grew from two main 
things, namely: (1) wonder has a subject; (2) magic has an Object. According to 
Augustine and Rene Descartes, what underlies people's thinking is doubt 
because the world is full of various opinions, beliefs and interpretations, giving 
rise to research results regarding: Cogito ergo sum, which means if I think then I 
exist. This pattern of thinking is contrary to Christian philosophy which comes 
with the concept of "Deus Est Ergo Sum" or "God exists, so I exist." Socrates 
stated that "all I know is that I know nothing." This view becomes the basis for 
philosophy due to the awareness that he is very small and weak compared to the 
universe around him (cf. Ps. 8:5-6). 
Polanyi and Karl Popper, a philosophical thinker, stated that philosophical 
thinking driven by positivism does not provide certainty that there is a difference 
between reality and fantasy. The Gospel of John says, “Christ Jesus who came 
down from heaven is above all; but people who live in the world, so their lives 
belong to the world and always communicate in human language (cf. John 3:31). 
Humans develop philosophy to introduce themselves, so they fail to 
understand themselves, therefore the Word becomes human and conveys the real 
truth to humans so they know the real truth. Christian philosophy answers that 
in this case humans do exist. We are all human and there are reasons that can be 
detected by the five senses. Humans are made up of billions of cells, which 
doesn't make sense to happen by itself. The Bible explains why humans exist. The 
answer is: First, God created humans to glorify His Name. As Isaiah 43:7 
emphasizes that all sons and daughters who are still far away at the ends of the 
earth who have been created, formed and made by God must glorify His Name, 
which is holy. Under the leadership of the Holy Spirit, the apostle Paul wrote that 
in Christ or in Him everyone has a part that has been promised and predestined 
so that they receive their part according to God's purpose and in all things are 
done according to His will, so that everyone puts their hope in Christ to praise 
His glory (Eph. 1:11-12) and because it is God's will that all things can be created 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2427 
 
(Revelation 4:11) as good. When anyone eats or drinks, or does anything else, 
what is good must be done for the glory of God (1 Cor. 10:31). 
Second, God created humans to have fellowship with Him. As David 
asked Him and desired to live in God's house all his life, so that he could bear 
witness to His mercy and live in prosperity in His House (cf. Ps. 27:4). The 
Apostle Paul wrote that God had called God's people in Corinth to fellowship 
with Jesus Christ as Lord and faithful God (1 Cor. 1:9) to preserve their lives, 
because of His love which has made them a fellowship and the Holy Spirit 
accompanies people's lives. believed in Corinth at that time (cf. 2 Cor. 13:13). 
Third, God created humans to carry out His commands. Everyone who obeys the 
commandments of Christ Jesus and carries them out, then that person loves Him. 
Then everyone who loves Christ Jesus is greatly loved by the Father who sent 
Jesus and Christ Jesus certainly loves him (cf. John 14:21). Then the apostle Paul 
seriously asked God's people in Thessalonica to live according to God's will, 
thereby calling the Thessalonian people to glorify His Name (cf. 1 Thess. 2:12). 
Everyone who carries out the good works of Christ Jesus until the end of his life, 
God will give him power to rule over all tribes (cf. Rev. 2:26). 
The Bible answers human dilemmas. Humans in their humanity according 
to "behaviorism" and "determinism" humans are not personal. Humans are noble 
but cruel (like to torture). Many say that humans are under God's law and that 
means zero, so that's not the case with God's Word. Psalm 8:6 “Yet you have 
made him almost like God, and have crowned him with glory and honor.” The 
Bible answers two dilemmas about humans which are big questions for 
philosophy, namely: First, humans are limited and individual. ~ God created 
humans with free will. Second, humans are noble but evil. ~ God created very, 
very good but sin has corrupted it into evil. Through the restoration of Jesus 
Christ, everything becomes a new creation and will live one day in the Most Holy 
Kingdom of Heaven. He has restored it on the cross that reconciled all things to 
the good and perfect God. So, according to Lasiyo, humans from birth have 
human nature which is a gift from God who is in the Kingdom of Heaven. 
Human nature is like a pearl of great price. Therefore, humans should always 
strive to recognize their nature and continually strive to please God in Heaven 
(Lasiyo, 2018). 
 
6. Issues in Christian Religious Education  
a. Philoshopy in Christian Religious Education 
 The Holy Bible is a source of knowledge for believers. The Holy 
Scriptures guide a person to love wisdom and love the Person who gives 
wisdom, namely God. Christian philosophy not only guides believers to "love 
wisdom" but also to love the giver of true wisdom. Pazmino writes that 
Christians are always reminded in the Scriptures that God gives wisdom to 
everyone who asks for it because from the mouth of God comes knowledge and 
wisdom (Prov. 2:6), and obeying God is the initial form of knowledge and 
wisdom (Prov. 1 :7; 9:10). An amazing statement that in Christ Jesus are kept all 
the secrets of wisdom and knowledge (Col. 2:3) to be given to everyone who asks 
(Pazmino 2012:111).  

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2428 
 
According to Dyulius Thomas Bilo, philosophy cannot be separated from 
four important aspects, namely: (1) The wonder aspect, studying philosophy 
because of wonder, questions about something that exists or happened; (2) 
Wisdom aspect, studying philosophy because it seeks the essence of something, 
seeks truth, and loves wisdom; (3) Truth aspect, studying philosophy because it 
leads to science that considers essential truths; (4) The aspect of a dynamic 
process, studying philosophy begins with a process, from a series of conflicting 
opinions, and continues until a satisfactory answer is obtained (Bilo 2020:3). 
Based on the thoughts above, this is the basis for the worldview discussing 
philosophy, including the philosophy of Christian religious education. Bilo, a 
Christian philosopher, has a Christian perspective with the following 
characteristics: (1) has a holistic goal that seeks to see all areas of life and thought 
in an integrative manner; (2) using an approach that provides a perspective, by 
assessing everything based on the perspective that someone has previously held 
with the aim of obtaining an integrative framework of thinking; (3) presents an 
exploratory process, by investigating the relationship of one area of life with 
other areas from a complete perspective; (4) it is pluralistic so that the same basic 
perspective can be articulated in various different ways; (5) shows the results in 
the form of actions, which are produced to think about, things that are 
considered valuable and things that will be done (Bilo 2020:3–4).  
Norman DeJong who provides levels of Christian philosophy, namely the 
basis of authority, human nature, goals and objectives, structural organization, 
implementation, and evaluation. First and foremost the basis of authority is 
Scripture. God's Word is the main frame of reference of Christian religious 
education. A view that corresponds to Christ's view of the Bible. Jesus said: "For 
truly I say to you, as long as the heavens and the earth disappear, not one iota or 
one tittle will pass away from the law until everything comes to pass" (Matt. 
5:18). In John 10:35 the Savior said “The Scriptures cannot be broken.” And in 
John 17:17, "Sanctify them in the truth, Your word is truth.". Second, is human 
nature. What and who are humans, as written by the Holy Bible. Third, goals and 
objectives, are based on theology which provides direction, goals and targets to 
be achieved. Fourth to sixth are organizational, structural, implementation and 
evaluation  (Bilo 2020:4). 
Christian religious education must develop philosophy and theology as an 
effort to express Biblical truth on various life issues. True truth comes from God 
which is revealed in His revelation, namely general revelation and special 
revelation. Through general revelation, God's truth can be seen through the 
universe, conscience, and life history of humans, tribes and nations. Through 
special revelation God's truth is revealed in Christ, the Bible, and the Holy Spirit. 
Of course the truth is expressed in various ways (Heb. 1:1-2). God's truth is also 
expressed in words, ideas, and various events. Even though it is realized that 
humans, in all their limitations due to sin, are certainly limited in obtaining and 
understanding that truth. These limitations make humans suffer and get sick 
(Bilo 2020:4). 
 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2429 
 
From the explanation above, Christian religious educators should be able 
to formulate a philosophy of Christian education that can direct students and 
readers to understand it. Brown is very firm in saying that Christian philosophy 
is very concerned about the reality and truth of God. For Christians, God is the 
source of truth and reality, discussing Christian philosophy must always relate 
humans to God the creator/redeemer (Ruru and Bilo 2023:177).  
An attempt to systematically organize several thoughts about education 
when given meaning based on biblical teachings that express the orthodox 
Christian faith. It is a challenge for Christian educators to formulate a biblical 
Christian education formula and maintain an attitude that is committed to the 
authority of the Bible (Pazmino 2012:117). 
 
b. Philosophical Foundations of Christian Religious Education 
The foundations of philosophy are linked to the foundations of the Bible 
and theology, and will provide universal, transcultural and cultural foundations 
in order to guide the mindset and practice of Christian education. Drawing 
connections between the foundations of the Bible, the foundations of theology, 
and the philosophical foundations of Charlotte Mason's thought, it is argued that 
just as a stream of water cannot rise higher than its source, so no educational 
effort can transcend the entire scheme of thought from which it originated (Bilo 
2020:5). For Mason, education is the fruit of his philosophical roots which are 
based on the Bible and theology. According to Pazmino, the obstacle for all 
Christian teachers is to carry out a dynamic educational philosophy that is 
explicit and consistent with Christian views but still provides room for paradoxes 
to occur (Pazmino 2012:110).  
Koe Yao Tung wrote that there is a relationship between theology and 
philosophy, therefore Christian education is education whose centrality is God, 
so that the implications are for the interpretation of God's love. So, Christian 
education uses a theistic philosophy which is based on the truth of God's word 
(theology) and is very clearly different from secular educational philosophy (Bilo 
2020:5). According to Gordon Brown, the aim of Christian education is directly 
related to the aim of Christian life, namely for God and His glory. So education is 
understood as a means used by the Holy Spirit to bring theology students into 
communion with God in order to prepare themselves for eternal salvation. 
Christian education aims to improve thinking in the view of the Christian faith 
and train everyone to live obediently and worship God as the goal of human life 
(Bilo 2020:5). So, there is a correlation between the teaching of philosophy and 
Christian religious education, thus encouraging humans to worship God through 
the principles of wisdom that He has given to humans to obey in implementing 
them. There are five starting points for understanding Christian educational 
philosophy, namely: The reality of God's creation, the mandate of creation, the 
mandate of culture, the covenant, and the mandate of the Great Commission. 
Why use a philosophical approach instead of just pure theology?(Tung 2013:265–
68). This is not easy to understand and answer. Samuel Sijabat sees the nature 
and model of educational philosophy as very helpful in providing an 
understanding of the policies and implementation of education and learning, 

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2430 
 
namely starting from the nature of life philosophy, educational philosophy, 
educational policies and practices, and teaching and learning activities. Of these 
three basic characteristics, philosophy is a search for truth that starts from asking 
questions about the ultimate meaning and purpose of life. 
The teaching of philosophy is often discussed by scientists and has a very 
significant relationship with science, so that philosophy is synonymous with 
science. Young explained that philosophy seeks to integrate various information 
discovered by science, especially the physical sciences, applying an analytical 
approach, while philosophy takes a synotype (integrative-synthesis) approach in 
thinking activities. Science focuses its attention on research and discovery of 
factual (empirical) data, while philosophy is interested in efforts to find and 
express the meaning and working principles pursued and from the available 
data. Young very clearly positions that scientists are discoverers while 
philosophers are interpreters, but he admits that this is also not pure because 
scientists need a philosophical approach in understanding science, so the 
philosophy of science was born.  
It must be acknowledged that theology and philosophy are different, but 
cannot be separated. Van Peursen sees the relationship between philosophy and 
theology from two points of view, namely the West and the East. In the East 
(Asia) philosophy developed in a religious context, while in the West, religion 
(theological concepts) developed in the context of philosophy (contemplation). 
That's why in the Western context, if we study theology, theological philosophy 
(philosophy of religion) is a field of study that receives important attention. For 
Van Peursen the theological approach is related to philosophy, the East is more to 
a religious context, and the West is more to a philosophical context. 
For Nico Syukur, he recognizes that theology is methodical, systematic 
and coherent supernatural knowledge about what God has revealed. It could be 
said that theology is a "scientific" reflection on faith. The basis is God's revelation, 
which reveals itself supernaturally. 
Doing theology and philosophizing in the context of the Christian 
vocation and Christian education is a vocation to enrich the mind and insight 
into a comprehensive way of thinking. Arthur Holmes' philosophical thinking 
styles such as systematic, synthetic, descriptive and normative thinking in 
fulfilling the Christian calling to life are very useful in making us more effective. 
Philosophy can further enrich our own theological thinking and efforts to do 
theology (worldviewish theology). Then philosophy can encourage us in 
apologetics by putting forward perspectives and providing clear answers 
(clarity) about various emerging and challenging issues, illuminated by the Holy 
Spirit and the word of God (1 Pet. 3:15). 
The philosophy of Christian education cannot be separated from the 
philosophy of ecclesiastical education. Educational services should be the domain 
and core of church ministry. This philosophy will give birth to new energy in 
ecclesiastical services beyond the conventional services carried out so far. Rex E. 
Johnson defines philosophy based on Webster's dictionary, namely "an analysis 
of the foundations and concepts that express fundamental beliefs". If it is related 
to service, then the question as a guide is what is the basis of your beliefs about 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2431 
 
service? When we serve, we are playing out a service philosophy. According to 
him, there are eight advantages of churches that have laid the foundation of their 
philosophy correctly, namely: (1) being able to determine the environment of 
their ministry; (2) can continuously re-evaluate the group's experience in terms of 
understanding His message; (3) can evaluate its services based on carefully 
considered criteria, not based on the popularity of a program; (4) are more likely 
to keep their services balanced and focused on what is important; (5) can 
mobilize a large proportion of its congregation to become pastors; (6) can 
determine the relative benefits of a prospective service; (7) can be a clear and 
attractive alternative community for people seeking escape from a systemic 
failure; (8) can choose to collaborate or not collaborate with other churches and 
church ministries (Bilo 2020:7). 
It is strongly emphasized that Christian philosophy is not the same as 
world (secular) philosophy. The difference lies in the source used, namely 
absolute truth. To differentiate between them, the definition of worldview is 
used, namely a philosophy that has become a person's view and belief. There are 
two types of worldview, namely the secular worldview and the Christian 
worldview. The secular worldview includes: Temporary, developing, contrary to 
history, revisable, natural and rational. Meanwhile, the Christian worldview is: 
eternal, unchanging, in line with history, biblical, permanent, and theistic (Tung 
2013:5–6). 
 
c. Integration of Faith and Science in PAK Practice 
Talking about knowledge cannot be separated from the aspect ratio 
behind it. Some people want to prove the truth through their ratios. Ratio is a 
part of humans as creatures created by God. It is from rationality that we become 
mature in the context of science. In the 17th and 18th centuries, several 
philosophers postulated that reason is everything and then seemed to no longer 
recognize Christian faith and teachings and even rejected the existence of God. 
Darwin with his revolutionary theory of evolution seemed to emphasize that 
humans and their ratios are everything. Some of these philosophers would have 
sunk to a terrible death if they had not repented. They forget that all truth cannot 
be tested for truth only by science and reason, but must also be accepted by faith 
as the Bible confirms in Romans 10:17, "faith comes from hearing, and hearing by 
the word of Jesus Christ, meaning there are two the parties involved, namely 
humans with their faith and reason and God with His love, justice and 
sovereignty. If we talk about Christian religious education, we also cannot escape 
the role of faith and reason. PAK is a projection of faith that is socialized through 
various aspects of life, while science is a way to analyze, criticize and evaluate. 
Christian thinkers have struggled throughout the history of their time to find the 
true nature of Christian education. It is true that there is tension, especially in the 
dynamics of PAK, such as the statement from Thomas Groome that there is 
tension, especially around differences in perspectives of principles, praxis and 
teaching methods, such as the tension in the thoughts of Comenius (1592) who 
proposed an inductive teaching method under the guidance of nature, educators 
others such as Pattalozzi and Froebel who propose education that is learner-

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2432 
 
oriented and centered. Whitehead, proposed that education should be religiously 
based. 
This happens because of worldview differences. Every Christian must 
have and understand the correct human perspective or worldview which will 
help him to judge everything correctly and in accordance with the faith he 
believes in. Humans are essentially rational creatures who can understand 
science theoretically and practically. .In the Christian faith with science, human 
reason can absorb, discover and create empirical truths that can test and prove 
everything that can be useful for humanity. However, all scientific knowledge 
must be evaluated based on Scripture. In Hebrews 11:3, it is through faith in Him 
that it is understood that He created the universe and that what is seen arises 
from what cannot be seen. 
Stephen Tong, believes that there must be a balance, humans must not lose 
their reason but humans also must not allow reason. Christians must use reason 
as well as possible so that they do not have to fall into rationalism. In Hebrews 
11:1, faith is the basis of all things, so the thing that Christians need to understand 
is faith which provides space for reason to explore all knowledge and the 
universe to discover the greatness of God. However, it is true what Christian 
thinkers such as Thomas Groome say that there are no cheap gifts in educational 
practice, that education is not easy, so it requires conscious effort in the form of 
hard and responsible work. 
First, Thomas Groome with the praxis of Aristotelian thought, which said 
that humans can be free to think intelligently using theoria, praxis and poiesis. 
These three styles are speculative, practical and productive lifestyles. Theoria's 
perspective is the search for truth through a contemplative or reflective or non-
involved process. How to know praxis with reflective involvement in social 
situations. While poiesis is a way of knowing that is manifested in and appears in 
the way of "making". All three differ in goals and what is expected is the results. 
For Aristotle, the context of praxis means reflective action and has useful goals 
with which knowledge emerges through "involvement" in social situations. In 
praxis, phronesis appears which is defined as "the state of being correct, 
reasonable, and able to act regarding things that are good or bad for humans. 
Phronesis is the state of mind from which praxis arises and is then further 
developed by praxis, resulting in practical wisdom. Meanwhile, poiesis is a way 
of relating to reality in which concrete objects are produced. These results contain 
certain knowledge and their production involves knowledge processes. Praxis 
refers to the creation of activities that require expertise. Praxis is practical 
knowledge whose goal is continuous action, while poiesis includes productive 
action and ends in what is produced. 
If what creates practicality is phronesis, then the way to know poiesis is so 
that using poiesis sharpens skills or abilities in making things. There is a 
reflective intellectual dimension to poiesis. For Aristotle, education carried out 
deliberately must be based on a practical way of knowing, so that knowledge is 
practice, not just theory. So, for Aristotle, the purpose of education is to create 
good moral character for citizens who are ready to bring prosperity to the 
country. Thomas Groome combines the dialectic between theory and practice. 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2433 
 
Second, Thomas Groome with Hegel and Geist praxis. One of the themes 
of Hegel's philosophy is geist. Which is a combination of the Greek concept of 
supreme reason and the Judeo-Christian tradition of transcendence-immanence. 
The Greeks understood the world to be essentially rational and the entire 
understanding of its rationality was a contribution from the highest reason which 
was its source. For the Greeks, reason was not an active principle in the process 
of becoming, but was already present in the world and could be brought to 
human consciousness by theoria. Geist is an active rational principle that 
actualizes itself in history, because for Hegel, geist is not abstract and 
transcendent wisdom, but active and unlimited reason that directs the world 
with its destiny. Hegel argued that God plans all events in the universe in 
accordance with existing principles, so that His destiny is wisdom given with 
unlimited power that realizes its own goals, namely the final, rational and 
absolute goals of the world. Here, the higher reason of Greek philosophy and the 
effective, active God of Judaism and Christian thought are combined. Geist is 
reason that actualizes itself in the world. In this sense, geist is not only the 
ultimate state and reality, but also the efficient and ultimate cause of the world. 
For Hegelm, geist moves forward to higher levels of actualization. The real 
essence is Spirit and action. The Spirit makes for itself what essentially exists. The 
Spirit is its own product, its own work. Geist moves towards self-actualization 
with its own inner dynamics. The role of humans is only through their awareness 
and will to become intermediaries or reflections of self-actualization activities. 
For Hegel geist is a part of human history. Hegel supports his theory and praxis 
into historical praxis which is a search for sources of knowledge.  
Third, Thomas Groome on how to know praxis from Karl Mark. Mark 
rejects Hegel's geist which is only a natural wonder of thought. For Mark, 
knowledge has now become a human and historical process, so that knowledge 
is not a reflection of geist but a reflection of historical materialism, namely the 
conditions of material life and especially the way of producing objects that are 
realized in society. In his epistemology, Mark views work as an intermediary 
between subject and object, so that work is not only a way to engage in the world, 
and work is also an appropriate way of working when using knowledge. So, 
knowing the world through real reflection to change the world. 
Fourth, Thomas Groome and Paulo Freire with their educational praxis. 
Freire started education from praxis. He taught people to read for at least six 
weeks. An emancipation according to Groome. There are three assumptions, first, 
humanization is the main calling of humans, second, people must be able to 
change their reality, create their culture. Third, education is never neutral, 
education always has political consequences. For Freire, education must be 
liberating to achieve this. He proposed a model of problem solving, as critical 
reflection and opening up myths that deceive and ignore. 
In the earliest efforts of zealotry brought the idea that a renewed lifestyle 
of the Holy Spirit and the Word was the path to salvation and a moral life in the 
world. Augustine from the Alexandarian school, emphasized that the city of God 
and connesions are a spiritual reflection of personal relationships with God. Its 
theological aim is the search for spiritual and practical wisdom. Thomas Aguinas 

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2434 
 
really emphasized the importance of the role of intelligence in the process of 
knowledge, with his method extended from theoria. Where there is no path to 
intelligence if it does not start from reflective sensory experience and he calls it 
summa. 
Indeed, Martin Luther rejected the intellectuals of the scholastics who tried 
to find God from human rationality. For Luther, he emphasized faith as a form of 
belief in God rather than doctrinal postulates. For Groome, the factor of 
experience with God in the world cannot be ignored in various aspects of life, 
including education. Allah is the ruler of all life, including the world of 
education, so anyone who wants to obey and worship Him in all areas of life will 
definitely experience Allah's care and help. 
 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Theology students are part of humans who need to study philosophy at 
theological colleges. The philosophy that students need to study is PAK 
philosophy. PAK philosophy is based on biblical theology, because the word of 
God written in the Holy Bible is the benchmark for Christian philosophy. 
Christian religious theology and education is a good formulation for 
developing the principles and praxis of Christian religious education 
philosophy. Written sources, namely the Bible and the word that became flesh 
in the person of Jesus Christ, must influence every style of thinking and 
behavior in educational practice. 
In the dynamics and development of Christian education, theology 
students cannot ignore or even separate science and faith. Christian religious 
education can combine or integrate faith and science, where reason is important 
for the development of science and faith as the basis for doing this. Theology 
students must submit to the authority of God's word and faith that encourages 
acceptance and belief in things that are within, above and/or beyond their 
reason. In this way, STT students are able to find correlations between the 
theological and philosophical foundations of the formulation and development 
of the principles and practices of Christian religious education. 
 
FURTHER STUDY 
 
This research has limitations because it only focuses on assessing the 
needs of theological high school students to develop teaching materials for the 
Philosophy of Christian Religious Education in theological high schools. 
Therefore, it is hoped that future research efforts will try to examine more 
deeply the needs of students at theological colleges, both state and 
private/Christian theological colleges, regarding the development of teaching 
materials for the Philosophy of Christian Religious Education. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
First of all, the author expresses gratitude to the presence of the Triune 
God, namely God the Father, Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit who has always 
blessed the author until the end of this article. Second, the author would like to 
thank the heads of the Theological Colleges who always encourage him to be 
active in writing. Third, the author would like to thank himself for having the 

East Asian Journal of Multidisciplinary Research (EAJMR)  
Vol. 3,  No. 7, 2024 : 2419 - 2436                                                          
 
                                                                                          
 
 
2435 
 
courage to try and continue to make efforts to produce scientific work in the 
form of articles until this article is finished. Fourth, the author would like to 
thank his fellow lecturers for their support in completing this article. Fifth, as 
well as for readers, we hope this article can add insight into the fields of science 
and art. 
 
REFERENCES 
Amid, Markus. 2021. “Urgensi Keterlibatan Pendeta Dalam Politik Praktis.” 
Voice Of Hami: Jurnal Teologi Dan Pendidikan Agama Kristen 3(2). 
Anon. n.d.-a. “Https://Core.Ac.Uk/Download/Pdf/130811768.Pdf.” 
Anon. n.d.-b. “Https://Serupa.Id/Filsafat-Umum/.” 
Anon. 
n.d.-c. 
“Https://Www.Kompasiana.Com/Kharismahidayah8303/ 
5d89dcdd097f36704 D5af31 3/Pengertian-Filsafat-Objek-Ciri-Ciri-Peranan-
Dan-Tujuan-Filsafat.” 
Baktiar, Amsal. 2012. Philosophy of Science Cet XI. Jakarta: Rajawali Pers. 
Bilo, Dyulius Thomas. 2020. “CORRELATION OF THE THEOLOGICAL AND 
PHILOSOPHICAL BASIS IN DEVELOPMENT OF PRINCIPLES AND 
PRACTICE OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION CHRISTIAN.” Phronesis: 
Jurnal Teologi Dan Misi 3(1). 
Brown, Colin. 2005a. Christian Philosophy and Faith 1. Surabaya: Momentum. 
Brown, Colin. 2005b. Christian Philosophy and Faith 2. Surabaya: Momentum. 
Ediyono, F. D. and S. (2022). The Relation between Ethics and Psychology Based on 
Philosophical 
Perspective. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366642320_Hubungan_Etika_
dan_Ilmu_Psikologi_Berdasarkan_Perspektif_Filsafat_The_Relation_betwe
en_Ethics_and_Psychology_Based_on_Philosophical_Perspective#fullText
FileContent 
Et.al, Lianto. 2023. “A Theological Study of Paabingkon Pahompu in the 
Tradition of the Simulangun Society.” Pharos Journal of Theology 104(4). 
Fadli, M. R. (2021). RELATIONSHIP OF PHILOSOPHY AND SCIENCE 
KNOWLEDGE AND ITS RELEVANCE IN THE ERA INDUSTRIAL 
REVOLUTION 4.0 (SOCIETY 5.0). Jurnal Filsafat, 31(1), 130–161. 
Husaini, Adian. 2013. Philosophy of Science from Western and Islamic 
Perspectives. Jakarta: Gema Insani. 
Lasiyo. (2018). THE INFLUENCE OF BUDDHISM ON NEO-CONFUCIANISM 
IN CHINA. Jurnal Filsafat, 28(1), 92–110. 
Marthen Mau, Junio Richson Sirait, Markus Amid, Yohanes Kotte, dan 
Hasahatan Hutahaean. 2023. “The Role of Christian Educators in Guiding 
the Spiritual Growth of GKSI People in Sanggau West Kalimantan.” 
Pharos 
Journal 
of 
Theology 
104(5). 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.46222/pharosjot.104.57. 
Mau, Marthen. 2016a. National Education. Jakarta: PT Views. 
Mau, Marthen. 2016b. The Integrity of Christian Religious Education Teachers 
in Guiding Students’ Personalities. Jakarta: PT Views. 

Mau, Kainara, Marampa 
2436 
 
Mau, Marthen. 2023. “Christian Education and Political Education for 
Christians in Indonesia.” Jurnal Pendidikan Agama Kristen (JUPAK) 
3(2):17–34. 
Munir, Rizal Mustansyir dan Misnal. n.d. “Science Phylosophy.” 
Muzairi. 2009. General Philosophy. Yogyakarta. 
Pazmino, Robert W. 2012. Foundations of Christian Education. Jakarta: BPK 
Gunung Mulia. 
Rapar, Jan Hendrick. 1996. Introduction to Philosophy. Yogyakarta: Kanisius. 
Runa, Marthen Mau, and Gianto. 2022. “EFFORTS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGIOUS 
EDUCATION TEACHERS IN IMPROVING THE SPIRITUALITY OF 
STUDENTS AT SDN 29 MANGGAM KUALA BEHE LANDAK 
DISTRICT.” Journal Coram Mundo: Teologi and PAK 4(2). 
Ruru, Aprianto, and Dyulius Thomas Bilo. 2023. “Philosophy of Christian 
Religious Education as a Foundation Student Faith Formation Process.” 
TELEIOS: Jurnal Teologi Dan Pendidikan Agama Kristen 3(2). 
Saenom, Marthen Mau. 2023. “Trusting the Bible as the True Word of God.” 
Coram Mundo: Journal of Theology and Christian Religious Education 
5(1). 
Sidabutar, H. (2020). Philosophy of Christian Religious Education and its 
Practice for Today’s Christian Religion. Journal of Christian Education, 1(2), 
85–101. 
Sumarna, Cecep. 2004. Philosophy of Science From Essence to Value. Bandung: 
Pustaka Bani Quraisy. 
Suriasumantri, Jujun S. 1985. Science in Perspective. Jakarta: Gramedia. 
Surpi, N. K., & Ardana, I. K. (2022). Hindu Philosophy Learning Methods 
(Study of Classical Indian Philosophical Texts and Their Projections on 
Learning Hindu Philosophy Today). Jayapangus Press Journal of Hindu 
Religion 
Research, 
6(4). 
https://jayapanguspress.penerbit.org/index.php/JPAH 
Susanto, Ahmad. 2011. Early Childhood Development. Jakarta: Kencana 
Prenada Media Group. 
Tung, Khoe Yao. 2013. Philosophy of Christian Education: Laying the 
Foundation and Philosophy of Christian Education amidst World 
Philosophical Challenges. Yogyakarta: Andi.