Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00204-023-03519-y
REVIEW ARTICLE
A review on immunomodulatory effects of BPA analogues
Anja Kodila1 · Nina Franko1 · Marija Sollner Dolenc1 
Received: 6 February 2023 / Accepted: 11 May 2023 / Published online: 19 May 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a known endocrine disruptor found in many consumer products that humans come into contact with on 
a daily basis. Due to increasing concerns about the safety of BPA and the introduction of new legislation restricting its use, 
industry has responded by adopting new, less studied BPA analogues that have similar polymer-forming properties. Some 
BPA analogues have already been shown to exhibit effects similar to BPA, for example, contributing to endocrine disruption 
through agonistic or antagonistic behaviour at various nuclear receptors such as estrogen (ER), androgen (AR), glucocor-
ticoid (GR), aryl hydrocarbon (AhR), and pregnane X receptor (PXR). Since the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) 
issued a draft re-evaluation of BPA and drastically reduced the temporary tolerable daily intake (t-TDI) of BPA from 4 mg/
kg body weight/day to 0.2 ng/kg body weight/day due to increasing concern about the toxic properties of BPA, including its 
potential to disrupt immune system processes, we conducted a comprehensive review of the immunomodulatory activity of 
environmentally abundant BPA analogues. The results of the review suggest that BPA analogues may affect both the innate 
and acquired immune systems and can contribute to various immune-mediated conditions such as hypersensitivity reactions, 
allergies, and disruption of the human microbiome.
Keywords  BPA analogues · Immunomodulation · Immunotoxicology · Endocrine disruptors · Bisphenols
Introduction
Bisphenol A (BPA) is one of the most abundant chemicals 
in the plasticizer industry due to its favourable polymer-
forming properties. It is most commonly used as a precur-
sor to epoxy resins or as a building block for polycarbonate 
plastics and is found in numerous consumer products such as 
electronics, dental fissure sealants, children’s toys, personal 
care products, thermal paper, and in various food contain-
ers (Lin et al. 2017). In addition to BPA exposure through 
water, air, and dust, humans are believed to come into con-
tact with the aforementioned contaminant primarily through 
food (Sciences 2015). BPA can be released from coatings 
and materials into food and beverages through hydrolysis or 
diffusion of BPA residues that remain on the polycarbonate. 
Food temperature, pH, processing method, and duration of 
exposure are also important factors affecting the amount of 
BPA released into the environment (Hoekstra and Simoneau 
2013).
Nevertheless, studies have shown that dermal exposure 
to BPA is more severe than oral exposure because BPA 
bypasses hepatic first-pass metabolism in this way and there-
fore prevents the formation of the nontoxic BPA conjugate, 
as is the case with oral intake (Liu and Martin 2017). Dermal 
exposure also results in a prolonged presence of BPA in 
biofluids and higher concentrations of unconjugated BPA 
in serum (Liu and Martin 2017).
The Classification, Labelling, and Packaging (CLP) 
Regulation ((EC) No. 1272/2008) classifies BPA as poten-
tially toxic to reproduction, possibly irritating to the skin 
Method of search: Literature searches were conducted through 
various online search databases such as Scopus, PubMed, and 
Google Scholar using the keywords “BPA analogues,” “BPA 
immune system,” “BPA immunotox,” “bisphenol immune system,” 
“bisphenol immunotox,” “bisphenol monocytes,” “bisphenol 
dendritic cells,” “bisphenol Th1,” “bisphenol Treg,” and “bisphenol 
B cells.” Additional articles were found through citations in 
other research or review articles. The material collected was 
carefully screened and all articles that did not specifically address 
BPA analogues were excluded from the review. For comparison 
purposes or to make a point, we also exceptionally cited articles 
that examined only the effects of BPA. The results collected in the 
review cover the period from 2003 to 2022.
 *	 Marija Sollner Dolenc 
	
marija.sollner@ffa.uni-lj.si
1	
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Aškerčeva 
cesta 7, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia

1832
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
and respiratory tract, and potentially harmful to the eyes 
(European Chemicals Agency 2022). In addition, BPA is a 
known endocrine disruptor whose effects have been linked 
to the development of several diseases, including impaired 
fertility, breast cancer, diabetes, obesity, cognitive impair-
ment, and cardiovascular disease (Catenza et al. 2021; 
Krause et al. 2022). Due to increasing concerns about the 
safety of BPA, the European Commission has banned the 
use of BPA in the manufacture of polycarbonate bottles for 
infant feeding, and a limit for BPA content in thermal paper 
was introduced in 2016 at the suggestion of France (Euro-
pean Chemicals Agency 2022). In addition, EFSA drasti-
cally reduced the tolerable daily intake (TDI) for BPA from 
4 µg/kg body weight (bw)/day to 0.2 ng/kg bw/day, as BPA 
has been shown to have adverse effects on the immune sys-
tem, in particular an increase in the number of T-helper cells 
(Enzymes et al. 2016; Implementation of the evidence-based 
risk assessment for the re-evaluation of Bisphenol A: pre-
paratory work on cross-sectional studies 2021; EFSA 2023). 
Industry has responded to the new laws and bans by using a 
variety of less-studied BPA analogues whose toxicological 
properties are not yet fully understood (Ye et al. 2015; Chen 
et al. 2016).
As with BPA, humans are most exposed to BPA ana-
logues through dietary sources (Geens et al. 2012). In the 
United States (U.S.), bisphenol F (BPF) was found to be 
the second most prevalent bisphenol next to BPA in vari-
ous foodstuffs, with a mean concentration of 0.93 ng/g wet 
weight (ww). In comparison, the mean concentration of 
BPA in the U.S. is reported to be 3 ng/g ww, indicating 
its dominance among bisphenols (Liao and Kannan 2013). 
The level of bisphenol exposure is also highly dependent on 
geographic location or proximity to an industrial site (Chen 
et al. 2016). For example, the mean estimated daily intake 
(EDI) of the sum of all bisphenols for adults in the U.S. is 
reported to be 54.6 ng/kg bw/day, while in China the levels 
reach 646 and 664 ng/kg bw/day for adult men and women, 
respectively (Liao and Kannan 2014a). Several European 
studies also report the presence of BPA and its analogues 
BPF, bisphenol S (BPS), and bisphenol B (BPB) in canned 
foods, which contain the highest levels of individual and 
total bisphenols (Liao and Kannan 2013; Grumetto et al. 
2008; Alabi et al. 2014; Viñas et al. 2010). Interestingly, 
white mustard seeds appear to be an important dietary 
source of BPF, with concentrations as high as 8 mg/kg. The 
literature suggests that consumption of 20 g of mustard can 
introduce 100–200 µg of BPF into the body (Zoller et al. 
2015). Bisphenols have also been detected in environmental 
compartments such as seawater, sediments, sewage sludge, 
and wastewater, with BPA remaining the most abundant, 
followed by BPF and BPS (Chen et al. 2016). As for human 
biomonitoring, studies have mainly examined urine sam-
ples, in which bisphenols are usually present in the form of 
conjugates. Urinary biomonitoring data provide an estimate 
of daily intake rates that range from 0.001 to 0.863 µg/kg/
day for BPA analogues in U.S. and Asia, about an order of 
magnitude lower than those for BPA. At this point, it should 
be noted that the number of studies addressing biomonitor-
ing of BPA analogues is much smaller than the number of 
similar studies with BPA, which seems to undermine the 
actual human exposure to the aforementioned compounds 
(Chen et al. 2016).
Some studies have raised concerns about the actual safety 
of BPA analogues due to similar structural elements such 
as the phenyl moiety and hydrophobic nature, which could 
contribute to endocrine activity (Usman and Ahmad 2019). 
The most common and abundant BPA analogues in the envi-
ronment are listed in Table 1, where similarities and differ-
ences are clearly illustrated in comparison to the structure of 
BPA. Furthermore, literature states estrogen like activities 
of BPA analogues such as bisphenol AF (BPAF), bisphenol 
E (BPE), BPS, bisphenol AP (BPAP), bisphenol P (BPP), 
bisphenol C (BPC), bisphenol Z (BPZ), tetramethyl bisphe-
nol A (TMBPA), and 4,4-bisphenol F (4,4-BPF), as they 
demonstrate estrogen receptor (ER) at concentrations of 
0.001 µM to 1 µM, with BPAF exerting the strongest effect 
in both an agonistic and antagonistic manner (Program and 
Protocol for Systematic Review of Bisphenol 2015; Program 
and Biological activity of Bisphenol A (BPA) structural ana-
logues and functional alternatives 2017). Rosenmai et al. 
(2014) showed that BPA and its analogues, more specifi-
cally bisphenol B (BPB), BPE, bisphenol F (BPF), BPS, and 
4-cumylphenol (HPP), also exerted antiandrogenic effects, 
with EC50 values ranging from 1.9 µM (BPE) to 5.1 µM 
(HPP). The authors additionally suggest that the effect of 
bisphenol analogues on PXR (Sui et al. 2012; Sui 2014) 
and AhR (Ziv-Gal et al. 2013) receptors may contribute to 
general endocrine disruption, as activation of these recep-
tors affects the expression of certain enzymes involved in 
the metabolism of endogenous hormones (Rosenmai et al. 
2014). In conjunction with endocrine disruption, studies also 
indicate the neurotoxic, genotoxic, and cytotoxic potential of 
BPA analogues, as well as toxic effects on the reproductive 
system (Chen et al. 2016; McDonough et al. 2021a).
As noted above, the available literature also points to the 
effects of BPA exposure during development on impaired 
immune function, potentially increasing the risk of devel-
oping immune-related diseases such as type 1 and 2 dia-
betes mellitus, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE), breast cancer, and allergies (McDonough 
et al. 2021a; Xu et al. 2016; Alhomaidan et al. 2019). BPA 
may be able to exert its immunomodulatory effects by act-
ing on various nuclear and nonnuclear receptors (Rogers 
et al. 2013), similar to the immunosuppressive effects of 
endogenous and exogenous estrogens, which can modulate 
the release of proinflammatory cytokines and regulate Th1/

1833
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846	
1 3
Th2 responses (Salem 2004). BPA can further affect the 
immune system through epigenetic changes by disrupting 
cell signalling pathways and affecting the gut microbiota 
(Xu et al. 2016). As the frequency of occurrence of bisphe-
nol analogues in the environment and in human biological 
samples is increasing (Chen et al. 2016), this review aims to 
summarise data from in silico, in vitro, and in vivo studies 
on the immunomodulatory effects of bisphenol analogues.
Effects of bisphenols on immune system 
components
Innate immune system
Given that the acquired component of the immune system 
is found primarily in vertebrates, the vast majority of other 
organisms rely mainly on innate immunity to maintain 
homeostasis (Turvey and Broide 2010). Considering that 
large amounts of endocrine disruptors are leached into 
environmental waters, these substances may have a sig-
nificant impact on the innate immune system of aquatic 
organisms (Xu et al. 2013). So far, several studies have 
already addressed this issue, indicating immunomodula-
tory effects of bisphenols on the immune system of fish 
(Qiu et al. 2018a, b; Qiu et al. 2016; Qiu et al. 2018c; 
Ji et al. 2013; Wu et al. 2011). In addition to the main 
function of defense against various foreign pathogens, 
innate immunity also plays a role in the development of 
various immune-mediated diseases, such as asthma, sys-
temic lupus erythematosus (SLE), type 1 diabetes, and 
inflammatory bowel disease (Turvey and Broide 2010). 
Data on this topic are organized according to the char-
acteristics of the cells of the innate immune system, into 
tissue-bound cells (such as macrophages and dendritic 
Table 1   BPA and its most common analogues included in this review article that exhibit immunomodulatory activity
The bisphenol family is characterised by two hydroxyphenyl functionalities that can be linked by various bridges. BPA contains two methyl 
groups replaced by sulphur and oxygen atoms in the case of BPS and by two trifluoromethyl groups in the case of BPAF. The phenol rings in 
BPF are linked by a methylene linking group. The table also lists the most common applications of the above compounds
Compound
Chemical structure
Application
BPA (2,2-Bis(4-hydroxyphenyl)propane)
Polycarbonate plastic, epoxy resins, children 
toys, medical equipment, dental sealants, 
electronics, food storage containers, personal 
hygiene products, eyeglass lenses (Lin et al. 
2017; Nowak et al. 2019)
BPS (4,4'-Sulfonyldiphenol)
Thermal paper and other products involved in 
paper production (brochures, envelopes, food 
boxes and paperboards, tickets, etc.), cleaning 
products, phenolic resins and as an electroplat-
ing solvent (Rochester et al. 2012; Rochester 
and Bolden 2015)
BPAF (4,4'-(Hexafluoroisopropylidene)
diphenol)
Fluoropolymers, fluoroelastomers, optical and 
electronic products (Liao and Kannan 2014b)
BPF (4,4'-Methylenediphenol)
Epoxy resins and coatings found in pipe linings, 
electrical varnishes, adhesives and industrial 
floors (Rochester and Bolden 2015; Liao and 
Kannan 2014b)

1834
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
cells) and “motile” cells (such as monocytes, neutrophils, 
and eosinophils) (Moser and Leo 2010).
Macrophages
Macrophages are an essential component of the innate, 
nonspecific immune system, their main function being the 
phagocytosis of foreign substances. Their presence in the 
vast majority of tissues illustrates their diversity and, in 
particular, highlights their important role in the first line of 
defense against pathogens (Locati et al. 2019).
The BPA analog BPF was found to promote M1 polariza-
tion of macrophages and cause a shift to a pro-inflammatory 
state with statistically significant increases in secretion of 
the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL -1β, and IL -6 at 
concentrations of 10 and 20 µM in the murine macrophage 
cell line RAW 264.7, as shown in Fig. 1 (Shi et al. 2020). 
The results are consistent with previous studies investigating 
another BPA analog BPS that also leads to a shift toward 
M1 polarization in mouse macrophages, measured as an 
increase in iNOS mRNA levels (Zhao et al. 2017). Similarly, 
BPS was also found to increase levels of cytokines such as 
TNF-α, IL -1β, IL -6, and TGF-β in the mouse macrophage 
cell line J774A.1 (Fig. 1) (Zhao et al. 2017). Zhao et al. 
(2017) also found that BPS -induced M1 polarization and 
resulting pro-inflammation are associated with alterations 
in the macrophage metabolome and lipidome, particularly 
alterations in the glycolytic pathway, as well as glutathione 
signalling pathways and aberrations in lipid signalling path-
ways (Zhao et al. 2017). Similar to BPS, the proinflamma-
tory properties of BPF have been shown to be associated 
with alterations in macrophage glycolysis, suggesting a link 
between the proinflammatory state and increased glycolysis 
levels. In investigating the underlying mechanisms, Zhang 
et al. (2021) concluded that BPF may affect macrophage gly-
colysis and consequently influence cytokine secretion via the 
PI3K-AKT pathway. It was also shown that the ER antago-
nist ICI 182,780 suppressed the secretion of proinflamma-
tory cytokines in macrophages upon concomitant BPF expo-
sure by inhibiting PI3K-AKT, indicating the involvement 
of ER (Zhang et al. 2021). Shi and colleagues (2020) also 
showed that estrogen-like BPF behaviour led to activation of 
the JAK2/STAT3 pathway, demonstrating the role of ER in 
M1 polarization of macrophages (Shi et al. 2020). The role 
Fig. 1   Effects of BPA and its most common analogues on various 
components of the immune system. The figure shows that BPA ana-
logues affect both the innate and acquired parts of the immune sys-
tem. The upward pointing arrows represent an increase in a particular 
parameter, and the downward pointing arrows represent a decrease 
(Zhao et al. 2017; Zhang et al. 2021; Švajger et al. 2016; Guo et al. 
2010; Camarca 2016; Peillex et  al. 2021; Buoso 2021; Malaisé 
et  al. 2020a; Li et  al. 2018a; Michałowicz et  al. 2015; Mokra and 
Michałowicz 2015; Mokra et al. 2018; Buoso et al. 2020; Chen et al. 
2018). Created with BioRender.com

1835
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846	
1 3
of imbalanced macrophage polarization in disease devel-
opment has been previously established; for example, an 
abnormal M1/M2 ratio is implicated in poor cancer progno-
sis, various autoimmune diseases, and obesity (Funes et al. 
2018). Therefore, previous data suggest that BPF, through its 
estrogenic effect, may influence the shift toward proinflam-
matory macrophage polarization and potentially lead to the 
development or exacerbation of pathological conditions. The 
involvement of ER in the proinflammatory effects of BPF on 
macrophages was also demonstrated by Shi and colleagues 
(2020), who showed that BPF promotes the expression of 
SOC3 via the JAK2/STAT3 pathway, which is under the 
control of the ER receptor (Shi et al. 2020).
Dendritic cells
Dendritic cells (DCs) are best known for their antigen-
presenting role, introducing foreign antigens into cells of 
the adaptive immune system and trigger primary immune 
responses. In addition, DCs are also an important factor in 
the development of immune tolerance to self-antigens, thus 
preventing autoimmune responses (Banchereau et al. 2000; 
Svajger and Rozman 2014). Several studies have already 
highlighted the potential effects of xenobiotics on aberra-
tions in the complex life cycle of DCs, which may lead to 
impaired immune function.
While studying the effects of BPA and its analogues BPF 
and BPAF on DCs transformation from monocytes, Švajger 
et al. (2016) showed that bisphenols can affect the expres-
sion of differential cell markers during DCs maturation, 
where 30 µM BPAF significantly decreased the expression 
of CD1a, whereas the dendritic cell-specific intercellular 
adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN) 
was significantly upregulated by both BPA (50 µM) and 
BPAF (30 µM), whereas the CD14 marker remained more 
or less unaffected (Fig. 1). The evaluation of differential cell 
markers represents a suitable tool to determine the success 
of transformation into mature DCs (mDCs), which highly 
express CD1a and DC-SIGN, while the macrophage marker 
CD14 is present only to a very low extent. Based on the 
above results, the authors conclude that BPAF does not 
inhibit the maturation of DCs, but initiates the development 
of a specific population of mature DCs with low CD1a and 
high DC-SIGN incidence (Švajger et al. 2016). Interestingly, 
two other studies using the classical in vitro method of DC 
maturation obtained opposite results for the incidence of 
membrane markers after BPA exposure, namely increased 
CD1a expression (Guo et al. 2010; Camarca et al. 2016). 
This could be due to differences in the in vitro differentia-
tion protocol—Švajger et al. (2016) exposed monocytes to 
bisphenols prior to exposure to differentiating stimulants, 
taking into account the direct effect of BPA on the process 
of monocyte differentiation (Švajger et al. 2016). It is also 
important to note the variability between the bisphenol 
concentrations used in the studies—Švajger et al. (2016) 
observed the above-mentioned bisphenol effects at 30 and 
50 µM, while Camarca et al. (2016) and Guo et al. (2010) 
worked in much lower concentration ranges (0.1–1 nM and 
0.01–0.1 µM, respectively) (Švajger et al. 2016; Guo et al. 
2010; Camarca et al. 2016).
Švajger et al. (2016) also showed a significant effect of 
BPAF on DC maturation markers, with a twofold reduc-
tion in the expression of CD80 and CD86 markers, whereas 
the other xenoestrogens tested (BPA, BPF, and E2) showed 
no significant effect on the above markers (Fig. 1). The 
reduction of CD80 and CD86 markers might be related to 
decreased phosphorylation and thus activation of NF-ĸB and 
ERK1/2 signaling pathways in DCs activated with LPS after 
BPAF exposure (Švajger et al. 2016). It is already known 
that decreased NF-ĸB activity leads to decreased DC matu-
ration, and furthermore, simultaneous downregulation of 
both NF-ĸB and ERK1/2 signaling pathways may further 
enhance the inhibition of DC maturation (Švajger et al. 
2016; Peng et al. 2012). It is worth noting that increased 
numbers of CD86 molecules on the surface of antigen-
presenting cells are associated with stimulation of allergen-
responsive Th2 cells, which may be mediated by the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), which can be part of both an 
inflammatory and an immunosuppressive state. AhR ago-
nists have previously been shown to induce CD86 and CD83 
expression in DCs (Aguilera-Montilla et al. 2013). Moreo-
ver, Švajger and colleagues (2016) also observed significant 
changes in morphology in DCs pretreated with BPAF after 
activation with LPS (Fig. 1). For example, they noted an 
almost complete absence of distinctive cluster formation and 
dendrites structuring of mature DCs. In addition, BPAF was 
found to significantly impair the allostimulatory function of 
both mature and immature monocyte-derived DCs (Švajger 
et al. 2016). The recent findings raise concerns about the 
inherent safety of the BPA substitute BPAF, which may have 
potentiating immunosuppressive effects by impairing DC 
maturation and thus proper function DC.
Neutrophils
Neutrophils are an important player in the proper functioning 
of the immune system and perform several specialized func-
tions. They are known for their role in the innate immune 
system and play a crucial role in acute inflammation (Kolac-
zkowska and Kubes 2013). Impaired function of any of the 
various neutrophil functions (such as chemotaxis, aggrega-
tion, adhesion, etc.) can significantly reduce host protection 
against pathogens and weaken the immune response (Bogo-
molski-Yahalom and Matzner 1995). Since neutrophils con-
stitute the largest fraction of circulating human leukocytes, 

1836
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
it is useful to study the effects of environmental pollutants 
such as bisphenols on their function.
Peillex and colleagues (2021) investigated how BPA, 
BPS, and their conjugated metabolites affect neutrophil 
metabolism and antimicrobial properties. The results showed 
a non-monotonic response to BPS and its conjugate BPS 
-glucuronate that decreased basal metabolism at concentra-
tions of 1–10 pM and 1–100 µM and conversely increased 
glycolysis at a concentration of 20 µM (Fig. 1). However, 
a response was observed only with short-term exposure of 
BPS and BPS -glucuronate to purified human neutrophils. 
Interestingly, BPA and its glucurinated metabolite showed 
no significant effect (Peillex et al. 2021). Glycolysis is one 
of the main energy sources of neutrophils, so its impaired 
function may affect the proper function of neutrophils and 
thus possibly immune function (Jeon et al. 2020). The link 
between altered neutrophil metabolism and proper function 
was further demonstrated by exposing bisphenol-treated 
neutrophils to N-formylmethionine-leucyl-phenylalanine 
(fMLP), which resulted in an increase in glycolysis after 
long-term bisphenol exposure, followed by an overall 
decrease in neutrophil metabolism (Peillex et al. 2021). 
The study also observed a significant decrease in cytokines 
secreted by neutrophils, particularly CXCL8/ IL -8, after 
bisphenol exposure, with the results again following a non-
monotonic trend (Fig. 1). It is important to note that BPA 
and the glucurated metabolites of BPS more markedly 
decreased the concentrations of secreted cytokines (Peillex 
et al. 2021).
Monocytes
Monocytes account for approximately 10 % of circulating 
peripheral leukocytes in the human body and are known to 
mobilize rapidly to sites of inflammation, where they can 
differentiate into tissue macrophages or DCs or exert effec-
tor or regulatory activity independently as distinct monocyte 
subpopulations. As they exert proinflammatory properties 
and have been shown to play a key role in some autoimmune 
diseases, they are an important target of immunotoxicology 
research (Guilliams et al. 2018).
Buoso and colleagues (2021) studied THP-1, a human 
promyelocyte cell line commonly used for in vitro studies 
of monocyte/macrophage function. The results obtained 
in this manner may indicate potential immunomodulatory 
effects in vivo (Chanput et al. 2014; Buoso 2021). The study 
shed light on the possible mechanism behind the immuno-
toxic effects of bisphenols by measuring the effect of BPA, 
BPAF, and BPS on the expression of RACK1, which is 
known to play a key role in the activation of immune cells 
and whose expression depends on a complex hormonal bal-
ance. The results showed that BPA and BPAF at a concen-
tration of 10 µM downregulated the transcriptional activity 
of RACK1, while BPS at the same concentration (10 µM) 
induced RACK1 expression (Fig. 1). The results suggest 
that bisphenols at higher concentrations could contribute to 
aberrant immune function, with BPS predisposing cells to a 
more immunostimulatory state that may lead to the develop-
ment of various autoimmune or allergic diseases, while BPA 
and BPAF could act in an immunosuppressive (Buoso et al. 
2021). Nevertheless, studies focusing on the immunotoxic 
effects of bisphenol analogues on monocytes are lacking, 
which represents an opportunity for future studies.
Adaptive immune system
The second major branch of the functional immune system 
is adaptive immunity, also known as acquired or specific 
immunity. In contrast to innate immune responses, adap-
tive immunity takes longer to respond to foreign challenges 
and has a significant targeting function and memory com-
ponent responsible for durable protection (Moser and Leo 
2010; Toskala 2014). The main protagonists of the adaptive 
immune response are white blood cells, lymphocytes, which 
are divided into T lymphocytes (which can exert cytotoxic, 
effector, and regulatory activity) and B lymphocytes (which 
are responsible for antibody production) depending on their 
function. Endocrine disruptors are known to have effects on 
the above two subsets of adaptive immunity (Nowak et al. 
2019), and in the following sections we have compiled infor-
mation on the effects of bisphenol analogues on these critical 
components of the immune system.
T lymphocytes
T lymphocytes are an important component of the adaptive 
part of the immune system, and consequently, dysfunction 
at any level of differentiation into subsets [e.g., CTL, Th1, 
Th2, Th9, fTh, Th17, and regulatory T cells (Treg) (Moser 
and Leo 2010; Chraa et al. 2019)] by endocrine disruptors 
such as bisphenols have significant consequences for normal 
immune function (Malaisé et al. 2020a; Malaisé et al. 2021; 
Dong et al. 2020; Gao et al. 2020; Sabuz Vidal et al. 2021).
Previous research with BPA has already demonstrated the 
immunotoxic potential of the endocrine disruptor, as BPA 
has been shown to impair the ratio between Th1 and Th2 
subsets of T cells (Fig. 1) and also affect appropriate Treg 
differentiation and function (Gao et al. 2020). Impaired Th1/
Th2 ratio may lead to alterations in cytokine release and 
thus affecting appropriate defense against pathogens or even 
contribute to the development of allergic conditions (Moser 
and Leo 2010). Gao et al. (2020) also showed that BPA can 
exert its inflammatory effects via induction of the PI3K/
Akt/mTOR signaling pathway (Gao et al. 2020). In addition 
to BPA, Malaise et al. (2020) tested the effect of BPF and 
BPS -analogs on spleen T lymphocytes of mice, and in vitro 

1837
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846	
1 3
assays resulted in a significant increase in IL -17 levels after 
exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations of 
0.05 nM of BPA and BPF (Fig. 1). BPS, on the other hand, 
had no effect on the release of IL -17 from mouse splenic 
T-cells. Similar results were also obtained after treatment of 
siLP-derived T cells with 0.05 nM of BPA, BPF, and BPS, 
which significantly increased the levels of IL -17 as well as 
IL -22 at this low concentration (Fig. 1). Nevertheless, no 
significant changes in Th17 frequencies were observed after 
treatment of mouse spleen or intestinal T cells with BPA and 
BPF (Malaisé et al. 2020a). However, in further studies in 
mouse models, an increase in Th1 and Th17 abundance was 
observed in female mouse offspring after perinatal dermal 
exposure to BPA and BPF (both at a concentration of 50 
μg/kg bw/day) prior to intestinal immune cell restimulation 
with anti-CD3 (Fig. 1). However, the results were not con-
sistent among female and male mice offspring, suggesting a 
greater sensitivity of female mice offspring to BPA and BPF 
exposure during the perinatal period (Malaisé et al. 2021). 
In contrast to the in vitro mouse T-cell assays mentioned 
above, only the highest bisphenol concentration tested had 
an effect on human T cells, where exposure to 50,000 nM 
BPA, BPF, and BPS significantly decreased secretion of IL 
-17 and IL -22 (Fig. 1). The bisphenols tested also caused a 
slight decrease in the percentage of IL -17 and IL -22 posi-
tive human T lymphocytes (Malaisé et al. 2020a). Secretion 
of IL -17 and IL -22 by Th17 lymphocytes appears to play a 
role in localized immune defense in the gut and lung and is 
also associated with autoimmune responses (Moser and Leo 
2010). Disruption of various T lymphocyte subsets such as 
Th1, Th2, and Th17 by BPA and the analogs BPF and BPS 
can therefore potentially lead to impaired immune defenses 
against foreign organisms and contribute to the development 
of autoimmune diseases such as asthma.
B lymphocytes
Lymphocytes B are a part of the adaptive immune system 
and serve as the center of the humoral response, with the 
main functions of antibody production, secretion of inflam-
matory cytokines, antigen presentation, and intercommuni-
cation with lymphocytes T (Affara et al. 2014).
In a study by Jang et al (2020), the toxic effects of BPA 
and its substitutes on human WiL2- NS lymphoblast B 
cells, which have been shown to express the ESR1 receptor, 
were tested in vitro. The tested compounds decreased cell 
viability at a concentration of 100 µM, i.e., BPA decreased 
cell viability by approximately 70%, BPS by 20%, and BPF 
by 30% (Fig. 1). Further measurements by flow cytometry 
revealed that 26% of cells were in the apoptotic sub-G0/G1 
region in the BPA- treated group, which was significantly 
higher than the 10% and 12% in the BPS and BPF groups, 
respectively, suggesting that BPA is more toxic to human B 
cells than its analogues (Jang et al. 2020). For comparison, 
a major in vivo study CLARITY-BPA examined the effects 
of BPA on components of the immune system in Sprague-
Dawley rats and found that a daily dose of 25 μg BPA/kg bw 
resulted in a reduction in splenic lymphocyte B in female 
rats after six months of exposure (Li et al. 2018a). More-
over, they observed an increase in IgM-high cells among 
splenic lymphocytes B in female rats at postnatal day 90 
(PND90) after daily BPA treatment with 25000 μg BPA/kg 
bw (Fig. 1). However, the authors emphasise that the results 
are sporadic in nature and occurred only in one group of 
the tested dosage (Li et al. 2018a; Li et al. 2018b). Further 
research is needed to adequately extrapolate these effects 
with potential implications for immune system function.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are a rep-
resentative model for studying immune processes in the 
peripheral blood circulation, where contact between foreign 
chemicals, including endocrine disruptors, and cells of the 
immune system occurs most frequently. This is precisely 
the reason for the frequent use of PBMCs as a model in 
toxicological studies, where the response reflects the behav-
ior of a combination of immune cells such as lymphocytes, 
monocytes, and macrophages (Pourahmad and Salimi 2015).
Research using PBMCs as cell models is based on the 
isolation of leukocytes, the so-called buffy coat, from human 
whole blood after treatment with separating agent (e.g., 
Ficoll) and centrifugation (Pourahmad and Salimi 2015; 
Michałowicz et al. 2015). Investigating the effects of differ-
ent bisphenol analogues on PBMC integrity, Michałowicz 
et al. (2015) found that almost all bisphenols tested (BPA, 
BPF, and BPAF) had a negative impact on cell viability, with 
statistically significant differences observed at high concen-
trations (150 and 300 µM in the case of BPAF and 220 and 
440 µM in the case of BPA) (Fig. 1). BPF showed cytotoxic 
potential only after a longer incubation period (4 hours), 
even at a high concentration of 500 µM. BPS had the least 
pronounced effect and showed only a slight decrease in cell 
viability at higher concentrations (2 mM). In the case of pro-
longed exposure (4 hours) of PBMCs to BPAF, statistically 
significant effects on viability were observed at concentra-
tions as low as 3 µM. The authors pointed out the possible 
relationship between reduced cell viability and ATP defi-
ciency after bisphenol exposure, which coincided with the 
greatest reduction in cellular ATP supply by BPAF. BPAF 
reduced ATP content in PBMCs at 1.5 µM (1h incubation) 
and 0.3 µM (4h incubation) (Fig. 1). A statistically signifi-
cant decrease in ATP level was also observed in BPA and 
BPF (Fig. 1) at concentrations of 22–440 µM for BPA and 
25–500 µM for BPF after 1h incubation and 2.2 µM (BPA) 
and 2.5 µM (BPF) after 4h incubation. Again, BPS had the 

1838
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
least effect and decreased ATP levels at 80–400 µM (1h 
incubation) and 20–400 µg/ml (4h incubation) (Michałowicz 
et al. 2015). Similarly, Mokra and Michałowicz (2015) 
investigated the effects of the above bisphenols (BPA, 
BPF, BPS, and BPAF) on the occurrence of necrotic and 
apoptotic PBMCs and found that BPAF caused the greatest 
increase in necrotic cells by 75.2% at 100 µg/mL compared 
with the control, whereas a statistically significant increase 
was observed at 0.5 µg/mL. BPS showed the least effect 
in increasing the number of necrotic cells, whereas, on the 
contrary, it had the greatest effect on the increase of apop-
totic PBMCs at a concentration of 20 µg/mL. The authors 
showed that the tested bisphenols affect the induction of 
programmed cell death via increased cytosolic ­Ca2+ levels 
and a decrease in transmembrane mitochondrial potential 
(Fig. 1). They are also involved in the activation of caspases 
(especially caspase 8, 9, and 3), which are important players 
in programmed cell death, and also affect PARP-1 cleav-
age (Mokra and Michałowicz 2015). It should be noted that 
bisphenols have been shown to alter the viability of PBMCs 
at very high concentrations to which ordinary people are 
not usually exposed in their daily lives. Nevertheless, it is 
worth noting that the concentrations of bisphenols that affect 
viability decrease significantly with long-term exposure. 
Therefore, the potential toxicity for PBMCs at daily expo-
sure and the possible saturation of detoxification pathways 
should be considered.
Xenobiotic-induced cell death is usually associated with 
changes in cell morphology, and BPAF at a concentration 
of 3 µM and an incubation time of 4 hours also showed the 
greatest effects, resulting in decreased size of PBMCs and 
increased granulation (Fig. 1). The study also showed an 
increase in the formation of ROS in PBMCs after exposure 
to the bisphenols tested, ranging from 0.3 to 250 µM, with 
BPF exerting the strongest effect (2.5–25 µM) (Fig. 1). The 
results were also consistent with BPF having the greatest 
effect on lipid peroxidation at concentrations of 0.5 µM (1h 
incubation) and 0.1 µM (4h incubation) (Fig. 1), followed by 
BPAF (0.3 µM—1h incubation, 0.6 µM—4h incubation) and 
BPA (0.44 µM—1h incubation, 0.88 µM—4h incubation). 
Moreover, it was shown that BPA and BPAF caused signifi-
cant protein damage after a 4-h incubation period (Fig. 1) 
(Michałowicz et al. 2015).
In comparison with the study conducted by Michałowicz 
et al. (2015), Mokra et al. (2018) determined a similar 
degree of immunotoxicity of bisphenol analogues by observ-
ing DNA damage after exposure to BPA, BPS, BPF, and 
BPAF. Consistent with the findings of Michałowicz et al. 
(2015), BPAF also exhibited the highest genotoxic potential 
(Fig. 1), while BPS again had the lowest effect on DNA 
damage (Michałowicz et al. 2015; Mokra et al. 2018). The 
authors suggested that the greater oxidative damage to DNA 
in the case of BPAF was mainly due to its electronegativity 
and reactivity due to additional trifluoromethyl groups, 
while the lower reactivity of BPS was due to its sulfonyl 
group and associated higher polarity (Michałowicz et al. 
2015; Molina-Molina et al. 2013). BPA and BPAF caused 
concentration-dependent oxidation of both purines and pyri-
midines at concentrations ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 µg/ml, 
whereas BPF and BPS significantly induced oxidation of 
only purine bases at concentrations of 0.01 and 0.1 µg/ml. 
The genotoxic properties of bisphenols are attributed to the 
formation of hydroxyl radicals (HO–) and their reactivity 
with DNA bases (Michałowicz et al. 2015). The authors 
emphasised that the tested bisphenol analogues BPA, BPAF, 
and BPF appeared to have toxic effects on PBMC DNA even 
at very low concentrations of 1 ng/mL, and most of the DNA 
damage was caused by single-strand DNA breaks (Mokra 
et al. 2018).
Overall, bisphenols affect the viability of PBMCs by 
impairing cellular ATP production, increased ­Ca2+ levels, 
and altered mitochondrial membrane permeability. BPA and 
its analogues also lead to changes in PBMC morphology and 
ROS production, leading to oxidation of cellular components 
(e.g., lipids and proteins) and causing genotoxic effects.
Other immunomodulation‑related effects 
of BPA analogues
Effects on immune function‑related gene expression
Previous studies have already shown mainly indirect effects 
of endocrine disruptors on gene expression through vari-
ous epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation, his-
tone (de)acetylation, and RNA interfering (Xu et al. 2016). 
Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are known post-transcriptional gene 
silencers with the ability to bind to multiple complementary 
mRNA molecules, thereby down-regulating further transla-
tional processes (Gomes et al. 2013; Hausser and Zavolan 
2014). Several endocrine disrupting chemicals, including 
BPA, can disrupt epigenetic processes, potentially influenc-
ing the development of pathological conditions (Hou et al. 
2012; Bollati and Baccarelli 2010). It was found that BPS 
at concentrations of 5 µg/L and 50 µg/L can modulate the 
expression of 14 miRNAs in male zebrafish gonads. The 
aforementioned miRNAs have been shown to be involved in 
the development of the immune system and lymphoid organs 
as well as hematopoiesis (Lee et al. 2018). Current research 
also highlights the negative relationship between specific 
miRNA and expression of target genes (Lee et al. 2018; 
Wang et al. 2013). For instance, overexpression of the cyp19 
gene, which encodes the aromatase enzyme responsible for 
converting androgen to estrogen (Sowers et al. 2006), was 
found in zebrafish exposed to BPS (Ji et al. 2013). It has also 
been shown that overexpression of cyp19a1 is associated 

1839
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846	
1 3
with lower levels of dre-miR-30c, -430a, -430b, -192, 454b, 
and -499 miRNAs (Lee et al. 2018).
Another in vivo study by Dong et al. (2018) assessed 
effects of parental exposure to BPA (0.1 µg/L, 1 µg/L, and 
10 µg/L), BPS (10 µg/L), and BPF (10 µg/L) on zebrafish F1 
offspring with/without continued bisphenol exposure, focus-
ing on the expression of Toll-like receptors (TLR) and their 
downstream signalling molecules, which eventually lead to 
the expression of cytokine- and chemokine-related genes. 
After treatment of control larvae with PAM3CSK4 and Poly 
I:C, there was a corresponding increase in the expression of 
TLR2 and TLR3 genes. The opposite was observed in the 
F1 larvae generation, where parental exposure to bisphenols 
resulted in decreased TLR gene expression, indicating a pos-
sible effect of bisphenols on impaired pathogen recognition. 
The study also found that parental exposure to bisphenols 
affected decreased expression of downstream immune sign-
aling molecules such as MyD88 and TRIF-dependent signal-
ing pathways, leading to decreased immunocompetence and 
consequently decreased survival of F1 larvae (Dong et al. 
2018).
Similarly, Qiu et al. (2018a) investigated the effect of 
BPA and its analogues BPS and BPF on the expression 
of immune-related genes in zebrafish embryos, as shown 
in Table 2. The results show a concentration-dependent 
increase in the expression of immune genes, with the high-
est concentrations of BPS and BPF (1000 µg/L) increas-
ing the mRNA levels of all cytokines/chemokines tested 
(Table 2). BPF had the strongest effect on increased expres-
sion; in comparison, BPA at a concentration of 100 µg/L 
was also shown to induce expression of almost all genes 
tested. In addition, suppressed effects of the above immune 
function-related genes were observed in the presence of 
estrogen receptor and NF-ĸB antagonists, shedding light on 
the potential mechanism behind gene expression regulation 
(Qiu et al. 2018b).
The above studies highlight the vulnerability of aquatic 
organisms to environmental pollutants and indicate simi-
larities in the in vivo immunotoxic effects of bisphenol 
analogues such as BPF and BPS with those of BPA, which 
may contribute to discrepancies in zebrafish survival and 
development.
In addition, we have examined in vitro studies focusing on 
altered expression of immune-related genes upon exposure 
to bisphenol analogues. For example, in the study by Fic 
and colleagues (2015), the effect of BPA, BPAF, and BPS 
on the expression of immune-related genes was observed, 
particularly the downregulation of chemokine-related genes, 
with the strongest effect observed when the human osteosar-
coma cell line (HOS) was treated with BPS (10 nM) after 
three months of exposure. The most remarkable reduction 
in chemokine-related gene expression was observed for 
chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), a known chemoattractant in 
Table 2   Effects of BPS and BPF on the expression of immune-relevant genes in the concentration range of 0.1–1000 µg/L, compared to 100 µg/L BPA
Up arrows demonstrate induction of expression, while a dash indicates no significant change compared to control. Summarised after [Qiu et al. (2018a, b)]
mRNA
BPA 
100 µg/L
BPS 0.1 µg/L
BPS 1 µg/L
BPS 10 µg/L
BPS 
100 µg/L
BPS 
1000 µg/L
BPF 0.1 µg/L
BPF 1 µg/L
BPF 10 µg/L
BPF 
100 µg/L
BPF 
1000 µg/L
il-1β
↑
–
–
–
↑
↑
–
–
–
↑
↑
il-6
↑
–
↑
↑
↑
↑
–
↑
↑
↑
↑
il-10
↑
–
–
–
–
↑
–
–
–
–
↑
il-11α
↑
–
–
–
–
↑
–
–
↑
↑
↑
il-12α
↑
–
↑
↑
↑
↑
–
–
–
↑
↑
ifn γ
↑
–
–
↑
–
↑
–
–
↑
↑
↑
tnf α
↑
–
–
–
↑
↑
–
–
–
–
↑
cc-chemokine
–
–
–
–
–
↑
–
–
–
↑
↑

1840
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
numerous immune cells, such as macrophages, monocytes, 
B and T cells, basophils, DCs, and NK cells. It is involved 
in many immune diseases such as allergic asthma, psoria-
sis, and rheumatoid arthritis, and its downregulation was 
observed in all three bisphenols tested, with BPS having the 
greatest impact (Rose et al. 2003; Inadera et al. 2000; Fic 
et al. 2015). It is worth noting that the exposed HOS cells in 
this specific study were categorised as oestrogen-dependent 
cell lines and treated with the above-mentioned bisphenols 
at a concentration of 10 nM, which falls within the range of 
BPA concentrations detected in human biological samples, 
thus highlighting the true immunomodulatory potential of 
BPA and its analogues (Fic et al. 2015; Vandenberg et al. 
2007).
Oxidative stress
Oxidative stress is the result of an imbalance between anti-
oxidant and pro-oxidant processes that occur as a by-product 
of cellular activities, and also plays an important role in 
the normal functioning of the immune system. For example, 
the production of ROS during phagocytosis in fish immune 
defenses plays a critical role in the subsequent formation 
of free radicals and potent bactericides that contribute to 
the elimination of pathogens (Biller and Takahashi 2018). 
In view of the increasing bisphenol concentrations in the 
aquatic environment, some published studies indicate the 
harmful effects of BPA on the immune system of fish 
through oxidative stress (Xu et al. 2013; Qiu et al. 2016; 
Wu et al. 2011). In addition, Qiu et al. (2018a) showed 
that the BPA analogues BPS and BPF at a concentration of 
1000 µg/L caused a significant induction of the formation 
of ROS in zebrafish embryos, as well as a concentration-
dependent increase in other oxidative stress markers such as 
SOD (superoxide dismutase) and LPO (lipid peroxidation), 
and T-AOC activity (total antioxidant capacity). Moreover, 
the increase in NO levels was also observed after exposure 
of zebrafish embryos to 100 and 1000 µg/L BPS and BPF. 
Overall, Qiu et al. (2018a) showed that BPS and BPF affect 
the immune system of zebrafish in a similar manner as BPA, 
raising questions about their actual safety in the aquatic envi-
ronment (Qiu et al. 2018b). Interestingly, another study by 
Dong et al. (2018) that examined the expression of oxida-
tive defense-related genes in zebrafish offspring after paren-
tal exposure to BPA, BPS, and BPF came to contradictory 
results. They found that parental exposure to bisphenols 
significantly downregulated the expression of key oxidative 
protection genes, such as MPX, CAT, Cu/Zn- SOD, and 
Mn- SOD. It is worth noting that Dong et al. (2018) used 
much lower bisphenol concentrations, with the highest con-
centration being 10 µg/L (Dong et al. 2018). In this regard, 
the controversy between the studies can be attributed to a 
possible biphasic effect of bisphenols, as already mentioned 
in the literature in the case of BPA (Ge et al. 2014). These 
results therefore suggest that parental exposure to low levels 
of bisphenols leads to less protection against ROS in the 
F1 generation, whereas high levels of bisphenols result in a 
concentration-dependent increase in the formation of ROS 
and related markers in zebrafish embryos.
The effect of bisphenols on the increase in the forma-
tion of ROS was also found in human PBMCs, with BPAF 
standing out significantly and causing the highest increase 
in the formation of ROS, followed by BPF. A study by 
Michałowicz et al. (2015) showed that BPA and BPS have 
the greatest effects on protein damage and consequently 
on their proper function via oxidative stress, while BPAF 
plays the greatest role in the formation of lipid peroxidation. 
The authors of the study showed that bisphenol analogues 
can cause oxidative stress in PBMCs at concentrations as 
low as 0.06–0.5 µM, which are already concentrations that 
can occur in humans due to occupational or environmental 
exposure (Michałowicz et al. 2015). Furthermore, Jang et al. 
(2020) demonstrated a significant 9.5-fold increase in super-
oxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) gene expression in the human 
B lymphoblast cell line WiL2- NS after a 4-h incubation 
with 100 µM BPA, and subsequent analysis revealed a simi-
lar significant increase in SOD2 gene expression after cell 
treatment with BPS and BPF (Jang et al. 2020). Although 
the SOD2 gene is not one of the primary representatives of 
genes related to the immune system, it is an important player 
in the regulation of the innate immune system, as its dys-
function leads to, among other things, increased replication 
of viral RNA (Wang et al. 2017).
Intestinal immune system
BPA is one of the most well-known contaminants in the food 
industry that affects lymphoid tissue in the intestine through 
food. Lymphoid tissue in the gut is tightly intertwined with 
cells of the innate and adaptive immune systems as well as 
the gut microbiota (Xu et al. 2016a; Malaisé et al. 2020c). 
Studies on BPA suggest altered tolerance to food antigens, 
gut dysbiosis, and immune system imbalance that may lead 
to metabolic disorders and altered glucose metabolism 
(Malaisé et al. 2017; Menard et al. 2014; Lai et al. 2016; 
Ménard et al. 2014).
The human microbiome, while important, is also an 
underappreciated factor in the proper functioning of the 
immune system. Microbial metabolites are thought to play 
a role in regulating the immune system, and imbalances in 
this area can lead to the development of various diseases 
(Levy et al. 2017). Studies show that the aforementioned 
microbial metabolites communicate with mucosa-asso-
ciated invariant T cells (known as MAIT), which may be 
susceptible to the effects of various food contaminants 
such as bisphenols (Corbett et al. 2014). Acute exposure of 

1841
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846	
1 3
Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron and Escherichia coli, a part of 
the human microbiome, to doses relevant to tolerable daily 
intake (2.3 μg/mL, 28.3 μg/mL, and 354.0 μg/mL) of BPA, 
BPF, and BPS, showed effects on microbial growth, with 
the greatest effect on Escherichia coli with BPF exposure, 
whereas the growth of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron was 
most affected with BPA exposure (Krause et al. 2022). Simi-
larly, prenatal exposure to 50 μg/kg body weight (bw) BPS 
was shown to result in significant induction of anti-E. coli 
IgG in mouse offspring (Malaisé et al. 2020c), which was 
consistent with other studies in which pregnant female mice 
were exposed to BPA, BPS, and BPF at concentrations of 
50 μg/kg bw/d via the skin (Malaisé et al. 2021). BPA had 
the greatest effect on microbiome metabolism at doses as 
low as 28.3 μg/ml. In terms of affecting the human microbi-
ome, its growth, metabolism, and viability, the metabolites 
of BPF and BPS had lesser effects, possibly making them 
somewhat safer options. A study by Krause et al. (2022) 
also found reduced MAIT cell activation prior to bisphenol 
exposure, with BPA having the greatest effect, followed by 
BPF and BPS (Krause et al. 2022). According to the above 
research, exposure to bisphenols has the potential to alter 
microbial metabolism and directly affect immune cells.
In an in vivo study conducted by Malaise et al. (2020), 
adverse effects on gut immune responses were observed after 
prenatal oral administration of BPA and its analogs BPS 
and BPF at doses of 5 and 50 μg/kg body weight (bw) to 
pregnant female mice. BPA and BPF at a dosage of 5 μg/kg 
body weight affected the intestinal and systemic immune 
response of mouse offspring by disrupting the Th1/Th17 
balance, while BPS at any dosage increased fecal lipocalin 
levels (Malaisé et al. 2020c). Lipocalin has already been 
established as a sensitive biomarker of intestinal inflamma-
tion, and the effect of BPS on lipocalin levels was replicated 
in the subsequent study, which found an increase in lipocalin 
levels along with a decrease in fecal IgA following perina-
tal dermal exposure to BPS in mice (Malaisé et al. 2021; 
Chassaing et al. 2012). The association between induced 
lipocalin levels in feces and the decrease in IgA concentra-
tion has been previously highlighted and linked to intestinal 
inflammation (Malaisé et al. 2021; Toyonaga et al. 2016). In 
addition, it was found that even low levels of all bisphenols 
tested (BPA, BPS, and BPF) resulted in a decrease in fecal 
IgA levels in female mouse offspring (Malaisé et al. 2021). 
On the contrary, adult male offspring exhibited increase in 
fecal IgA levels, suggesting sex-specific effects. As intestinal 
IgA plays a crucial role in regulating the balance between 
the host immune system and commensal microbiota, these 
results are significant (Malaisé et al. 2021).
Accordingly, Brulport and colleagues (2021) also dem-
onstrated the effects of BPS on intestinal inflammation in 
mice after perinatal exposure. They found that parental and 
current exposure to BPS affected the release of TNF-α and 
lipocalin in male F1 offspring, which continued into the 
F2 generation. Finally, the levels of inflammatory mark-
ers decreased in the F3 generation, except for IFN-γ, which 
was higher in the BPS group. Because additional metabolic 
changes were observed in the unexposed F3 group, the 
authors raised concerns about possible transgenerational 
transmission of BPS induced epigenetic changes. The 
authors also observed sex differences, such as a decrease 
in gut inflammatory response in female F1 offspring and, 
conversely, an increase in inflammation in the F3 generation 
(Brulport et al. 2021).
In addition, Malaisé et al. (2021) found that cytokine 
release profiles differed by sex after perinatal skin expo-
sure to BPA, BPS, and BPF. They demonstrated increased 
levels of IFN-γ in the supernatant of siLP (small intesti-
nal lamina propria) in female mice offspring after perinatal 
exposure to BPS (5 μg/kg bw/day) and BPF (50 μg/kg bw/
day). Conversely, these concentrations caused a decrease in 
IFN-γ release in male mice offspring. The IL -17 release rate 
followed a similar trend after perinatal exposure to 50 μg/kg 
bw/day BPF—showing increased cytokine release in female 
offspring and reduced IL -17 secretion in male offspring 
compared with control (Malaisé et al. 2021).
Considering the studies mentioned in this chapter, bisphe-
nol exposure may alter microbial metabolism and thus affect 
immune cells. They are also capable of immunomodulating 
intestinal immune processes in mouse offspring after perina-
tal exposure, representing a possible transgenerational trans-
mission of epigenetic changes in mice. Studies also show 
sex differences in measured effects, suggesting sex-specific 
responses.
Outcomes related to immune system, such 
as asthma and allergy‑related diseases
Reports of occupational occurrence of allergic contact der-
matitis in industry are accumulating in workers exposed 
to epoxy resin monomers, which constitute the majority 
(75–90%) of polymers of diglycidyl ethers based on bis-
phenol A (DGEBA/BADGE) and in some cases bisphenol 
F (DGEBF). Both of the above compounds have a high sen-
sitizing potential and are therefore classified as highly aller-
genic (O’Boyle et al. 2012).
Accordingly, several human birth cohort studies have 
reported an association between prenatal BPA exposure and 
allergy symptoms such as asthma and wheezing in children 
at different ages (Gascon et al. 2015; Spanier et al. 2012; 
Donohue et al. 2013). Yanagisawa and colleagues (2019) 
have shown that BPA can influence the increase in allergic 
inflammatory symptoms by stimulating Th1/Th2 chemokine 
expression and increasing OVA -specific immunoglobu-
lin production. They also showed that OVA + BPA expo-
sure affects lung hormone receptors by reducing Erb and 

1842
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
Ar mRNA levels, while having no effect on Ahr, GR, and 
ESRRG (estrogen-related receptor gamma) (Yanagisawa 
et al. 2019). Similarly, a paper by Guo et al. (2010) found 
a link between Th2 deviation caused by stimulation of spe-
cialized DCs by BPA in the presence of TNF-α and allergic 
reactions (Guo et al. 2010).
Although many articles mention allergen effects as 
another way to demonstrate the immunotoxicity of BPA, 
there are currently not many studies investigating the sensi-
tization effects of BPA analogues. Therefore, Mendy et al. 
(2020) analysed National Health and Nutrition Examina-
tion Survey (NHANES) data from 2013 to 2016 and con-
cluded that neither BPS nor BPF is a safe BPA substitute. 
The authors found a positive correlation between urinary 
BPF levels and current asthma and hay fever, while BPS was 
associated with a higher likelihood of asthma in men. Never-
theless, further prospective studies are needed to determine 
the allergenic properties of other bisphenols besides BPA 
(Mendy et al. 2020).
Autoimmunity
Previous research has already established a complex rela-
tionship between estrogen and the immune system (Stein-
metz et al. 1998). BPA, a known xenoestrogen, has been 
linked to development of autoimmune diseases through mul-
tiple mechanisms. For example, increased urine BPA levels 
are positively correlated with hyperprolactinemia, which 
is linked to various autoimmune diseases such as multiple 
sclerosis, SLE, antiphospholipid syndrome, rheumatoid 
arthritis, thyroid and celiac disease, and diabetes mellitus 
type I (Aljadeff et al. 2018). Again, based on the structural 
similarity and evidence of comparable effects to BPA in 
other aspects of the immune system mentioned above, it is 
also suspected here that exposure to BPA analogues may 
predispose to autoimmunity, especially during the gesta-
tional period when the immune system is under development 
(Aljadeff et al. 2018).
However, a study by Xu et al. (2019a) found contradictory 
results in the case of BPS, when they examined its effects 
on the development of type I diabetes in nonobese diabetic 
(NOD) mice. In contrast to BPA, they found no significant 
effects on immune processes after BPS exposure in mice 
fed a soy-based diet. In the study, adult female mice were 
administered environmentally relevant BPS concentrations 
of 3, 30, 150, and 300 µg/kg, while male mice were treated 
with 0 or 300 µg/kg BPS. Although minimal effects were 
observed in terms of immunotoxicity, BPS was found to alter 
blood glucose levels in mice on soy-based diet, likely due to 
mechanisms beyond immunomodulation. Different dietary 
groups in male mice (soy-based and non-soy-based) clarified 
the possible interactions of BPS and phytoestrogens, as male 
mice on non-soy-based diets showed protective effects on 
blood glucose levels, while males on soy-based diet initially 
exhibited some degree of adverse effects, such as altered 
glucose homeostasis and heightened insulin resistance (Xu 
et al. 2019a). The results of the above study contrast with 
similar studies that examined BPA and found progression 
of type I diabetes and/or proinflammatory effects in female 
NOD mice (Bodin et al. 2013, 2015; Xu et al. 2019b), sug-
gesting different mechanisms of action in the case of BPS.
Conclusion
Since the introduction of new regulatory dossiers based on 
the use of BPA in industry, an increasing occurrence of bis-
phenol analogues in everyday products and consequently in 
the environment has been observed (Ye et al. 2015; Chen 
et al. 2016). The bisphenol analogues are characterised 
by the presence of highly reactive hydroxyphenol groups 
linked by a bridge to which various chemical groups can 
be attached, giving the analogues a high degree of versatil-
ity. Given the content of similar structural elements, there 
is concern for similar, if not greater, potential toxic prop-
erties of BPA analogues, which have not yet been so well 
investigated (Usman and Ahmad 2019). In addition to the 
already demonstrated similar activity of some bisphenol 
analogues on nuclear receptors, such as ER, AR, GR, AhR, 
and PXR (Program and Protocol for Systematic Review of 
Bisphenol a (Bpa ) 2015; Program and Biological activity 
of Bisphenol A (BPA) structural analogues and functional 
alternatives 2017; Sui et al. 2012; Sui 2014; Ziv-Gal et al. 
2013; Rosenmai et al. 2014; Kolšek et al. 2014), there is also 
a risk of potential immunotoxic effects, among others (Xu 
et al. 2016a; McDonough et al. 2021b). Studies to date have 
shown that BPA analogues can affect many components of 
the immune system, ranging from the building blocks of 
innate to adaptive immunity, and through this influence the 
aberrant functioning of the immune system, which mani-
fests itself in different ways, such as occurrence of various 
hypersensitivity reactions and allergies, immunosuppression 
or even an exaggerated immune response, all depending on 
the concentration and route of exposure. In vivo and in vitro 
studies have also shown the impact of bisphenol analogues 
on the microbiome, which can contribute to inflammation in 
the gastrointestinal tract (Krause et al. 2022; Corbett et al. 
2014; Brulport et al. 2021; Malaisé et al. 2020b). This can be 
particularly problematic as most people are exposed to BPA 
and its analogues via the oral route (Xu et al. 2016a; Malaisé 
et al. 2020c). Our literature review revealed that there is still 
much room to investigate the mechanisms behind bisphenol-
mediated immunomodulation and that studies in the area of 
the adaptive immune system, particularly in B-cell mod-
els, are lacking. We also noticed absence in relevant studies 
on the effects of bisphenols on eosinophil function, which 

1843
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846	
1 3
would also make an important contribution to the under-
standing of various immunological manifestations such as 
allergy. So far, the studies have shown the impact of BPA 
analogues on the expression of immune-related genes and 
epigenetic mechanisms, the production of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS), and interference with certain cell receptors 
and cell signalling pathways in immune cells (Salem 2004; 
Qiu et al. 2018c; Zhang et al. 2021; Švajger et al. 2016; 
Buoso et al. 2021; Jang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2016; Lee et al. 
2018; Dong et al. 2018; Rogers and Mirza 2013). However, 
given the characteristic biphasic action of bisphenols, inter-
preting the data and drawing meaningful conclusions can 
sometimes be challenging. It is as well crucial to empha-
sise that the data in this review include only a few of the 
most common BPA alternatives, but there are also a num-
ber of other, newer BPA analogues that are less studied and 
increasingly found in industry and consequently in the envi-
ronment. Since humans come into contact with several bis-
phenol analogues and alternatives simultaneously, it would 
be worthwhile to study the effects of different mixtures and 
combinations on the components of the immune system to 
obtain a much more realistic picture of the immunotoxic 
activity of bisphenols as well as additional information on 
their interactions, which may be additive or even synergistic. 
We can conclude that it is still difficult to give an assessment 
of the immunomodulatory effects of BPA analogues due to 
data scarcity, because of the narrow range of concentrations 
tested, the limited number of analogues included in the 
studies, the sparse information on the mechanisms behind 
the sex-dependent effects, the lack of understanding of the 
interactions between bisphenols and other endocrine disrup-
tors, and, most importantly, the lack of studies in the area 
of in vivo effects in humans and of epidemiological studies.
Funding  Study was supported by a Young Researcher grant from Slo-
venian Research Agency to AK, by the Slovenian Research Agency 
(program code P1-0208) and the grant from the European Union’s 
Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under Grant 
Agreement No 101057014.
Data availability  All data produced or analyzed during this study are 
enclosed in this article. All visual material, such as included images, 
was created using BioRender.com licensing software.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare they have no actual or poten-
tial competing financial interests.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Affara NI et al (2014) B cells regulate macrophage phenotype and 
response to chemotherapy in squamous carcinomas. Cancer Cell 
25:809–821
Aguilera-Montilla N et al (2013) Aryl hydrocarbon receptor contributes 
to the MEK/ERK-dependent maintenance of the immature state 
of human dendritic cells. Blood 121:108–117
Alabi A, Caballero-Casero N, Rubio S (2014) Quick and simple 
sample treatment for multiresidue analysis of bisphenols, bis-
phenol diglycidyl ethers and their derivatives in canned food 
prior to liquid chromatography and fluorescence detection. J 
Chromatogr A 1336:23–33
Alhomaidan HT, Rasheed N, Almatrafi S, Al-Rashdi FH, Rasheed Z 
(2019) Bisphenol A modified DNA: A possible immunogenic 
stimulus for anti-DNA autoantibodies in systemic lupus ery-
thematosus. Autoimmunity 52:272–280
Aljadeff G, Longhi E, Shoenfeld Y (2018) Bisphenol A: a noto-
rious player in the mosaic of autoimmunity. Autoimmunity 
51:370–377
Banchereau J et al (2000) Immunobiology of dendritic cells. Annu 
Rev Immunol 18:767–811
Biller JD, Takahashi LS (2018) Oxidative stress and fish immune 
system: Phagocytosis and leukocyte respiratory burst activity. 
An Acad Bras Cienc 90:3403–3414
Bodin J, Bølling AK, Samuelsen M, Becher R, Løvik M, Nygaard 
UC (2013) Long-term bisphenol A exposure accelerates insu-
litis development in diabetes-prone NOD mice. Immunophar-
macol Immunotoxicol 35(3):349–358. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3109/​
08923​973.​2013.​772195
Bodin J, Kocbach Bølling A, Wendt A, Eliasson L, Becher R, Kuper 
F, Løvik M, Nygaard UC (2015) Exposure to bisphenol A, but 
not phthalates, increases spontaneous diabetes type 1 develop-
ment in NOD mice. Toxicol Rep 2:99–110. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​toxrep.​2015.​02.​010
Bogomolski-Yahalom V, Matzner Y (1995) Disorders of neutrophil 
function. Blood Rev 9(3):183–190. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​
0268-​960x(95)​90024-1
Bollati V, Baccarelli A (2010) Environmental epigenetics. Heredity 
(edinb) 105:105–112
Brulport A, Lencina C, Chagnon MC, Le Corre L, Guzylack-Piriou 
L (2021) Transgenerational effects on intestinal inflammation 
status in mice perinatally exposed to bisphenol S. Chemosphere 
262:128009. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chemo​sphere.​2020.​128009
Buoso E et al (2020) Effect of estrogen-active compounds on the 
expression of RACK1 and immunological implications. Arch 
Toxicol 94:2081–2095
Buoso E et al (2021) Effects of Bisphenols on RACK1 Expression 
and Their Immunological Implications in THP-1 Cells. Front 
Pharmacol 12:743991
Camarca A et al (2016) Human peripheral blood mononuclear cell 
function and dendritic cell differentiation are affected by bisphe-
nol-A exposure. PloS One 11:e0161122
Catenza CJ, Farooq A, Shubear NS, Donkor KK (2021) A targeted 
review on fate, occurrence, risk and health implications of bis-
phenol analogues. Chemosphere 268:129273

1844
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
Chanput W, Mes JJ, Wichers HJ (2014) THP-1 cell line: An in vitro 
cell model for immune modulation approach. Int Immunophar-
macol 23:37–45
Chassaing B et al (2012) Fecal lipocalin 2, a sensitive and broadly 
dynamic non-invasive biomarker for intestinal inflammation. 
PLoS One 7:3–10
Chen D et al (2016) Bisphenol analogues other than BPA: environmen-
tal occurrence, human exposure, and toxicity - a review. Environ 
Sci Technol 50:5438–5453
Chen Y, Xu HS, Guo TL (2018) Modulation of cytokine/chemokine 
production in human macrophages by bisphenol a: a comparison 
to analogues and interactions with genistein. J Immunotoxicol 
15:96–103
Chraa D, Naim A, Olive D, Badou A (2019) T lymphocyte subsets in 
cancer immunity: friends or foes. J Leukoc Biol 105:243–255
Corbett AJ et al (2014) T-cell activation by transitory neo-antigens 
derived from distinct microbial pathways. Nature 509:361–365
Dong X et al (2018) Parental exposure to bisphenol A and its ana-
logs influences zebrafish offspring immunity. Sci Total Environ 
610–611:291–297
Dong Y-D et al (2020) Abnormal differentiation of regulatory T cells 
and Th17 cells induced by perinatal bisphenol A exposure in 
female offspring mice. Mol Cell Toxicol 16:167–174
Donohue KM et al (2013) Prenatal and postnatal bisphenol A exposure 
and asthma development among inner-city children. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 131:736-742.e6
EFSA Panel on Food Contact Materials, E. and P. A. (CEP) (2023) Re-
evaluation of the risks to public health related to the presence of 
bisphenol A 4 (BPA) in foodstuffs. EFSA J 21:e06857
European Chemicals Agency (2022) The use of bisphenol A and its 
alternatives in thermal paper in the EU during 2014–2022. Echa. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​2823/​592282
Fic A et al (2015) Genome-wide gene expression profiling of low-dose, 
long-term exposure of human osteosarcoma cells to bisphenol A 
and its analogs bisphenols AF and S. Toxicol Vitr 29:1060–1069
Funes SC, Rios M, Escobar-Vera J, Kalergis AM (2018) Implications 
of macrophage polarization in autoimmunity. Immunology 
154:186–195
Gao L et al (2020) The imbalance of Treg/Th17 cells induced by peri-
natal bisphenol A exposure is associated with activation of the 
PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway in male offspring mice. 
Food Chem Toxicol 137:111177
Gascon M et al (2015) Prenatal exposure to bisphenol A and phthalates 
and childhood respiratory tract infections and allergy. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 135:370-378.e7
Ge LC et al (2014) Signaling related with biphasic effects of bisphenol 
A (BPA) on Sertoli cell proliferation: a comparative proteomic 
analysis. Biochim Biophys Acta - Gen Subj 1840:2663–2673
Geens T et al (2012) A review of dietary and non-dietary exposure to 
bisphenol-A. Food Chem Toxicol 50:3725–3740
Gomes AQ, Nolasco S, Soares H (2013) Non-coding RNAs: multi-
tasking molecules in the cell. Int J Mol Sci 14:16010–16039
Grumetto L, Montesano D, Seccia S, Albrizio S, Barbato F (2008) 
Determination of bisphenol A and bisphenol B residues in 
canned peeled tomatoes by reversed-phase liquid chromatogra-
phy. J Agric Food Chem 56:10633–10637
Guilliams M, Mildner A, Yona S (2018) Developmental and functional 
heterogeneity of monocytes. Immunity 49:595–613
Guo H et al (2010) Bisphenol A in combination with TNF-α selec-
tively induces Th2 cell-promoting dendritic cells in vitro with an 
estrogen-like activity. Cell Mol Immunol 7:227–234
Hausser J, Zavolan M (2014) Identification and consequences of 
miRNA-target interactions-beyond repression of gene expres-
sion. Nat Rev Genet 15:599–612
Hoekstra EJ, Simoneau C (2013) Release of bisphenol a from polycar-
bonate-a review. Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr 53:386–402
Hou L, Zhang X, Wang D, Baccarelli A (2012) Environmental chemi-
cal exposures and human epigenetics. Int J Epidemiol 41:79–105
External Scientific Report (2021) Implementation of the evidence‐
based risk assessment for the re‐evaluation of Bisphenol A: 
preparatory work on cross‐sectional studies. Agriculture and 
Environment Research Unit. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2903/​sp.​efsa.​
2021.​EN-​6997
Inadera H, Sekiya T, Yoshimura T, Matsushima K (2000) Molecular 
analysis of the inhibition of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 
gene expression by estrogens and xenoestrogens in MCF-7 cells. 
Endocrinology 141:50–59
Jang JW, Lee JW, Yoon YD, Kang JS, Moon EY (2020) Bisphenol 
A and its substitutes regulate human B cell survival via Nrf2 
expression. Environ Pollut 259:113907
Jeon JH, Hong CW, Kim EY, Lee JM (2020) Current understanding on 
the metabolism of neutrophils. Immune Netw 20:1–13
Ji K, Hong S, Kho Y, Choi K (2013) Effects of bisphenol S exposure 
on endocrine functions and reproduction of zebrafish. Environ 
Sci Technol 47:8793–8800
Kolaczkowska E, Kubes P (2013) Neutrophil recruitment and function 
in health and inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol 13:159–175
Kolšek K, Gobec M, Mlinarič Raščan I, Sollner Dolenc M (2014) 
Molecular docking revealed potential disruptors of glucocorti-
coid receptor-dependent reporter gene expression. Toxicol Lett 
226:132–139
Krause JL et al (2022) MAIT cell activation is reduced by direct 
and microbiota-mediated exposure to bisphenols. Environ Int 
158:106985
Lai KP, Chung YT, Li R, Wan HT, Wong CKC (2016) Bisphenol A 
alters gut microbiome: Comparative metagenomics analysis. 
Environ Pollut 218:923–930
Lee J, Kho Y, Kim PG, Ji K (2018) Exposure to bisphenol S alters 
the expression of microRNA in male zebrafish. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol 338:191–196
Levy M, Blacher E, Elinav E (2017) Microbiome, metabolites and 
host immunity. Curr Opin Microbiol 35:8–15
Li J et al (2018a) CLARITY-BPA: effects of chronic bisphenol A 
exposure on the immune system: part 1 – quantification of the 
relative number and proportion of leukocyte populations in the 
spleen and thymus. Toxicology 396–397:46–53
Li J et al (2018b) CLARITY-BPA: Effects of chronic bisphenol A 
exposure on the immune system: part 2 – characterization of 
lymphoproliferative and immune effector responses by splenic 
leukocytes. Toxicology 396–397:54–67
Liao C, Kannan K (2013) Concentrations and profiles of bisphenol 
a and other bisphenol analogues in foodstuffs from the united 
states and their implications for human exposure. J Agric Food 
Chem 61:4655–4662
Liao C, Kannan K (2014a) Food additives & contaminants: part 
A a survey of bisphenol A and other bisphenol analogues in 
foodstuffs from nine cities in China. Food Addit Contam Part 
A 31:319–329
Liao C, Kannan K (2014b) A survey of alkylphenols, bisphenols, and 
triclosan in personal care products from China and the United 
States. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 67:50–59
Lin X et al (2017) Rapid and sensitive detection of bisphenol a from 
serum matrix. Biosens Bioelectron 91:104–109
Liu J, Martin JW (2017) Prolonged exposure to bisphenol A from sin-
gle dermal contact events. Environ Sci Technol 51:9940–9949
Locati M, Curtale G, Mantovani A (2019) Diversity, mecha-
nisms, and significance of macrophage plasticity. Annu Rev 
Pathol Mech Dis. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​pathm​
echdis-​012418-​012718
Malaisé Y et al (2017) Gut dysbiosis and impairment of immune 
system homeostasis in perinatally-exposed mice to Bisphenol 
A precede obese phenotype development. Sci Rep 7:1–12

1845
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846	
1 3
Malaisé Y, Le Mentec H, Sparfel L, Guzylack-Piriou L (2020a) 
Differential influences of the BPA, BPS and BPF on in vitro 
IL-17 secretion by mouse and human T cells. Toxicol. Vitr. 
69:104993
Malaisé Y et al (2020b) Oral exposure to bisphenols induced food 
intolerance and colitis in vivo by modulating immune response 
in adult mice. Food Chem Toxicol 146:111773
Malaisé Y et al (2020c) Perinatal oral exposure to low doses of bisphe-
nol A, S or F impairs immune functions at intestinal and systemic 
levels in female offspring mice. Environ Heal A Glob Access Sci 
Source 19:1–11
Malaisé Y et al (2021) Bisphenol A, S or F mother’s dermal impreg-
nation impairs offspring immune responses in a dose and sex-
specific manner in mice. Sci Rep 11:1650
McDonough CM, Xu HS, Guo TL (2021a) Toxicity of bisphenol ana-
logues on the reproductive, nervous, and immune systems, and 
their relationships to gut microbiome and metabolism: insights 
from a multi-species comparison. Crit Rev Toxicol 51:283–300
McDonough CM, Xu HS, Guo TL (2021b) Toxicity of bisphenol ana-
logues on thereproductive, nervous, and immune systems, and 
their relationships to gut microbiomeand metabolism: insights 
from a multi-speciescomparison. Crit Rev Toxicol 51:283–300
Ménard S et al (2014) Perinatal exposure to a low dose of bisphenol 
a impaired systemic cellular immune response and predisposes 
young rats to intestinal parasitic infection. PLoS One 9:1–15
Menard S et al (2014) Food intolerance at adulthood after perinatal 
exposure to the endocrine disruptor bisphenol A. FASEB J 
28:4893–4900
Mendy A et al (2020) Association of urinary levels of bisphenols F 
and S used as bisphenol A substitutes with asthma and hay fever 
outcomes. Environ Res 183:108944
Michałowicz J, Mokra K, Bak A (2015) Bisphenol A and its analogs 
induce morphological and biochemical alterations in human 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (in vitro study). Toxicol 
Vitr 29:1464–1472
Mokra K, Kocia M, Michałowicz J (2015) Bisphenol A and its analogs 
exhibit different apoptotic potential in peripheral blood mononu-
clear cells (in vitro study). Food Chem Toxicol 84:79–88. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​fct.​2015.​08.​007
Mokra K, Woźniak K, Bukowska B, Sicińska P, Michałowicz J (2018) 
Low-concentration exposure to BPA, BPF and BPAF induces 
oxidative DNA bases lesions in human peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cells. Chemosphere 201:119–126
Molina-Molina JM et al (2013) In vitro study on the agonistic and 
antagonistic activities of bisphenol-S and other bisphenol-A 
congeners and derivatives via nuclear receptors. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol 272:127–136
Moser M, Leo O (2010) Key concepts in immunology. Vaccine 28:C2
National Toxicology Program (2015) Protocol for Systematic Review 
of Bisphenol a (Bpa) Analogues. August 2015. Office of Health 
Assessment and Translation, Division of the National Toxicology 
Program, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
National Toxicology Program (2017) Biological activity of Bisphenol 
A (BPA) structural analogues and functional alternatives. 18: 
561–569
Nowak K, Jabłońska E, Ratajczak-Wrona W (2019) Immunomodula-
tory effects of synthetic endocrine disrupting chemicals on the 
development and functions of human immune cells. Environ Int 
125:350–364
O’Boyle NM, Delaine T, Luthman K, Natsch A, Karlberg AT (2012) 
Analogues of the epoxy resin monomer diglycidyl ether of bis-
phenol F: Effects on contact allergenic potency and cytotoxicity. 
Chem Res Toxicol 25:2469–2478
Panel on Food Contact Materials Flavourings Enzymes Processing 
Aids (CEF) et al (2016) A statement on the developmental immu-
notoxicity of bisphenol A (BPA): answer to the question from 
the Dutch Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport. EFSA Journal. 
Eur. Food Saf. Auth. 14:e04580
Peillex C, Kerever A, Lachhab A, Pelletier M (2021) Bisphenol A, 
bisphenol S and their glucuronidated metabolites modulate gly-
colysis and functional responses of human neutrophils. Environ 
Res 196:110336
Peng H et al (2012) Dimethyl fumarate inhibits dendritic cell matu-
ration via nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) and extracellular signal-
regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and mitogen stress-activated 
kinase 1 (MSK1) signaling. J Biol Chem 287:28017–28026
Pourahmad J, Salimi A (2015) Isolated human peripheral blood mono-
nuclear cell (PBMC), a cost effective tool for predicting immu-
nosuppressive effects of drugs and Xenobiotics. Iran J Pharm 
Res 14:679–980
Qiu W et al (2016) Oxidative stress and immune disturbance after 
long-term exposure to bisphenol A in juvenile common carp 
(Cyprinus carpio). Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 130:93–102
Qiu W et al (2018a) The in vivo action of chronic bisphenol F showing 
potential immune disturbance in juvenile common carp (Cypri-
nus carpio). Chemosphere 205:506–513
Qiu W et al (2018b) Immunotoxicity of bisphenol S and F are similar 
to that of bisphenol A during zebrafish early development. Che-
mosphere 194:1–8
Qiu W et al (2018c) Toxic Effects of bisphenol S showing immunomod-
ulation in fish macrophages. Environ Sci Technol 52:831–838
Rochester JR, Bolden AL (2015) Bisphenol S and F: a systematic 
review and comparison of the hormonal activity of bisphenol a 
substitutes. Environ Health Perspect 123:643–650
Rochester JR, Bolden AL, Liao C, Liu F, Kannan K (2012) Bisphenol 
S, a new bisphenol analogue, in paper products and currency 
bills and its association with bisphenol a residues. Environ Sci 
Technol 46:6515–6522
Rogers JA, Mirza RS (2013) The effects of bisphenol-a on the immune 
system of wild yellow perch, Perca flavescens. Water Air Soil 
Pollut 224:1–6. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11270-​013-​1728-5
Rogers JAJA, Metz L, Yong VWW (2013) Review: endocrine disrupt-
ing chemicals and immune responses: a focus on bisphenol-A 
and its potential mechanisms. Mol Immunol 53:421–430
Rose CE, Sung SSJ, Fu SM (2003) Significant involvement of CCL2 
(MCP-1) in inflammatory disorders of the lung. Microcirculation 
10:273–288
Rosenmai AK et al (2014) Are structural analogues to bisphenol a safe 
alternatives? Toxicol Sci 139:35–47
Sabuz Vidal O, Deepika D, Schuhmacher M, Kumar V (2021) EDC-
induced mechanisms of immunotoxicity: a systematic review. 
Crit Rev Toxicol 51(7):634–652. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10408​
444.​2021.​20094​38
Salem ML (2004) Estrogen, a double-edged sword: Modulation of 
TH1- and TH2-mediated inflammations by differential regulation 
of TH1/TH2 cytokine production. Curr Drug Targets Inflamm 
Allergy 3:97–104
Sciences EH, NIH (2015) National Toxicology Program, US Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services. Natl Toxicol Progr 11–13
Shi M et al (2020) Estrogen receptor-regulated SOCS3 modulation via 
JAK2/STAT3 pathway is involved in BPF-induced M1 polariza-
tion of macrophages. Toxicology 433–434:1–9
Sowers MFR, Wilson AL, Kardia SR, Chu J, Ferrell R (2006) Aro-
matase gene (CYP 19) polymorphisms and endogenous androgen 
concentrations in a multiracial/multiethnic, multisite study of 
women at midlife. Am J Med 119:23–30
Spanier AJ et al (2012) Prenatal exposure to bisphenol A and child 
wheeze from birth to 3 years of age. Environ Health Perspect 
120:916–920
Steinmetz R et al (1998) The xenoestrogen bisphenol A induces 
growth, differentiation, and c-fos gene expression in the female 
reproductive tract. Endocrinology 139:2741–2747

1846
	
Archives of Toxicology (2023) 97:1831–1846
1 3
Sui Y et al (2012) Bisphenol A and its analogues activate human preg-
nane X receptor. Environ Health Perspect 120:399–405
Sui Y, Park SH, Helsley RN, Sunkara M, Gonzalez FJ, Morris AJ, 
Zhou C (2014) Bisphenol A increases atherosclerosis in pregnane 
X receptor-humanized ApoE deficient mice. J Am Heart Assoc 
3(2):e000492. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1161/​JAHA.​113.​000492
Svajger U, Rozman P (2014) Tolerogenic dendritic cells: molecular and 
cellular mechanisms in transplantation. J Leukoc Biol 95:53–69
Švajger U, Dolenc MSMS, Jeras M (2016) In vitro impact of bisphe-
nols BPA, BPF, BPAF and 17β-estradiol (E2) on human mono-
cyte-derived dendritic cell generation, maturation and function. 
Int Immunopharmacol 34:146–154
Toskala E (2014) Immunology. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol 4:21–27
Toyonaga T et al (2016) Lipocalin 2 prevents intestinal inflammation 
by enhancing phagocytic bacterial clearance in macrophages. 
Sci Rep 6:1–13
Turvey SE, Broide DH (2010) Innate immunity. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 125:S24–S32
Usman A, Ahmad M (2019) Computational study suggesting recon-
sideration of BPA analogues based on their endocrine disrupt-
ing potential estimated by binding affinities to nuclear receptors. 
Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 171:154–161
Vandenberg LN, Hauser R, Marcus M, Olea N, Welshons WV 
(2007) Human exposure to bisphenol A (BPA). Reprod Toxicol 
24:139–177
Viñas P, Campillo N, Martínez-Castillo N, Hernández-Córdoba M 
(2010) Comparison of two derivatization-based methods for 
solid-phase microextraction-gas chromatography-mass spectro-
metric determination of bisphenol A, bisphenol S and biphenol 
migrated from food cans. Anal Bioanal Chem 397:115–125
Wang Y, Zhang X, Li H, Yu J, Ren X (2013) The role of miRNA-29 
family in cancer. Eur J Cell Biol 92:123–128
Wang W, Jin Y, Zeng N, Ruan Q, Qian F (2017) SOD2 facilitates the 
antiviral innate immune response by scavenging reactive oxygen 
species. Viral Immunol 30:582–589
Wu M, Xu H, Shen Y, Qiu W, Yang M (2011) Oxidative stress in 
zebrafish embryos induced by short-term exposure to bisphe-
nol A, nonylphenol, and their mixture. Environ Toxicol Chem 
30:2335–2341
Xu H, Yang M, Qiu W, Pan C, Wu M (2013) The impact of endo-
crine-disrupting chemicals on oxidative stress and innate 
immune response in zebrafish embryos. Environ Toxicol Chem 
32:1793–1799
Xu J, Huang G, Guo TL (2016) Developmental bisphenol a exposure 
modulates immune-related diseases. Toxics 4:23
Xu J, Huang G, Guo TL (2019a) Bisphenol S modulates type 1 diabetes 
development in non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice with diet- and 
sex-related effects. Toxics 7:1–14
Xu J, Huang G, Nagy T, Teng Q, Guo TL (2019b) Sex-dependent 
effects of bisphenol A on type 1 diabetes development in non-
obese diabetic (NOD) mice. Arch Toxicol 93:997–1008
Yanagisawa R, Koike E, Win-Shwe T-T, Takano H (2019) Oral expo-
sure to low dose bisphenol A aggravates allergic airway inflam-
mation in mice. Toxicol Reports 6:1253–1262
Ye X et al (2015) Urinary concentrations of bisphenol a and three 
other bisphenols in convenience samples of U.S. adults during 
2000–2014. Environ Sci Technol 49:11834–11839
Zhang W et al (2021) Bisphenol F promotes the secretion of pro-
inflammatory cytokines in macrophages by enhanced glycolysis 
through PI3K-AKT signaling pathway. Toxicol Lett 350:30–39
Zhao C et al (2017) Bisphenol S exposure modulate macrophage phe-
notype as defined by cytokines profiling, global metabolomics 
and lipidomics analysis. Sci Total Environ 592:357–365
Ziv-Gal A, Craig ZR, Wang W, Flaws JA (2013) Bisphenol A inhib-
its cultured mouse ovarian follicle growth partially via the 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling pathway. Reprod Toxicol 
42:58–67
Zoller O et al (2015) Natural occurrence of bisphenol F in mustard. 
Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk 
Assess 33:137–146
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.