Dissolution of the Solid Electrolyte Interphase and its Effects on Lithium Metal Anode 
Cyclability  
Philaphon Sayavong1,#, Wenbo Zhang2,#, Solomon T. Oyakhire3, David T. Boyle1, Yuelang Chen1, 
Sang Cheol Kim2, Rafael A. Vilá2, Sarah E. Holmes1, Mun Sek Kim3, Stacey F. Bent3, Zhenan 
Bao3, Yi Cui2,4,* 
 
1Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.  
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. 
3Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.  
4Stanford Institute for Materials Energy and Energy Sciences, SLAC National Laboratory, Menlo 
Park, CA, USA.  
#These authors contributed equally 
*Corresponding author: Y. C.  e-mail: yicui@stanford.edu 
 
Abstract  
At >95% Coulombic efficiencies, most of the capacity loss for Li metal anodes (LMAs) is through 
the formation and growth of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). However, the mechanism 
through which this happens remains unclear. One property of the SEI that directly affects its 
formation and growth is the SEI’s solubility in the electrolyte. Here, we systematically quantify 
and compare the solubility of SEIs derived from ether-based electrolytes optimized for LMAs 
using in-operando electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM). A correlation between 
solubility, passivity and cyclability established in this work reveals that SEI dissolution is a major 
contributor to differences in passivity and electrochemical performance among battery 

electrolytes. Together with our EQCM, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy results, we show that solubility is dependent on not just 
the SEI’s composition, but also the properties of the electrolyte. This provides a crucial piece of 
information that could help minimize capacity loss due to SEI formation and growth during battery 
cycling and aging. 
 
Introduction  
Despite their potential to provide higher energy density rechargeable batteries, lithium metal 
anodes (LMA) suffer from low cyclability. The two major capacity fading mechanisms that result 
in low cycle life include 1) isolation of electroactive lithium (Li) metal deposits from the current 
collector and 2) continuous reduction of the electrolyte with electroactive surfaces in the anode to 
form the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI).1–3 The passivating SEI layer mitigates the 
thermodynamic instability of Li metal towards the electrolyte, preventing further reactions that 
result in lower Coulombic efficiency (CE, ratio of capacity output during discharge to capacity 
input during charge). Recent advancements in liquid electrolyte engineering have enabled highly 
reversible LMAs with CEs well above 95%. At such high CE, most of the capacity loss is due to 
SEI formation and growth.4 However, the mechanism(s) of SEI growth remains elusive.  
 
One property of the SEI that directly affects its formation and growth is its solubility in the 
electrolyte. Dissolution compromises the efficacy of the passivation layer since additional 
electrolyte and Li must be consumed to repair the partially dissolved SEI, resulting in a thickened 
layer.5,6 Wood et al. predicts that SEI dissolution can completely deplete Li metal inventory before 
the electrolyte is consumed during cell cycling, or even after calendar aging for 80 days.7 

Furthermore, Boyle et al. experimentally shows an average of 2-3% CE loss after calendar aging 
for 24 hours through the growth of the SEI on Li metal surface, even for top performing 
electrolytes. Their observation of organic-rich clusters after aging suggests that the growth 
mechanism involves the dissolution of organic components in the SEI, followed by their 
redeposition after locally saturating the electrolyte.8 These previous studies indicate that SEI 
dissolution is a major contributor towards capacity loss through SEI formation and growth for 
high-performance electrolytes.  
 
Anion-derived inorganic species within the SEI, namely lithium fluoride (LiF), have been shown 
to exhibit low solubility in the electrolyte, while solvent-derived organic components can undergo 
significant dissolution after their formation.7,9–12 As a result, the amount of anion-derived 
components in the SEI has been used to compare the solubility of SEIs derived from different 
electrolytes. However, Huang et. al. recently showed evidence suggesting that LiF does not deposit 
directly into the compact SEI due to its moderate solubility in the electrolyte.13 In contrast, Shadike 
et. al. revealed that nanocrystalline LiF does exist within the compact SEI when a different 
electrolyte is used,14 indicating that LiF solubility is dependent on both electrolyte chemistry and 
SEI composition. Their results suggest that an alternative metric that considers both the electrolyte 
and SEI composition is required to reliably evaluate solubility.  
 
Recently, Melin et. al. and Kwon et. al. utilized the electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance 
(EQCM) - a technique that can measure mass changes in the ng cm-2 scale - to quantify SEI mass 
loss during resting at open circuit after its formation in situ. They both illustrated over half of the 
SEI mass is loss during rest, demonstrating the potential of EQCM as a technique to accurately 

quantify SEI dissolution.6,15 Moreover, mass loss during dissolution would be a reliable metric to 
compare SEI solubility, as the measurement considers solute (SEI) – solvent (electrolyte) 
interactions as a whole. However, this has not been widely applied to electrolytes engineered for 
LMAs. Being able to quantify and compare SEI solubility between different high-performance 
electrolytes could reveal the mechanism of SEI formation and growth. 
 
Herein, we systematically quantify the dissolution of SEIs derived from electrolytes optimized for 
LMAs using EQCM. Comparing SEI solubility results with performance metrics obtained from 
coulometric experiments allowed us to establish a correlation between solubility, passivity, and 
cyclability. Building upon this, we illustrate that cycle life can be further extended for one of the 
best electrolytes by shifting the SEI solubility equilibria, signifying that dissolution is one of the 
major mechanisms that induces the interphase’s degradation and its subsequent repair. Chemical 
characterization of the interphase and electrolyte reveal that dissolution is dependent on not just 
the SEI’s composition, but also the physical and chemical properties of the electrolyte. This is an 
important piece of information that introduces another design principle to minimize capacity loss 
during Li metal battery cycling and calendar aging.  
 
Results and Discussions 
Systematic quantification of SEI dissolution using EQCM  
To accurately quantify the overall solubility of the SEI, EQCM is used to detect mass changes of 
the nanoscale interphase in situ (Figure 1a). EQCM has been previously used extensively to probe 
battery interphases.16–19 However, few studies have focused on high performance electrolytes 
tailored for LMAs. In this study, the SEI is electrochemically formed on copper-coated quartz 

crystal sensor utilizing a constant current – constant voltage (CC-CV) protocol, with a final voltage 
of 50 mV above lithium plating potential (Figure 1b). The potential for the CC-CV protocol allows 
SEI dissolution to be probed without the influence of electrodeposited lithium, while maintaining 
chemistry similar to SEI formed on Li metal surface.8,20 After formation, the mass of the SEI is 
further monitored at open circuit to quantify the amount of soluble components in the SEI (Figure 
1a). Losses in SEI mass should be due to the overall dissolution of the SEI, whether it’s from the 
direct dissolution of the SEI, or from the dissolution of soluble species resulting from SEI 
decomposition. In addition, prior studies have demonstrated SEI decomposition into gaseous 
product is negligible during open circuit resting at room temperatures.21,22 Therefore, mass losses 
observed during our EQCM measurements should primarily be from SEI dissolution.  
 
We systematically vary the salt concentration of the electrolytes used to form the SEI to extract 
physical insights from our EQCM measurements. This includes 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 M of lithium 
bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI) in 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME), denoted as 0.5M, 1M, 2M and 
4M hereafter. By adding a diluent (1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl 2,2,3,3-tetrafluororopyl ether, TTE) 
into the electrolyte, we further investigate the effect of localized high concentration environment 
on SEI solubility (also known as localized high concentration electrolyte, LHCE). Overall, this 
represents some of the commonly studied electrolytes for LMA, including some of the highest 
performing electrolytes (4M and LHCE).23,24  
 
During the polarization of copper coated quartz sensors, there is a mass increase from the 
electroreduction of electrolytes to form SEIs (Figure 1c). The recorded SEI mass ranges from 
around 2 to 4 μgcm-2 for the electrolytes investigated, comparable with previously reported SEI 

mass using the same technique.16,17 During the subsequent resting step at open circuit, the voltage 
profile shows rapid voltage increase for all electrolytes investigated. However, this is not reliable 
evidence for SEI dissolution, as the voltage response will be different for different electrolytes 
(Figure 1d). Meanwhile, the mass decrease during this period shows significant SEI dissolution 
for all electrolytes investigated (Figure 1e). Our results show that SEI derived from 0.5M 
undergoes the most dissolution, where ~60% of its mass is loss after dissolution. In fact, the mass 
of the SEI decreases towards the end of its formation stage during the constant-voltage step 
(Figure 1c). This can be rationalized by considering the rate of mass changes from different 
processes. During the constant-voltage step (Figure 1b), the SEI formation rate decreases due to 
a decrease in current density, resulting in a slower rate of mass gain. The overall mass decline 
during this step indicates that mass loss from SEI dissolution occurs at a faster rate than mass gain 
from formation for 0.5M. Despite the net SEI mass loss during the constant voltage step, the 
current density also continues to decrease which suggests that the insoluble SEI component is more 
electronically insulating than the soluble species. Interestingly, our EQCM results show that the 
SEI becomes less soluble as the salt concentration increases. The SEI percentage mass loss 
decreases from ~60% for 0.5M to ~7% for 4M, demonstrating that SEI solubility is strongly 
affected by salt concentration in the electrolyte. 
 
SEI dissolution and passivation  
Passivity is a key SEI property that directly affect the formation and growth of the interphase, as 
less passivating layer requires more capacity to inhibit electrolyte reduction. Therefore, the 
capacity used to form SEI is a good metric for evaluating its passivity. Our EQCM results show 
that the passivity of the SEI decreases as the salt concentration of the electrolyte is lowered (Figure 

2a). When comparing the SEI formation capacity and solubility of different electrolytes (Figure 
2b), a positive correlation is obtained regardless of the electrolyte composition, signifying that the 
two properties are interlinked (Figure 2c). In fact, studies have indicated that more passivating 
SEIs contain more inorganic species such as LiF and Li2O.9,10 However, it is difficult to establish 
a correlation between SEI solubility and passivity without a systematic quantification of the two 
properties. Our EQCM results provide additional evidence suggesting that SEI dissolution is a 
major mechanism that governs SEI formation and growth. 
 
Compositional analysis of SEI and its soluble species 
Trends obtained from our EQCM results reveal important fundamental insights involved in the 
process of SEI dissolution. The negative correlation between electrolyte salt concentration and SEI 
dissolution (Figure 2b) suggests that an increase in salt concentration could result in less available 
uncoordinated DME molecules to dissolve SEI components, as well as fewer DME available for 
formation of SEI. This is because more DME would be required to fully dissolve LiFSI in the 
electrolyte. Higher LiFSI concentration can also suppress the dissolution of decomposed Li 
compounds in the SEI due to the common ion effect. Additionally, our EQCM results show that 
adding TTE to the LiFSI-DME electrolyte system can suppress SEI dissolution (1.73 M for LHCE 
compared to 2 M, Figure 2b). Since TTE is a major solvent in LHCE (1.2DME:3TTE molar ratio), 
the interaction between the SEI and electrolyte in LHCE is expected to be different due to the 
significant differences between DME and TTE molecules. However, EQCM results alone could 
not account for the effects of SEI composition on solubility. This is because increasing electrolyte 
salt concentration or incorporating a diluent into the electrolyte system can result in a more anion-
rich Li solvation structure, causing the SEI to be more anion-derived and less soluble.23–25  

 
Building upon the insights gained from our EQCM results, we investigate the effect of SEI 
composition on its solubility by analyzing the interphase’s composition before and after 
dissolution using XPS. To ensure that our results are reliable, three different spots of the SEI 
formed on copper are analyzed and averaged for all samples investigated. Chemical analysis of the 
SEI before dissolution shows that 4M and LHCE form more anion-derived interphases compared 
to 1M, agreeing with previous results published (Figure S3).23,24 However, LHCE is more anion-
derived compared to 4M, despite its more soluble SEI measured using EQCM (Figure 2b). This 
illustrate that while anion-derived SEIs are generally less soluble, electrolyte properties such as 
salt concentration and solvent chemistry can significantly affect dissolution. Based on our results 
for the LiFSI-DME electrolyte system, the trend between SEI solubility and salt concentration 
should also apply for other single salt + single solvent electrolytes. This is because at higher 
concentration, electrolytes will generally exhibit a stronger common ion effect, less free 
(uncoordinated) solvent molecules and form more anion-derived SEIs.24,25 However, further 
theoretical study of SEI dissolution is needed to quantify the contributions of different effects (e.g. 
common ion effect, availability of uncoordinated solvent molecules and SEI composition) 
impacting SEI solubility. 
 
The fact that more anion-derived SEIs are less prone to dissolution (Figure 3a) indicates that 
organic components in the SEI are more soluble. Therefore, the resulting SEI after dissolution 
should become more anion-derived and soluble organic moieties should be detectable in the 
electrolyte. To confirm our hypothesis, compositional changes in the SEI after dissolution were 
measured using XPS (Figure 3a), revealing that all SEIs investigated become more anion-derived 

after dissolution. Furthermore, changes in the XPS atomic ratios suggest that the organic soluble 
species are different for TTE-DME solvent system (LHCE) compared to DME-only electrolytes 
(1M and 4M). For 4M and 1M, the atomic ratios F/O, F/C and S/C all significantly increased after 
dissolution, whereas only S/C ratio is increased for LHCE (Figure 3a). This demonstrates that the 
TTE/DME solvent system interacts differently with the SEI compared to DME only.  
 
Due to its sensitivity, NMR has been widely used to characterize and detect organic SEI soluble 
species in carbonate-based electrolytes.26,27 Herein, we carried out NMR characterization of 
electrolytes soaked with Li metal chips to detect organic soluble species in the SEI to support our 
XPS and EQCM results. Soaking Li metal in electrolytes allows the SEI to form chemically on the 
metal surface, subsequently allowing soluble products to dissolve into the electrolyte media, 
essentially aging the electrolyte. Comparing NMR spectra of electrolytes with and without aging 
reveals additional peaks detected primarily in 19F and 1H NMR. Furthermore, different soluble 
species are detected for the DME-only electrolyte system (1M and 4M) compared to TTE-DME 
system (LHCE), corroborating with our XPS analysis. For 1M and 4M, 1H NMR detect proton 
peaks around 4 to 7 ppm, whereas the peaks around 4 to 4.5 ppm are detected for aged LHCE. 
This indicates that the soluble species detected (for both DME-only and TTE-DME electrolyte 
systems) are derived from ether-based molecules (Figure 3b and 3c).26 While prior studies report 
that TTE is not involved in the SEI formation process,23 our NMR results suggest that it can still 
interact with solvent-derived components in the SEI. The fact that TTE is fully miscible in DME 
suggests that the interactions between TTE and solvent-derived SEI components are strong, 
demonstrating the importance of molecular interactions in SEI solubility.  
 

The positions of 19F NMR peaks for soluble SEI species indicate that there are also soluble species 
derived from FSI- anion (Figure 3d). This is because the chemical shifts of these species are close 
to the fluorine chemical shift in FSI- anion. We hypothesize that this is a result from reactions 
between reactive intermediates formed during FSI- reduction and solvent molecules, yielding 
organic species that contain sulfonyl fluoride functional groups with similar chemical shift to FSI- 
anion.28 In addition, this would corroborate with the hydrogen peaks near 7 ppm in 1H NMR, where 
the protons on the carbon bridging the ether and sulfonyl group would result in a less shielding 
environment, resulting in higher chemical shift observed.28 Furthermore, evidence from XPS high-
resolution scans underscore the proposed mechanism, where the fluorine peak from -SO2F 
decreases in magnitude after the SEI is allowed to dissolve (Figure S4). However, these 
observations are not present for LHCE. We believe this is due to the weak interaction between 
TTE and sulfonyl fluoride functional groups, based on the solubility of LiFSI in TTE compared to 
LiFSI in DME.23 Therefore, organic sulfonyl fluoride moieties should be less soluble in LHCE. 
This is also reflected in our 19F NMR results, where smaller peak near FSI anion is detected for 
aged LHCE compared to 1M and 4M. Our these findings underscore our hypothesis suggesting 
the significance of electrolyte chemistry in SEI dissolution. However, full NMR characterization 
of SEI soluble species are not possible for our experimental setup, due to the low concentration of 
the SEI species. Further studies should be done to characterize the structure of SEI soluble species.   
 
 
Many researchers suggest that anion-derived SEIs are more stable and passivating, which would 
minimize capacity fading from SEI formation and growth. This is an effective design principle, as 
more anion-derived SEIs contain more insoluble components.9–12 However, our results illustrate 
that it is not only SEI composition that affect its solubility, but also the physical and chemical 

properties of the electrolyte. More importantly, we show that for high-performance electrolytes 
(4M and LHCE), SEI anion composition does not necessarily correlate with the extent of solubility 
or passivity. As a result, a more quantitative method like EQCM is needed to evaluate SEI 
solubility, especially for high-performance electrolytes where electrolyte properties can 
significantly affect dissolution and anode passivation. 
 
Effects of SEI dissolution on Li metal anode cyclability  
To gauge on how much SEI dissolution affect the cyclability of Li metal anodes, we carried out 
coulometric experiments to determine whether there is a trend between dissolution and 
performance. Under regular cycling protocol, our analysis demonstrates a trend where more 
soluble SEIs result in lower CEs (Figure 4a & 4c). The average CE (cycle 5-20) ranges from 
~98% for 4M to ~93% for 0.5M. Since the CE is above 95% for the electrolytes investigated 
(except 0.5M), capacity loss during cycling should be dominated by SEI formation and growth.4 
This capacity loss pathway is dependent on two major factors: surface area of electroplated Li 
metal and SEI passivity. Previous studies and our SEM analyses (Figure 4b) show that the Li 
plating morphology for these ether-based electrolytes are similar, suggesting that their anode 
surface areas are comparable .23,24 Therefore, we believe it is the passivation problem caused by 
SEI dissolution that is the dominant mechanism inducing capacity loss for the set of electrolytes 
investigated here. Dissolution of SEI, which can happen during battery cycling and resting, induces 
capacity loss from SEI formation and growth. Dissolution causes the SEI to become porous, 
exposing Li metal to the electrolyte, inducing further electrolyte reduction that forms new SEI 
layer. The repeated SEI dissolution and reformation does not only result in Li metal inventory loss, 
but also SEI thickening. In fact, this is a similar mechanism in which SEI dissolution induces 

capacity fading in graphite-based anodes. However, due to the limited volume expansion of 
graphite-based anodes during cycling, this problem is not as detrimental in later cycles as the SEI 
fully passivates the electrode.5,6 In contrast, LMAs theoretically undergo infinite relative volume 
change during cycling. This results in new SEIs forming on Li metal surface during every plating 
step, repeating the cycle of SEI dissolution and maturation.29 Hence, this partially explains why 
SEI dissolution could have a more significant effect on cycling performance for LMAs.  
 
A numerical model established by Wood et. al. predicts that larger electrolyte volume can change 
SEI solubility equilibria, resulting in accelerated capacity decay and reducing cycle life for Li 
metal batteries.7 Building upon their model and our SEI solubility-cyclability trend established, 
we compare cell cycling utilizing different volumes of LHCE electrolyte. Indeed, our cycling data 
show that stable cycling is extended to >350 cycles for 20 µL from ~200 cycles for 60 µL 
electrolyte volume, with an improvement in CE observed from ~98.5% to ~99.2% (averaged over 
all stable cycles, Figure 4d). Generally, lean electrolyte conditions should result in faster 
electrolyte consumption, leading to an accelerated capacity decay and cell failure.30 We believe 
this is not the failure mode for the Li|Cu cell configuration used, due to the small capacity (1 
mAhcm-2) utilized during battery cycling. Furthermore, the number of cycles it takes for CE to 
plateau decreases from ~75 cycles for 60 µL to ~40 for 20 µL (Figure 4d). We believe this is due 
to a faster saturation of SEI soluble species due to less electrolyte volume. This would explain the 
gradual improvement in CE, as SEI dissolution and growth is minimized when the saturation point 
is reached. Another factor that could contribute to the faster plateau of CE is the decrease in 
electroactive surface area when less electrolyte volume is used (less electrolyte wetting). This 
would result in less galvanic corrosion of Li metal, resulting in an improvement in CE.8,20 

However, the current collector and cell casings do not undergo volume change during cycling, 
where these surfaces should be passivated within the first 5 cycles as the SEI mature.20,31 
Therefore, the improved cycling performance observed must be due to the faster saturation of SEI 
soluble species when lower electrolyte volume is utilized, resulting in less overall SEI dissolution 
during extended cell cycling. 
 
To further validate our hypothesis suggesting the involvement of SEI dissolution in its formation 
and growth mechanism, we investigate capacity loss during calendar aging for LHCE by 
introducing a 24-hour resting step at open circuit into the cycling protocol. The rest step is 
introduced during the second cycle at fully charged state to ensure that the electroactive surface, 
aside from Li metal surface, is passivated to minimize galvanic corrosion (Figure S5, same 
protocol used in Boyle et. al.).8 Our results show that 24-hour calendar aging step induces ~3% 
capacity loss (Figure 4e), comparable to other high-performance electrolytes reported previously.8 
However, SEI dissolution can also affect the passivation of other electroactive surface such as the 
current collector and cell casings. We explored this effect by introducing an additional 24-hour 
resting step at open circuit at the end of the first cycle at fully discharged state, after the 24-hour 
rest in the fully charged state (see Figure S5 for protocol). This allows the SEI on copper and cell 
casings to dissolve without the interference of corrosion through SEI growth on Li metal surface. 
Our results show that the overall corrosion loss is only slightly greater when the SEI on copper is 
allowed to dissolve, suggesting that the additional capacity loss from galvanic corrosion is minimal 
(Figure 4e). Therefore, we believe dissolution of the SEI on Li metal surface is the main 
contributor towards capacity loss. 
 

Overall, our results suggest that strategies designed to prevent SEI dissolution could push the CE 
of Li metal anodes higher. Through molecular tuning of the solvent, liquid electrolytes can be 
engineered to purposely decrease its interaction with the SEI to suppress dissolution.  By 
incorporating this into the electrolyte design principle, guided by SEI solubility quantification 
using EQCM, we believe both the cycle and calendar life of LMBs can be extended even more 
effectively through electrolyte engineering. 
 
Conclusions 
Using EQCM, we systematically quantify and compare SEI mass loss from dissolution using 
electrolytes optimized for LMAs, illustrating that SEIs derived from even state-of-the-art 
electrolytes undergo significant dissolution during resting at open circuit. The correlation 
established between solubility and passivity obtained from our EQCM results indicate that SEI 
dissolution is a major contributor towards SEI formation and growth. Furthermore, we compare 
our SEI solubility results from EQCM experiments and cycling data to show that the cycle and 
calendar life of LMAs are closely dependent on SEI dissolution for high-performance electrolytes 
(Figure 5). Our results suggest that the cycle life of a state-of-the-art electrolyte can be extended 
by decreasing SEI dissolution, illustrating that SEI solubility is another knob that can be tuned to 
effectively minimize losses from SEI growth. Combining our EQCM results with compositional 
analyses of the SEI and electrolyte, we show that comparing SEI solubilities solely based its 
composition becomes less reliable for high-performance electrolytes. Our analyses show that the 
differences in the amount of anion-derived component in their SEIs become small enough that the 
physical and chemical properties of the electrolytes start to play a more significant role in 
dissolution. This provides a crucial piece of information that could help future design of more 

passivating SEIs through not just tuning the SEI composition, but also tuning the physical and 
chemical properties of the electrolyte to minimize SEI dissolution even more effectively. 
 
Methods 
Electrolyte preparation 
All electrolytes were prepared and handled in an argon-filled glovebox with an O2 concentration 
of <0.2 ppm and H2O concentration of <0.01 ppm. LiFSI-DME electrolyte was prepared with 
LiFSI (Oakwood) and DME (Aldrich). LHCE was prepared by adding TTE (SynQuest) to LiFSI 
in DME solution in a LiFSI:1.2DME:3TTE molar ratio.  
 
EQCM 
EQCM measurements were performed using a QCM200 instrument (Stanford Research Systems), 
where all electrochemical testing were down in a glovebox filled with argon with an O2 
concentration of <0.2 ppm and H2O concentration of <0.01 ppm. Testing was done within the 
sensor holder itself, with a Li metal foil counter electrode. AT-cut quartz crystal coated with copper 
(Phillip Technologies) was used as the sensor and electrode for electrodeposition.  
 
Electrochemical methods 
Aside from EQCM measurements, electrochemical measurements used 2032-type coin cell with 
60 uL of electrolyte (unless specified otherwise). High-quality Li metal foil were used (750 um, 
99.9% (Alfa Aesar)) and Cu foil (Pred Materials) were used for all Li|Cu cell configuration. Both 
the Li metal and Cu foil were punched to 1 cm-2. Cu foil was rinsed with deionized water, isopropyl 
alcohol (Fisher) and acetone (Fisher) before transferring into the glovebox. All 2023-type coin cell 

assembly used 25-micrometer-thick propylene-polyethylene-propylene (Celgard) as separators. 
Lithium iron phosphate (2 mAh-2, Targray) was paired with Cu foil for XPS characterization of 
the SEI before and after dissolution. The SEI was formed on Cu using a constant current-constant 
voltage procedure. The current was applied at 50 uAcm-2 until the voltage reached 50 mV vs. 
Li/Li+. The voltage was held at this voltage until the current drops down to 10 uAcm-2. For the SEI 
dissolution experiments, the cells were rested at open circuit for 48 hours before cell dissembling 
and characterization. All battery cycling was carried out at 1 mAcm-2 and 1 mAhcm-2. Arbin 
battery cycler was used to cycle all cells at 25oC unless stated otherwise.  
 
XPS 
Cu foil working electrodes were prepared in an Ar glovebox and rinsed with 90 µL of DME to 
remove residual Li salts, then transferred to an XPS chamber using a vacuum transfer vessel. 
XPS signals were collected on a PHI VersaProbe 1 scanning XPS microprobe with an Al Kα 
source. 
 
NMR  
Small pieces of Li metal foil (roughly 1´1´1 mm size cubes) was soaked in 2 mL of electrolyte 
for 2 days. The electrolyte was then filtered through a 0.45 um polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 
filter. NMR measurements was performed on a Varian Mercury 400 MHz NMR. The temperature 
was set at 25oC. Samples were prepared in the glovebox by injecting 300 μL of electrolyte into a 
new and dried NMR tube, together with 600 μL of newly opened methyl sulfoxide-d6 (Acros 
Organics, 99.9% D, max. 0.03% water impurity in each DMSO-d ampoules). It was then sealed 

with PTFE caps and immediately put into the NMR machine for data acquisition. The samples 
were locked and shimmed using the external standard. 
 
SEM 
SEM characterization was carried out in the plated state using Li|Cu cell configuration after 10 
cycles. 1 mAcm-2 and 1 mAhcm-2 was used for the cycling conditions. Characterization was done 
using Thermo Fisher Scientific Apreo S LoVac Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). 
 
References 
 (1) Xu, W.; Wang, J.; Ding, F.; Chen, X.; Nasybulin, E.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, J.-G. Lithium 
Metal Anodes for Rechargeable Batteries. Energy Env. Sci 2014, 7 (2), 513–537. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C3EE40795K. 
(2) Lin, D.; Liu, Y.; Cui, Y. Reviving the Lithium Metal Anode for High-Energy Batteries. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12 (3), 194–206. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2017.16. 
(3) Fang, C.; Wang, X.; Meng, Y. S. Key Issues Hindering a Practical Lithium-Metal Anode. 
Spec. Issue Part Two Big Quest. Chem. 2019, 1 (2), 152–158. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trechm.2019.02.015. 
(4) Fang, C.; Li, J.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, Y.; Yang, F.; Lee, J. Z.; Lee, M.-H.; Alvarado, J.; 
Schroeder, M. A.; Yang, Y.; Lu, B.; Williams, N.; Ceja, M.; Yang, L.; Cai, M.; Gu, J.; Xu, 
K.; Wang, X.; Meng, Y. S. Quantifying Inactive Lithium in Lithium Metal Batteries. 
Nature 2019, 572 (7770), 511–515. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1481-z. 
(5) Broussely, M.; Biensan, Ph.; Bonhomme, F.; Blanchard, Ph.; Herreyre, S.; Nechev, K.; 
Staniewicz, R. J. Main Aging Mechanisms in Li Ion Batteries. Sel. Pap. Press. 12th Int. 
Meet. Lithium Batter. 2005, 146 (1), 90–96. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2005.03.172. 
(6) Heiskanen, S. K.; Kim, J.; Lucht, B. L. Generation and Evolution of the Solid Electrolyte 
Interphase of Lithium-Ion Batteries. Joule 2019, 3 (10), 2322–2333. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.08.018. 
(7) Wood, S. M.; Fang, C.; Dufek, E. J.; Nagpure, S. C.; Sazhin, S. V.; Liaw, B.; Meng, Y. S. 
Predicting Calendar Aging in Lithium Metal Secondary Batteries: The Impacts of Solid 
Electrolyte Interphase Composition and Stability. Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8 (26), 
1801427. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201801427. 
(8) Boyle, D. T.; Huang, W.; Wang, H.; Li, Y.; Chen, H.; Yu, Z.; Zhang, W.; Bao, Z.; Cui, Y. 
Corrosion of Lithium Metal Anodes during Calendar Ageing and Its Microscopic Origins. 
Nat. Energy 2021, 6 (5), 487–494. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00787-9. 
(9) Peled, E.; Menkin, S. Review—SEI: Past, Present and Future. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 
164 (7), A1703–A1719. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1441707jes. 

(10) Mogensen, R.; Brandell, D.; Younesi, R. Solubility of the Solid Electrolyte Interphase (SEI) 
in Sodium Ion Batteries. ACS Energy Lett. 2016, 1 (6), 1173–1178. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00491. 
(11) Tasaki, K.; Harris, S. J. Computational Study on the Solubility of Lithium Salts Formed on 
Lithium Ion Battery Negative Electrode in Organic Solvents. J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114 
(17), 8076–8083. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp100013h. 
(12) Tasaki, K.; Goldberg, A.; Lian, J.-J.; Walker, M.; Timmons, A.; Harris, S. J. Solubility of 
Lithium Salts Formed on the Lithium-Ion Battery Negative Electrode Surface in Organic 
Solvents. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2009, 156 (12), A1019. https://doi.org/10.1149/1.3239850. 
(13) Huang, W.; Wang, H.; Boyle, D. T.; Li, Y.; Cui, Y. Resolving Nanoscopic and Mesoscopic 
Heterogeneity of Fluorinated Species in Battery Solid-Electrolyte Interphases by Cryogenic 
Electron Microscopy. ACS Energy Lett. 2020, 5 (4), 1128–1135. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.0c00194. 
(14) Shadike, Z.; Lee, H.; Borodin, O.; Cao, X.; Fan, X.; Wang, X.; Lin, R.; Bak, S.-M.; Ghose, 
S.; Xu, K.; Wang, C.; Liu, J.; Xiao, J.; Yang, X.-Q.; Hu, E. Identification of LiH and 
Nanocrystalline LiF in the Solid–Electrolyte Interphase of Lithium Metal Anodes. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2021, 16 (5), 549–554. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-020-00845-5. 
(15) Kwon, B.; Lee, J.; Kim, H.; Kim, D.; Park, K.; Jo, S.; Lee, K. T. Janus Behaviour of LiFSI- 
and LiPF6-Based Electrolytes for Li Metal Batteries: Chemical Corrosion versus Galvanic 
Corrosion. J Mater Chem A 2021. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1TA07860G. 
(16) Wang, H.; Matsui, M.; Kuwata, H.; Sonoki, H.; Matsuda, Y.; Shang, X.; Takeda, Y.; 
Yamamoto, O.; Imanishi, N. A Reversible Dendrite-Free High-Areal-Capacity Lithium 
Metal Electrode. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 15106. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15106. 
(17) Sonoki, H.; Matsui, M.; Imanishi, N. Effect of Anion Species in Early Stage of SEI 
Formation Process. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2019, 166 (15), A3593–A3598. 
https://doi.org/10.1149/2.0191915jes. 
(18) Kitz, P. G.; Lacey, M. J.; Novák, P.; Berg, E. J. Operando Investigation of the Solid 
Electrolyte Interphase Mechanical and Transport Properties Formed from Vinylene 
Carbonate and Fluoroethylene Carbonate. J. Power Sources 2020, 477, 228567. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2020.228567. 
(19) Mozhzhukhina, N.; Flores, E.; Lundström, R.; Nyström, V.; Kitz, P. G.; Edström, K.; Berg, 
E. J. Direct Operando Observation of Double Layer Charging and Early Solid Electrolyte 
Interphase Formation in Li-Ion Battery Electrolytes. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2020, 11 (10), 
4119–4123. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c01089. 
(20) Lin, D.; Liu, Y.; Li, Y.; Li, Y.; Pei, A.; Xie, J.; Huang, W.; Cui, Y. Fast Galvanic Lithium 
Corrosion Involving a Kirkendall-Type Mechanism. Nat. Chem. 2019, 11 (4), 382–389. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-018-0203-8. 
(21) Hobold, G. M.; Khurram, A.; Gallant, B. M. Operando Gas Monitoring of Solid Electrolyte 
Interphase Reactions on Lithium. Chem. Mater. 2020, 32 (6), 2341–2352. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b04550. 
(22) Yoon, T.; Milien, M. S.; Parimalam, B. S.; Lucht, B. L. Thermal Decomposition of the 
Solid Electrolyte Interphase (SEI) on Silicon Electrodes for Lithium Ion Batteries. Chem. 
Mater. 2017, 29 (7), 3237–3245. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b00454. 
(23) Ren, X.; Zou, L.; Cao, X.; Engelhard, M. H.; Liu, W.; Burton, S. D.; Lee, H.; Niu, C.; 
Matthews, B. E.; Zhu, Z.; Wang, C.; Arey, B. W.; Xiao, J.; Liu, J.; Zhang, J.-G.; Xu, W. 

Enabling High-Voltage Lithium-Metal Batteries under Practical Conditions. Joule 2019, 3 
(7), 1662–1676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2019.05.006. 
(24) Qian, J.; Henderson, W. A.; Xu, W.; Bhattacharya, P.; Engelhard, M.; Borodin, O.; Zhang, 
J.-G. High Rate and Stable Cycling of Lithium Metal Anode. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6 (1), 
6362. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7362. 
(25) Kim, S. C.; Kong, X.; Vilá, R. A.; Huang, W.; Chen, Y.; Boyle, D. T.; Yu, Z.; Wang, H.; 
Bao, Z.; Qin, J.; Cui, Y. Potentiometric Measurement to Probe Solvation Energy and Its 
Correlation to Lithium Battery Cyclability. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143 (27), 10301–
10308. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c03868. 
(26) Jin, Y.; Kneusels, N.-J. H.; Grey, C. P. NMR Study of the Degradation Products of 
Ethylene Carbonate in Silicon–Lithium Ion Batteries. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10 (20), 
6345–6350. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b02454. 
(27) Wang, L.; Menakath, A.; Han, F.; Wang, Y.; Zavalij, P. Y.; Gaskell, K. J.; Borodin, O.; 
Iuga, D.; Brown, S. P.; Wang, C.; Xu, K.; Eichhorn, B. W. Identifying the Components of 
the Solid–Electrolyte Interphase in Li-Ion Batteries. Nat. Chem. 2019, 11 (9), 789–796. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557-019-0304-z. 
(28) Xu, R.; Xu, T.; Yang, M.; Cao, T.; Liao, S. A Rapid Access to Aliphatic Sulfonyl Fluorides. 
Nat. Commun. 2019, 10 (1), 3752. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11805-6. 
(29) Li, Y.; Huang, W.; Li, Y.; Pei, A.; Boyle, D. T.; Cui, Y. Correlating Structure and Function 
of Battery Interphases at Atomic Resolution Using Cryoelectron Microscopy. Joule 2018, 2 
(10), 2167–2177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2018.08.004. 
(30) Nagpure, S. C.; Tanim, T. R.; Dufek, E. J.; Viswanathan, V. V.; Crawford, A. J.; Wood, S. 
M.; Xiao, J.; Dickerson, C. C.; Liaw, B. Impacts of Lean Electrolyte on Cycle Life for 
Rechargeable Li Metal Batteries. J. Power Sources 2018, 407, 53–62. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2018.10.060. 
(31) Kolesnikov, A.; Kolek, M.; Dohmann, J. F.; Horsthemke, F.; Börner, M.; Bieker, P.; 
Winter, M.; Stan, M. Galvanic Corrosion of Lithium‐Powder‐Based Electrodes. Adv. 
Energy Mater. 2020, 10, 2000017. https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.202000017. 
(32) Yu, Z.; Wang, H.; Kong, X.; Huang, W.; Tsao, Y.; Mackanic, D. G.; Wang, K.; Wang, X.; 
Huang, W.; Choudhury, S.; Zheng, Y.; Amanchukwu, C. V.; Hung, S. T.; Ma, Y.; Lomeli, 
E. G.; Qin, J.; Cui, Y.; Bao, Z. Molecular Design for Electrolyte Solvents Enabling Energy-
Dense and Long-Cycling Lithium Metal Batteries. Nat. Energy 2020, 5 (7), 526–533. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-020-0634-5. 
(33) Yu, Z.; Rudnicki, P. E.; Zhang, Z.; Huang, Z.; Celik, H.; Oyakhire, S. T.; Chen, Y.; Kong, 
X.; Kim, S. C.; Xiao, X.; Wang, H.; Zheng, Y.; Kamat, G. A.; Kim, M. S.; Bent, S. F.; Qin, 
J.; Cui, Y.; Bao, Z. Rational Solvent Molecule Tuning for High-Performance Lithium Metal 
Battery Electrolytes. Nat. Energy 2022, 7 (1), 94–106. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-
00962-y. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge support from the Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable 
Energy, Office of Vehicle Technologies of the US Department of Energy under the Battery 

Materials Research (BMR) Program and Battery 500 Consortium. D.T.B. acknowledges support 
from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program. S.T.O. 
acknowledges support from the Knight Hennessy scholarship for graduate studies at Stanford 
University. R.A.V. acknowledges support from the National Academy of Sciences Ford 
Foundation Fellowship, the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program 
(NSF GRFP, grant no. DGE-1656518), and the Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education 
(EDGE) Doctoral Fellowship Program at Stanford University. Scanning electron microscopy were 
performed at the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF), supported by the National Science 
Foundation under award ECCS-1542152. We also acknowledge Christopher E. D. Chidsey for 
loaning us the SRS QCM200 equipment. 
 
Author contributions 
P.S. and Y.C. conceived the idea. P.S. designed the research with Y.C. guidance. P.S. and D.T.B. 
conducted EQCM experiments. P.S. and W.Z. performed electrochemical testing. S.T.O. 
conducted XPS characterization. P.S. and Y.C. conducted NMR characterization. P.S. and W.Z. 
carried out SEM characterization. W.Z., D.T.B., S.C.K., R.A.V., S.E.H. and M.S.K. assisted in 
results interpretation. P.S., W.Z. and Y.C. wrote the manuscript. All the authors made comments 
on the manuscript.  
 
Competing interests 
Authors declare no competing interests. 
 
Data and materials availability 

All data in the main text or the supplementary materials. 
 
Supporting information 
EQCM profiles, XPS atomic ratio analyses, XPS high resolution scans, voltage profiles for 
calendar aging protocols.