Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
An autocatalytic multicomponent
DNAzyme nanomachine for tumor-speciﬁc
photothermal therapy sensitization in
pancreatic cancer
Jiaqi Yan1,2,3,4,7, Xiaodong Ma3,4,7, Danna Liang
5,7, Meixin Ran1,2,3,4,7,
Dongdong Zheng
6, Xiaodong Chen1,2, Shichong Zhou6, Weijian Sun5
,
Xian Shen1,2
& Hongbo Zhang
1,2,3,4
Multicomponent deoxyribozymes (MNAzymes) have great potential in gene
therapy, but their ability to recognize disease tissue and further achieve
synergistic gene regulation has rarely been studied. Herein, Arginylglycylas-
partic acid (RGD)-modiﬁed Distearyl acylphosphatidyl ethanolamine (DSPE)-
polyethylene glycol (PEG) (DSPE-PEG-RGD) micelle is prepared with a DSPE
hydrophobic core to load the photothermal therapy (PTT) dye IR780 and the
calcium efﬂux pump inhibitor curcumin. Then, the MNAzyme is distributed
into the hydrophilic PEG layer and sealed with calcium phosphate through
biomineralization. Moreover, RGD is attached to the outer tail of PEG for
tumor targeting. The constructed nanomachine can release MNAzyme and the
cofactor Ca2+ under acidic conditions and self-assemble into an active mode to
cleave heat shock protein (HSP) mRNA by consuming the oncogene miRNA-21.
Silencing miRNA-21 enhances the expression of the tumor suppressor gene
PTEN, leading to PTT sensitization. Meanwhile, curcumin maintains high
intracellular Ca2+ to further suppress HSP-chaperone ATP by disrupting mito-
chondrial Ca2+ homeostasis. Therefore, pancreatic cancer is triple-sensitized to
IR780-mediated PTT. The in vitro and in vivo results show that the MNAzyme-
based nanomachine can strongly regulate HSP and PTEN expression and lead
to signiﬁcant pancreatic tumor inhibition under laser irradiation.
Mild photothermal therapy can avoid inﬂammation and tumor
metastasis caused by excessive hyperthermia during cancer therapy1.
However, the curative effect of mild PTT is dramatically compromised
by heat shock proteins (HSPs), which are produced by the cellular
thermal defense mechanism2,3. The combination of HSP small mole-
cule inhibitors and photothermal agents has been considered an
effective PTT strategy4,5. Nevertheless, small molecule inhibitors nor-
mally suffer from obvious hysteretic effects, since they can only inhibit
already generated HSPs, rather than prevent the production of HSPs
before treatment6. Furthermore, small molecule inhibitors will inevi-
tably inhibit HSPs in peritumoral tissues; therefore, unavoidable ther-
mal diffusion during PTT will intensify the side effects of tumor
treatment7. More importantly, targeting not only HSPs but also PTT-
associated targets such as ATP8,9 and miRNA-2110 could also lead to a
synergistic effect. Therefore, achieving multilevel PTT sensitization in
speciﬁc cancer cells is of great signiﬁcance.
Oligonucleotide therapeutic agents can regulate target genes
intracellularly by means of supplementing downregulated genes11 or
Received: 25 May 2023
Accepted: 20 October 2023
Check for updates
A full list of afﬁliations appears at the end of the paper.
e-mail: fame198288@126.com; shenxian@wmu.edu.cn; hongbo.zhang@abo.ﬁ
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

by sterically blocking or cleaving overexpressed genes12 and possess
irreplaceable advantages compared with traditional drugs13. A deox-
yribozyme (DNAzyme) is a single-stranded DNA-based oligonucleotide
therapeutic agent14 that contains a catalytic core ﬂanked by two sub-
strate arms that can be endowed with immense biocatalytic functions
by employing various metal cofactors15,16. Leveraging excellent pro-
grammability and intrinsic biocompatibility, DNAzymes can be con-
structed as speciﬁc-mRNA hydrolysis machines with multiple turnover
rates17. Thus far, they have been utilized in many advanced applica-
tions, including disease biomarker detection18, intelligent release sys-
tem construction19,20, speciﬁc mRNA applications21, or even double-
stranded DNA regulation with higher efﬁciency than the CRISPR‒
Cas9 system22. However, although researchers can accurately design
DNAzymes with target gene-silencing functions, the “off-target” effects
are still serious since the DNAzymes cannot regulate target genes in
speciﬁc tissues23. For example, under photothermal therapy (PTT), it is
very difﬁcult to use DNAzymes to silence HSP70 mRNA only in pan-
creatic tumor sites while retaining HSP70 function in paracancerous
tissues, therefore distinguishing the two sites with different photo-
thermal responsive sensitivities.
Multicomponent
deoxyribozymes
(MNAzymes)
are
further
engineered inventions from the two most widely used DNAzymes
(17E and 10-23)24, which contain two partzyme strands created by
splitting the DNAzyme at the catalytic core (Fig. 1a, b)25. Each part-
zyme comprises half of each substrate’s binding arm, target binding
arm, and catalytic core26. This engineered segmentation process
endows
MNAzymes
with
the
ability
to
recognize
cancer
biomarkers27,28. Although the category of target biomarker sequence
(miRNA-15527, miRNA-2128, miRNA-10b29, antibiotic resistance genes30,
SARS-CoV-2 virus sequence31, etc.) has been broadly explored for
more than 10 years of MNAzyme development, the MNAzyme sub-
strate strand has been mainly a stereotype for ﬂuorescence/
quencher-based signal detection (Fig. 1c) rather than biomarker-
responsive target gene silencing (common stereotype sequences of
the cleavage site for 17E-based MNAzyme: 3’-TrArGG-5’24,25,27,28,32 and
10-23-based MNAzyme: 3’-CrUrGC-5’25,29,33). Encouragingly, a recent
study has demonstrated the potential of using miRNA for the self-
assembly of MNAzymes to achieve tumor-targeted delivery34. How-
ever, the investigation into the silencing of miRNA to further enhance
the therapeutic effect has been neglected. The lack of such research
represents a signiﬁcant gap in the current understanding of this
MNAzyme therapeutic concept, which therefore warrants further
exploration in future studies.
Therefore, designing an MNAzyme system for mild PTT that
considers the targeting effect of the cancer biomarker miRNA-21 and
further regulates both miRNA-2135 and HSP70 mRNA (substrate
sequence) could effectively overcome the off-target problem and
achieve a signiﬁcant synergistic PTT effect. Silencing miRNA-21 can
upregulate PTEN expression, which in turn sensitizes the tumor to
PTT10, while inhibiting HSP70 can directly reduce the tumor’s heat
resistance. Notably, hybridization between miRNA and the partzyme
target binding arm will silence the miRNA via a steric blocking function
rather than RNase H-dependent degradation process36,37. This silencing
mechanism ensures the stable structure of partzyme/miRNA and
guarantees the multiple-turnover substrate cleavage activity of
MNAzyme.
Meanwhile, poor oligonucleotide delivery efﬁciency and low
content of metal cofactors in tumor microenvironments also challenge
the activity of MNAzyme in vivo for cancer therapy38. As a result of the
rapid and thriving development of nanomedicine, metal ion cofactors
can be utilized for nanocarrier construction, with excellent particle
encapsulation efﬁciency achieved through electrostatic interactions
between the DNA phosphate backbone and mineral cofactors39,40. In
our case, to further enhance PTT sensitization, Ca2+ was chosen as a
cofactor to activate the MNAzyme system. Calcium ions can also
mediate mitochondrial calcium dysregulation, which disrupts the
mitochondrial structure and results in the inhibition of the HSP-
chaperone molecule ATP41.
Fig. 1 | Structures of MNAzymes. a 17E-based MNAzyme. b 10-23-based MNAzyme. c Common design for MNAzyme-based applications.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
2

In this work, we construct a miR-21-targeted MNAzyme-powered
HSP70 mRNA cleavage machinery to restrain HSP70 production
before PTT treatment. We fabricate a DSPE-PEG2k micelles modiﬁed
with the tumor-targeting peptide RGD for the coloading of the
mitochondrion-targeted PTT dye IR780 and the Ca2+ efﬂux pump
inhibition agent curcumin (abbreviated as RM(I+C)). The MNAzyme is
mineralized on the PEG layer of the micelle system using calcium
phosphate to form the ﬁnal nanodevice, RM(I+C)@CaP(P) (Fig. 2). After
cell internalization, CaP produce tremendous Ca2+ for lysosomal
escape. As a result, some enzymes consume miRNA-21 and self-
assemble into Ca2+-assisted MNAzyme-powered HSP70 mRNA silen-
cing machines in tumor tissues while retaining the HSP70 protection
effect in healthy tissues. The silencing of miRNA-21 causes PTEN
expression to be upregulated, which also sensitize the tumor tissues to
Fig. 2 | Illustration of four-step reactions after nanosystem fabrication and
delivery. (1): The MNAzyme will self-assemble on-site by consuming miRNA-21 and
Ca2+ ions and silencing HSP70 mRNA before photothermal therapy (PTT) treat-
ment. (2) Silencing miR-21 causes Phosphatase and TENsin homolog deleted on
chromosome 10 (PTEN) upregulation for PTT sensitization. (3) Ca2+ will be
absorbed by mitochondria, and curcumin will promote the further release of Ca2+
from the ERand inhibit the Ca2+ efﬂux pump. Mitochondrial calciﬁcation can reduce
HSP-chaperones adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production. (4): IR780 will target
mitochondria to achieve precise mild PTT treatment and produce ROS-mediated
photodynamic therapy.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
3

increase PTT efﬁciency. Further sensitization to IR780-mediated PTT is
accomplished through Ca2+-induced multichannel mitochondria dis-
ruption due to curcumin-mediated calcium efﬂux pump inhibition and
Ca2+ release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in cancer cells. The
addition of zinc prevents the phase transformation of amorphous CaP
to hydroxyapatite, enhancing the stability of the nanoformulations
during storage. Finally, we demonstrated the ability of the MNAzyme
system to selectively regulate tumor tissue and adjacent tissue in an
orthotopic pancreatic cancer model.
Results
To build a miR-21 responsive DNAzyme system for HSP70 mRNA
depletion, two common DNAzyme models (17E and 10-23) were
chosen. These two DNAzymes are substrate-universal and can be
tailored to recognize speciﬁc mRNAs by designing the substate arm
sequence42. Interestingly, the 17E DNAzyme was recently found to
be more active than the 10-23 DNAzyme when the same metal
cofactor at the same concentration was implemented43. The catalytic
ring structure of the 17E DNAzyme has also been fundamentally
studied (Fig. 3a, b), and the substitution of different sequence frag-
ments in the catalytic ring can affect the catalytic activity and
responsiveness of the DNAzyme to different metal ions. For instance,
3-base-pair replacements at the stem position (N3-N5, N9-N11), as well
as replacement of thymine (T) at the N12 position adenine (A), can
signiﬁcantly
enhance
the
Ca2+
afﬁnity
of
the
17E
DNAzyme
(Fig. 3c)32,44. Therefore, in this study, 17E DNAzyme was applied to
design an efﬁcient Ca2+-responsive MNAzyme dual-gene regulation
machine.
We ﬁrst designed the Ca2+-speciﬁc MNAzyme system by setting
the target sequence as one complementary to miRNA-21 (abbreviated
as T), while the substrate arm was engineered to match HSP70 mRNA
(abbreviated as S). The MNAzyme was split from the catalytic core and
divided into the right partzyme (abbreviated as R) and left partzyme
(abbreviated as L) (Fig. 3d). The NUPACK web application45 was utilized
to understand the possible reaction scenarios (Fig. 3e). From the ﬁnal
equilibrium system of the T + R + L system (each strand concentration
was set as T = 0.2 μM, R = 1 μM and L = 1 μM), T (miRNA-21) showed a
strong afﬁnity with R (right partzyme), which formed a 150 nM com-
plex; T and L (left partzyme) showed less combination efﬁciency (only
3 nM). Surprisingly, T, R and L formed a 47 nM MNAzyme system (T-R-
L). These simulation results unexpectedly indicated that the self-
building of MNAzyme consists of two processes: T and R achieve the
ﬁrst conjugation, and then L combines with the T-R complex to realize
the second step of MNAzyme construction. This step-by-step assembly
can theoretically enhance the utilization efﬁciency of miRNA-21 for
multiple-turnover cleavage of HSP70 mRNA in the case of low
Fig. 3 | Architecture of the Ca2+-responsive MNAzyme system for dual-gene
adjustment. a Secondary structure of the traditional 17E DNAzyme. b Variant
structures of the 17E DNAzyme. N’ represents the alternative site and can be an A, T,
G, or C deoxynucleotide. c Structure of the Ca2+-responsive 17E-based MNAzyme
system. d The ﬁnal MNAzyme system with high Ca2+ afﬁnity for miRNA-21 triggered
HSP70 mRNA cleavage. e The NUPACK web application simulated the equilibrium
concentration of each binding chance. f Twenty percent polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis experiments for different formulations. g Veriﬁcation of the Ca2+
concentration-dependent MNAzyme system. h Cancer biomarker response test.
i Construction logic of the cancer biomarker-responsive MNAzyme system. The
experiments in (f–h) were repeated three times independently with similar results.
PTT photothermal therapy, T target strand, R right partzyme, L left partzyme, S
substrate mRNA.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
4

partzyme content (Supplementary Fig. 1). Similarly, the T + R + S + L
reaction
simulation
results
(L = 1 μM,
R = 1 μM,
T = 0.2 μM
and
S = 4 μM) showed that the T-R-L system bound to the substrate S
sequence and formed a 44 nM (T-R-S-L) complex. Of note, the T-R-S-L
complex exhibited a lower free energy of secondary structure
(−38.96 kcal/mol) compared with that of the T-R-L system (−27.84 kcal/
mol), which revealed that the T-R-S-L structure was more stable
(Supplementary Fig. 1).
Then, the feasibility of MNAzyme-based dual-gene modulation
was evaluated in reality by 20% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(PAGE) tests (Fig. 3f). The individual L, R, S and T strands all showed
clear bands (Lanes 1, 2, 3 and 4), while an obvious new band appeared
upon incubation of L, R and T for 30 min at 37°C (L = 1 μM; R = 1 μM;
T = 0.2 μM, Lane 5). These results indicated that partzymes possessed
strong binding afﬁnity with miRNA-21, which facilitated efﬁcient
MNAzyme construction. For a deeper understanding of the multiple
turnover catalytic cleavage effect of the MNAzyme system on the
HSP70 substrate strand (S), we incubated excess S chain (4 μM) with
the abovementioned system, as revealed in Lane 6. A large amount of
unreacted S strand appeared at the top of the band (marked with a red
asterisk in Fig. 3f, Lane 6). Importantly, the S strand was not cleaved
due to the lack of catalysis by the metal ions in Lane 6. Subsequently,
when 10 mM Ca2+ was added to the system in Lane 7, the substrate
chain S was cleaved and disappeared, and a new band was formed from
the PAGE test result, as shown in Fig. 3f, Lane 7. These results
demonstrated that our designed partzymes could utilize 0.2 μM
miRNA to achieve Ca2+-mediated 4 μM HSP70 multiple-turnover clea-
vage and consume all miRNA-21 to achieve dual gene regulation.
To further verify the metal ion dependence of the partzyme sys-
tem, a substrate catalytic hydrolysis test was performed under differ-
ent Ca2+ concentrations for 4 h (Fig. 3g). L (1 μM) and R (1 μM) strands
together with 0.2 μM T strand were applied. We found that as the Ca2+
concentration increased from 0 to 50 mM, the content of substrate S
(4 μM) gradually decreased, and the product amount consistently
increased. Furthermore, the hydrolysis rate of substrate strand HSP70
mRNA reached saturation at~20 mMCa2+. These results reﬂected thata
high catalyst rate of the MNAzyme system could be guaranteed when
sufﬁcient calcium ions were present in the mRNA regulation system.
Ultimately, to demonstrate the cancer responsiveness of the
designed partzymes, i.e., their safety in healthy tissues, we carried out
another PAGE assessment to investigate the hydrolysis performance of
the MNAzyme system for HSP70 mRNA in the absence of miRNA-21
(with 50 mM Ca2+) (Fig. 3h). We observed that although in the presence
of sufﬁcient Ca2+, partzymes could not self-assemble into MNAzymes
to mediate the catalytic hydrolysis of HSP70 mRNA. Therefore, hypo-
thetically, when partzymes, Ca2+ and a photothermal therapeutic agent
(IR780) are simultaneously delivered to the tumor microenvironment
(TME),
the
partzymes
can
distinctively
self-assemble
into
an
MNAzyme-driven HSP70 mRNA-regulating machine in speciﬁc miRNA-
21-overexpressing pancreatic cancer cells. These processes avoid
hysteresis effects by preventing the generation of heat shock proteins
at the mRNA level before photothermal treatment. Moreover, during
the assembly process of MNAzymes, most of the miRNA-21 within the
TME will be consumed, thus realizing dual-gene regulation for both
the pathogenic gene miRNA-21 and the therapeutic stimulated gene
HSP70 (Fig. 3i).
The miRNA-21-dependent self-construction process of MNAzyme
and the speciﬁc gene cleaving function under Ca2+ triggering have
been veriﬁed, yet the intracellular activation of the MNAzyme system
suffers from poor cellular internalization and low cytoplasmic Ca2+
content (~0.1 μM)46. Therefore, a smart and robust partzyme delivery
strategy using Ca2+ as the multicargo carrier component to achieve
target site Ca2+ enhancement has been explored. Nanostructured
amorphous calcium phosphate (CaP) has been broadly investigated as
an excellent nuclear acid delivery system owing to its high afﬁnity for
the gene phosphate backbone (Fig. 4a)47, pH-responsive degradability
and sustained release performance48. However, amorphous calcium
phosphate (ACP) composed of Posner’s clusters (Ca9(PO4)6) is an
unstable precursor that can dissolve and renucleate as hydroxyapatite
(HA) within a few minutes in aqueous solution49,50, causing inefﬁcient
cargo delivery. To verify this phenomenon, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) was utilized to systematically observe the crystal
transformation of ACP, as shown in Fig. 4b. We found that the ACP was
a complete and smooth sphere with irregular channels on its surface
within 10 min of preparation. However, the storage of APC in Milli-Q
water resulted in the dissolution of ACP (>1 h), nucleation (>3 h) and
full crystallization to HA after 48 h. Moreover, we also found that this
crystal transformation process could take place in the cell culture
medium after 24 h of incubation and that the large size and irregular
needle-like shape structure made it difﬁcult to deliver nucleotide drugs
and even calcium ions into cells (Fig. 4c).
The zinc additive was found to stabilize the ACP phase for more
than 20 days when the Zn/Ca ratio was 10%51. In the reaction system in
which Zn2+ and Ca2+ existed simultaneously, the chemical reactions
followed the equations below52:
3Zn2 + + 2H2PO4
 $ Zn3ðPO4Þ2 + 4H +
ð1Þ
3Ca2 + + 2H2PO4
 $ Ca3ðPO4Þ2 + 4H +
ð2Þ
Ca2 + + 2Zn2 + + 2H2PO4
 ! CaZn2ðPO4Þ2 # + 4H +
ð3Þ
In this way, highly stable ACP NPs were fabricated, as depicted in
Fig. 4d, which contributed to the mechanism by which smaller zinc
ions can easily replace Ca2+ in ACP and inhibit crystallization by dis-
torting atomic order and reducing ACP solubility51. To assess the
content of Ca2+ and DNAzymes, we used two different assay kits to
measure the concentrations of Ca2+ and Zn2+ ions within the nanosys-
tem, and we found the concentration of zinc ions to be 196 μg and the
concentration of calcium ions to be 1280 μg within 3.5 mg Zn-doped
CaP NPs.
Nevertheless, Zn2+-substituted APC NPs did not possess cancer
cell-enhanced endocytosis, and surface pores were reduced by the
tight cooperation between zinc and phosphate ions, resulting in the
inability to load multiple therapeutics. To resolve the abovementioned
difﬁculties, RGD-modiﬁed DSPE-PEG amphiphilic micelles (RM) were
used as the synthesis template of Zn2+-doped CaP since the negatively
charged oxygen atom of the CH2-O-CH2 group in PEG can attract Ca2+
or Zn2+ through electrostatic attraction (Fig. 4e)53. Meanwhile, the
micelles can be loaded with multiple hydrophobic drugs, and RGD can
realize cancer cell targeting54.
We ﬁrst synthesized IR780/Cur-loaded micelles, and a spherical
structure of ~50 nm could be seen under TEM (Fig. 4f, RM(I+C)). During
preparation, we found that 50 mg of DSPE-PEG-RGD could carry up to
7.98 mg of IR780 and 2.06 mg of Cur. (Tables S1 and S2). To achieve
the optimal synergistic treatment ratio of both drugs after being loa-
ded by the nanosystem, the loading weight ratio of IR780:Cur (mg) was
adjusted to 0:2, 0.5:2, 1:2, 2:2, 4:2, and 8:2 to calculate the coefﬁcient of
drug interaction (CDI)55,56. The calculation was based on the WST-1
absorbance results, which compared the viability of cells after treat-
ment with different drug ratios of nanoparticles. The equation is as
follows:
CDI = AB=ðA × BÞ
ð4Þ
where AB is the absorbance of the combination groups to the control
group, while A or B is the absorbance of the single-agent group to the
control group (CDI > 1, =1, <1 indicates antagonism, additivity and
synergism). In accordance with the WST-1 results, a 4:2 ratio (4 mg
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
5

IR780 and 2 mg Cur within 50 mg DSPE-PEG-RGD) exhibited the best
CDI = 0.52 (Tables S3 and S4).
After attaining the proper drug loading, we further determined
the optimum dose of partzyme, and PO4
2−, Zn2+ and Ca2+ were utilized
to mineralize partzyme (P), as shown in Fig. 4f, RM(I+C)@CaP(p). For
silencing miRNA-21 in pancreatic cancer cell lines, it has been reported
that the concentration of miRNA-21 antisense oligonucleotides needs
to reach 100 nM to achieve a signiﬁcant gene-silencing effect57,58.
Hence, the therapeutic concentration of partzyme, which also serves
as a miRNA silencing agent, should also reach 100 nM. To conﬁrm the
efﬁcient partzyme loading content of our designed nanosystem, we
carried out a gradient partzyme loading test (Supplementary Fig. 2).
Left and right partzymes were labeled with Cy3 and mixed with 1 ml
RM(I+C) solution (one/tenth upper-mentioned micelle volume, which
contained 0.4 mg IR780 and 0.2 mg Cur) to yield different con-
centrations of each partzyme (1, 10, 50, 100, and 200 μM). After
Fig. 4 | Construction, drug loading and photothermal characterization of the
designed nanosystem. a Schematic illustration of the DNA and CaP biominer-
alization process. b Degradation process of CaP in Milli-Q aqueous solution. c Panc-
1 cells were incubated with APC nanoparticles for 24 h. d Stability for Zn-substituted
CaP in Milli-Q aqueous solution. e Interaction between PEG and Ca2+ and Zn2+.
Carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms are labeled with black, red, and white,
respectively. f TEM images of RM(I+C) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p). g Size distribution of
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs within 2 weeks and zeta potential results for RM(I+C), Zn-doped
CaP and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (n = 3 independent experiments, and the data are pre-
sented as the mean values ± SDs). h FTIR results for Zn-substituted CaP and
RM@CaP. i Photothermal heating curves of RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs with different
concentrations of IR780. j The infrared thermal images correspond with photo-
thermal heating curves. k Temperature elevation of RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs over four
rounds of NIR on–off irradiation cycles. l Photobleaching effects of pure drug and
nanoparticles after three rounds of laser irradiation (n = 3 independent experi-
ments, and the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs). m Drug-releasing
capacity of RM(I+C)@CaP(p) under different situations (n = 3 independent experi-
ments and the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs). n Cleavage capacity of
HSP70 mRNA after partzyme release from different environments. All statistics
were calculated using two-tailed paired t tests, and the experiments in (b–d, f, n)
were repeated three times independently with similar results. The source data from
(g, h, I, k, i, m) are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
6

calcium phosphate mineralization, we found that all partzymes were
centrifuged to the bottom of the tube (even when the content was as
high as 200 μM), and there was no leakage of partzyme after several
washes with Milli-Q water. Therefore, the system had excellent part-
zyme encapsulation efﬁciency and eliminated the burst release phe-
nomenon of oligonucleotides through a rational biomineralization
process to easily achieve a 100 nM therapeutic concentration.
To further demonstrate the successful synthesis of
RM(I+C),
CaP(p) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p), dynamic light scattering (DLS) and Fourier
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were used to characterize
the particle size, zeta potential and characteristic chemical bond of
the nanocarrier. The particle size analysis revealed that RM(I+C) pos-
sessed a similar average diameter as RM(I+C)@CaP(p), at ~100 ± 15 nm
(Supplementary Fig. 3), which was larger than the TEM results
(~50 nm) due to the aqueous layer out of the DLS specimen59.
Notably, RM(I+C)@CaP(p) was found to be very stable (with the same
size) in aqueous solution for more than 2 weeks (Fig. 4g), suggesting
that this nanosystem possessed excellent stability, which may have
occurred through a combination of zinc-additive and steric repulsion
forces between the PEG chains. Additionally, in PBS buffer at pH = 7.4
(Fig. 4g), RM(I+C) was observed to have a zeta potential of −10.21 mV,
which may have been attributable to the carboxyl groups on RGD.
Furthermore, the Zn2+-substituted CaP(p) showed a strong positive
charge (10.01 mV). Through the elemental mapping experiment, we
found that the Zn ions and calcium ions were distributed throughout
the NPs; hence, the positive charge may have been due to the
uncoordinated calcium and zinc ions on its surface (Supplementary
Fig. 4). Finally, we found that the ﬁnal formulation RM(I+C)@CaP(p)
exhibited −2.53 mV, which might have been caused by the outermost
exposed RGD that renders the formulation slightly electronegative.
Based on the aforementioned results, we conducted stability
assessments on the ﬁnal formulation of our nanomaterial in accor-
dance with the guidelines provided by the International Council for
Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for
Human Use (ICH) Supplementary Table S5. We investigated the sta-
bility of the formulation at refrigerator temperature (4–8 °C) and
under accelerated conditions at 40 °C, by following with the ICH
guidelines, speciﬁcally ICH Q1A(R2) for long-term stability testing.
The results of these stability studies indicated that there was no
signiﬁcant increase (p > 0.05) in particle size or polydispersity index
(PDI) throughout the 3-month experimental period.
The FT-IR spectrum of DSPE-PEG-COOH reﬂected an absorbance
band at 1738 cm−1, corresponding to the –COOH groups60. After RGD
modiﬁcation, there was a newly formed band at 1657 cm−1 belonging to
the O=C-N-H group between PEG and RGD connections within
micelles60. Subsequently, the micelles were coated by CaP, and the
band at 1657 cm−1 was also found in the RM(I+C)@CaP group compared
with the pure CaP group. These results together demonstrated the
successful incorporation of CaP nanoparticles with the DSPE-PEG-RGD
micelles (Fig. 4h).
IR780, as a PTT and PDT agent, suffers from poor aqueous solu-
bility and high photobleaching properties and was protected inside
micelles in this study for higher drug loading content and enhanced
therapeutic effects. To examine the photothermal conversion prop-
erties of the ﬁnal formulation, RM(I+C)@CaP(p), which contains different
concentrations of IR780 (0, 2, 5, 50, 100 μg/ml), was irradiated with an
808 nm laser (1 W cm−2) for 300 s (Fig. 4i). The corresponding infrared
photos are shown in Fig. 4j. The results showed that the photothermal
conversion properties of RM(I+C)@CaP(p) displayed a positive correla-
tion with the NP concentration. The solution temperature increased by
up to 20 °C when only 5 μg/ml IR780 NPs were irradiated for 5 min
(Fig. 4i, j), while pure water did not increase the temperature.
Furthermore, the photothermal conversion efﬁciency (η) of pure
IR780, RM(I+C) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs was also studied through NIR
heating-cooling cycles (1.0 W cm−2, 808 nm) with 50 μg/ml IR780
(Fig. 4k). (η) was calculated by following Eqs. (5) and (6)59:
η = hsΔTmax  Q
Ið1  10A808Þ
ð5Þ
Here, ΔTmax is the maximum temperature change value, while Q is the
solvent increased heat, I is the power of the laser, A808 is the absorbance
of the NPs at a wavelength of 808 nm, and hs is deﬁned by another
formula:
hs = mc
τ
ð6Þ
in which m and c are the speciﬁc heatcapacity and mass of the solution,
respectively, while τ is the slope of the ﬁtted line of time to ln
ΔT
ΔTmax.
The photothermal conversion efﬁciency of the pure drug was only
23.70% (Supplementary Fig. 5) due to the poor stability of IR780 in
aqueous solution. In contrast, the η of RM(I+C) was converted up to
29.25% (Supplementary Fig. 6), which demonstrated that the micelle
could prevent IR780 degradation. Surprisingly, the Zn2+-containing
dense CaP mineralization layer further improved the η of IR780
(33.70%, Supplementary Fig. 7), indicating that the ﬁnal formulation
signiﬁcantly improved the photothermal stability of IR780. Further-
more, the photobleaching efﬁciency was additionally evaluated for the
abovementioned IR780, RM(I+C) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups (Fig. 4l).
After three cycles of irradiation (1 W cm−2, 5 min, 808 nm), free
IR780 showed an ~80% decrease in absorbance at 780 nm, illustrating
that free IR780 was rapidly degraded. Conversely, RM(I+C) reﬂected a
41% decrease in absorbance, and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) showed only a 23%
decrease after 3 cycles of irradiation. Hence, compared with RM(I+C),
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) realized an effective photothermal conversion ability
of IR780.
To further estimate the pH-responsive drug release capacity,
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs (containing 0.4 mg of IR780, 0.2 mg of Cur and
200 μM partzyme) were subjected to release tests by dialysis mem-
branes. Since IR780 generates heat under laser irradiation, it will
promote the diffusion of drug molecules from the material, so dif-
ferent drug release environments with pH and temperature were
designed (pH = 7, 37 °C; pH = 7, 45 °C; pH = 6, 37 °C; pH = 6, 45 °C).
Therapeutic agents were observed through UV–visible spectroscopy
at 780, 425 and 560 nm (Supplementary Fig. 8). We observed that at
45 °C, there was an increased release of the drug. Approximately 35%
IR780 and 43% Cur were released at pH = 6 and 45 °C, whereas only
9% IR780 and 14% Cur were released at pH = 6 and 37 °C. A similar
phenomenon was also found in the pH = 7 group. More than 20%
IR780 and 30% curcumin were released at pH = 7 and 45 °C. However,
less than 5% of IR780 and 10% of curcumin were released at pH = 7
at 37 °C.
Furthermore, we observed a pronounced pH-responsive release
proﬁle for partzymes since CaP possessed excellent pH-sensitive
degradation performance, and more than 90% of the partzyme was
released from the system after 4 h incubation at pH = 6 (Fig. 4m,
partzyme). However, the degradation of CaP did not mediate sig-
niﬁcant release of Cur and IR780 at pH 6 compared to partzymes
loaded in the CaP shell, reﬂecting that IR780 and Cur were loaded
mainly inside the micelles. Subsequently, 1 μl of released medium from
each group was further incubated with 1 μl of miRNA-21 (10 μM) and
2 μl of HSP70 mRNA (10 μM). We found that the released media in the
pH = 6 groups efﬁciently cleaved HSP70 (Fig. 4n). Rapid release of
partzymes ensured silencing of HSP70 before PTT treatment and
prevented the previously mentioned hysteretic effect.
Given the successful design and construction of the dual-gene
regulation MNAzyme system and the productive fabrication of the RM(I
+C)@CaP(p) nanovector with high partzyme loading and excellent
aqueous stability, we next closely investigated the biocompatibility of
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
7

the carrier system by testing the toxicity of the pure nanocarrier and
laser to the normal human dermal ﬁbroblast NFDH cell line (Supple-
mentary Fig. 9). We found that pure nanovehicle RM@CaP at a max-
imum concentration of 40.5 μg/ml (which could carry 6 μg/ml IR780
and 3 μg/ml curcumin) was not toxic to healthy cells. Hence, based on
the results in Supplementary Table S3, at effective therapeutic con-
centrations for PANC-1 cells (IR780: 4 μg/ml, Cur: 2 μg/ml), pure car-
riers should have negligible side effects. In addition, NFDH cells were
irradiated with an 808 nm laser at different laser intensities (0, 0.5, 1,
1.5 and 2 W cm−2), and it was found that a pure laser did not inhibit the
growth of healthy cells (Supplementary Fig. 9). These results suggest
that the RM@CaP system holds good biocompatibility and that the
laser power we selected is safe for healthy cells.
Next, the cellular uptake of the pure drug, M(I+C)@CaP(p) and
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups by PANC-1 cells and the healthy control cell
line NHDF (after 1 h and 8 h incubation) was observed by tracking the
ﬂuorescence of IR780 (red), Cy3-modiﬁed partzymes (green) and Cur
(light blue) via confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and ﬂow
cytometry (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Figs. 10–12). The therapeutic
concentrations were as follows: IR780: 4 μg/ml, Cur: 2 μg/ml and
partzyme: 2 μM. In the case of PANC-1 cells, the results revealed that
the uptake content of each therapeutic agent gradually increased
with the extension of the incubation time (Supplementary Figs. 10
and 5a). After 8 h of incubation with the pure drug group, IR780 and
Cur were pronounced diffused into PANC-1 cells, while Cy3-labeled
partzyme
exhibited
no
internalization.
However,
for
the
M(I
+C)@CaP(p) group, IR780, Cur and Cy3-labeled partzyme were all
endocytosed, which proved that the nanocarrier could ensure the
internalization of partzyme. Meanwhile, after the decoration of RGD
on top of the nanosystem, the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group exhibited 2.2
times higher uptake efﬁciency than the M(I+C)@CaP(p) group, which
reﬂected that RGD, as a tumor-targeting tripeptide, could promote
the endocytosis of NPs by pancreatic cancer PANC-1 cells. Inductively
coupled plasma‒optical emission spectrometry (ICP‒OES) results
indicated that the calcium ion concentration in the cancer cells was
~240 parts per million (ppm), which was sufﬁcient to activate MNA-
zymes (Supplementary Fig. 10).
In contrast, for NHDF cells, the pure drug, M(I+C)@CaP(p) and RM(I
+C)@CaP(p) groups all showed negligible uptake after 1 h of treatment
(Supplementary Fig. 11). Meanwhile, only sporadic drug ﬂuorescence
signals were exhibited for the M(I+C)@CaP(p) and
RM(I+C)@CaP(p)
groups after 8 h of incubation (Supplementary Fig. 12). These phe-
nomena may be attributable to the weaker uptake capacities of normal
cells41. The surface modiﬁcation of RGD did not promote the ingestion
of NPs by healthy NHDFs.
Having determined that the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group could effec-
tively deliver multiple cargoes into PANC-1 cells, we explored the
intracellular endosomal escape. For both groups, after NPs and cells
were cultured together for 2 h and 24 h, the cell media were replaced,
and a 1 W laser was applied for 5 min. Here, IR780 is presented in red,
and the lysosome is labeled in green. Pearson correlation coefﬁcients
(PCCs) were utilized to determine whether the two colors colocalized
(>0.5
indicates
moderate
correlation;
<0.5
indicates
low
correlation)61,62. After 2 h of treatment with RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs without
laser irradiation, we found that the red ﬂuorescence (IR780) over-
lapped well with the green ﬂuorescence of lysosomes (Fig. 5b). In
addition, the PCC was calculated as 0.673 (higher than 0.5), demon-
strating the colocalization of IR780 and lysosomes. After 1 W cm−2
808 nm laser irradiation for 5 min, the PCC number dropped to 0.582
but still showed a colocalized effect. For the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs after
24 h of treatment, lower overlap between IR780 and lysosomes was
observed, and the PCC value was 0.454. Notably, there was almost no
overlap between red and green ﬂuorescence after laser irradiation
(PCC = 0.413), conﬁrming that the therapeutic agents could efﬁciently
escape from the lysosome.
After validating that the therapeutics could be efﬁciently deliv-
ered to the cytoplasm, we further studied the functional performance
of each nanosystem component (MNAzyme, IR780, Cur and Ca2+) in
PANC-1 cells. For the MNAzyme system, self-assembly into MNAzyme
should be achieved by the released partzymes and endogenously
overexpressed miRNA-21, which then autocatalytically trigger its sub-
strate (HSP70 mRNA) cleavage function with the assistance of Ca2+
(Fig. 5c). Subsequently, the silencing of miRNA-21 can mediate the
increased expression of the tumor suppressor protein PTEN, while the
HSP70 protein should be downregulated after HSP70 mRNA cleavage.
Based on the above assumptions, to verify that the partzymes
could bind to intracellular miRNA-21, the ﬂuorescence in situ hybridi-
zation (FISH) method was used to observe intracellular free miRNA-21
(Fig. 5d). Four groups, including the PBS, IR780+Cur, RM(I+C)@CaP
(without partzymes) and
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (with partzymes) groups,
were used, and endogenous miRNA-21 was labeled red. From the
results, we observed that the PBS groups exhibited tremendous Cy5.5
ﬂuorescence (miRNA), while when IR780 and curcumin were added,
the ﬂuorescence intensity of miRNA decreased by nearly 32%. It has
been reported that curcumin can regulate a variety of miRNAs
(including miRNA-21) in other cancer cell lines63. Hence, curcumin
could also inhibit endogenous miRNA-21 in the PANC-1 cell line. Of
note, during the experiments, all the therapeutics containing cell cul-
ture medium were replaced at the 6 h timepoint, which resulted in a
shorter intracellular retention time for the pure drug, while the
nanosystem promoted the retention time and therapeutic efﬁciency of
Cur. As a result, the red ﬂuorescence intensity in the RM(I+C)@CaP
group was decreased by ~76%. More interestingly, from the results of
the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group, the red ﬂuorescence intensity was reduced
almost to zero, indicating that the partzyme system could efﬁciently
utilize miRNA-21 and ensure MNAzyme formation.
Subsequently, to explore whether MNAzyme can effectively
downregulate the expression of HSP70 protein and mediate the
increasein the expression of PTEN protein in PANC-1 cells, western blot
experiments were performed, and the relative HSP70/GAPDH and
PTEN/GAPDH ratios were calculated with ImageJ, as shown in Fig. 5e.
For the HSP70 protein, compared with | PBS (1 and 2), we found that
IR780+Cur with laser treatment (4) signiﬁcantly upregulated HSP70
expression (1.8 times), which indicates that PTT can activate HSP70 to
protect cells from thermal stress64. Surprisingly, for the RM(I+C)@CaP
groups (5 and 6), the expression of HSP70 was downregulated by
nearly 40% (-laser) and 20% (+laser). It has been reported that the
generation of HSPs highly depends on ATP production8,9. Since our
nanosystem will trigger multichannel Ca2+ ions inside cells to cause
mitochondrial calcium overload (Figs. 6 and 7), ATP production by
damaged mitochondria should decline and lead to a decrease in HSP70
content. Ultimately, from the results of the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups with
partzymes 7 and 8, the HSP70 gene was fully eliminated for both the
±laser groups, suggesting the effective HSP70 mRNA cleavage function
of the MNAzyme system.
PTEN protein expression should be upregulated owing to the
silencing of miRNA-21. From the results, compared with the PBS
groups (1 and 2), the pure drug groups (3 and 4) showed slight upre-
gulation of PTEN expression due to the inhibitory effect of curcumin.
Meanwhile, the relative ratio of PTEN/GAPDH for the RM(I+C)@CaP
groups (5 and 6) was ~2 times higher than that of the PBS groups, which
might have been caused by the long-term Cur-mediated decrease in
miRNA-21. Furthermore, for the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups (7 and 8), a
signiﬁcant increase in the PTEN/GAPDH relative ratio (3 times higher
than that of the PBS groups) was observed, demonstrating the miRNA-
21 silencing effect of the MNAzyme system.
Considering that the MNAzyme system has a targeted therapeutic
effect on cancer cells, we further investigated MNAzyme function in
healthy NFDH cells in eight groups. The FISH method was ﬁrst utilized
to compare the miRNA-21 content between NFDH cells and PANC-1
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
8

cells (Supplementary Fig. 13). The green ﬂuorescence in NFDH cells
was clearly ~7 times weaker than that in PANC-1 cells, indicating that
partzymes might not effectively use miRNA-21 to construct the MNA-
zyme system. Moreover, due to the absence of RGD receptors on the
surfaces of healthy cells, the construction of the MNAzyme system was
hampered by both poor partzyme delivery efﬁciency and the absence
of miRNA-21, which could not further regulate the expression of HSP70
proteins. (Supplementary Fig. 14). Western blotting was then applied
Fig. 5 | Therapeutic delivery by nanosystems and the intracellular function of
the MNAzyme. a Uptake of pure drug, M(I+C)@CaP(p) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups by
PANC-1 cells (n = 3 independent experiments, and the data are presented as the
mean values ± SDs). b Lysosomal escape proﬁles of RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups (±Laser)
by PANC-1 cells at 2 h and 24 h. The Pearson value Rcoloc was calculated by using
ImageJ with the Coloc 2 plugin. c The schematic diagram depicts the intracellular
self-assembly of the MNAzyme system for regulating the protein expression of
PTEN and HSP70. d Intracellular miRNA-21 content was determined by the ﬂuor-
escence in situ hybridization (FISH) method (n = 3 independent experiments and
the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs). e The expression of HSP70 and
PTEN protein was evaluated by western blotting. The ﬁnal concentrations of the
components in the different groups were as follows: IR780: 4 μg/ml, Cur: 2 μg/ml,
each partzyme: 2 μM) (n = 3 independent experiments, and the data are presented
as the mean values ± SDs). Groups 1–8 represent the following: 1: PBS, 2: PBS +Laser,
3: I + C, 4: I + C +Laser, 5: RM(I+C)@CaP, 6: RM(I+C)@CaP +Laser, 7: RM(I+C)@CaP(p), and
8: RM(I+C)@CaP(p) +Laser. All statistics were calculated using two-tailed paired
t tests, and the experiments in (a, b, d, e) were repeated three times independently
with similar results. The source data from (a, d, e) are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
9

to test the generation of HSP70 in NFDH cells. The results showed that
IR780 + Cur + laser (4) increased HSP70 expression by 2 times com-
pared with that in the PBS group, while RM(I+C)@CaP + laser (6) and RM(I
+C)@CaP(p) + laser (8) increased the HSP70/GAPDH relative ratio by 3.4
times (Supplementary Fig. 14), demonstrating that the nanosystem did
not affect the thermal protection mechanism of healthy cells.
After conﬁrming the cancer-speciﬁc dual-gene regulatory cap-
ability of the MNAzyme system, we further studied subcellular-based
ion therapy with our nanoplatform in PANC-1 cells. Multidimensional
mitochondrial therapeutics was realized through the following syner-
gistic mechanisms: (1) IR780 targeted mitochondria to generate PTT
and PDT therapy; (2) CaP-composed nanocarriers released tre-
mendous amounts of Ca2+, mediating intramitochondrial Ca2+ over-
load; and (3) Cur further promoted the release of Ca2+ from the ER and
inhibited Ca2+ efﬂux pumps in cancer cells.
We ﬁrst veriﬁed the mitochondria-targeted therapy with IR780
through CLSM, as shown in Fig. 6a. Eight groups, including PBS ±Laser,
I + C ±Laser, M(I+C)@CaP(p) (without RGD) ±Laser and RM(I+C)@CaP(p)
(with RGD) ±Laser, were established and marked as 1 to 8. The laser
groups were under 1 W cm−2 808 nm irradiation for 5 min. IR780
exhibited red ﬂuorescence, and mitochondria were marked in green.
As expected, IR780 colocalized with mitochondria in each treatment
Fig. 6 | Multidimensional mitochondrial therapeutics mediated by IR780, Cur
and Ca2+. a Colocalization between IR780 and mitochondria. b 1O2 generation
capability of each treatment group (n = 3 independent experiments, and the data
are presented as the mean values ± SDs). c Ca2+ concentration level visualization by
using Fluo-3 AM as a labeling dye (n = 3 independent experiments and the data are
presented as the mean values ± SDs). d ΔΨm detection by tracking of the JC-1
monomer and aggregates through CLSM. e Relative ﬂuorescence intensity of JC-1
signals for each group as calculated by ImageJ. The eight groups are labeled from 1
to 8, including PBS (1), PBS +Laser (2), IR780+Cur (3), IR780+Cur +Laser (4),
M(I+C)@CaP(p) (5), M(I+C)@CaP(p) +Laser (6), RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (7) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p)
+Laser (8). The ﬁnal concentrations of the components in the different groups were
as follows: IR780: 4 μg/ml, Cur: 2 μg/ml, and each partzyme: 2 μM (n = 3 indepen-
dent experiments, and the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs). All sta-
tistics were calculated using two-tailed paired t tests, and the experiments in (a–d)
were repeated three times independently with similar results. The source data from
(b, c, e) are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
10

group. Compared with those of the PBS and pure drug groups (groups
1–4), the green ﬂuorescence signals of the M(I+C)@CaP(p) group with-
out laser (5) were decreased, which might have been caused by Ca2+-
mediated mitochondria disruption. M(I+C)@CaP(p) +Laser (6) showed
less green signal than (5) due to the synergistic effect of IR780 and
calcium overload. In contrast, after modiﬁcation with RGD, the RM(I
+C)@CaP(p) ±Laser group (7 and 8) exhibited the least green ﬂuores-
cence, indicating the most severe mitochondrial damage caused by
RGD-mediated
enhanced
endocytosis
of
the
nanosystem
by
cancer cells.
In addition, the intracellular 1O2 generation capability was also
monitored to investigate the PDT effect of IR780. The same groups
mentioned above were implemented, and the ROS were tracked with
2′,7′-dichloroﬂuorescein diacetate (which emits a green signal after
oxidation by 1O2), as depicted in Fig. 6b. All +Laser treatment groups
produced observable 1O2 upon laser irradiation for 5 min (808 nm
1.0 W cm−2). We found that the pure drug I + C +Laser group (4) showed
less relative ﬂuorescence intensity, which was due to poor drug sta-
bilization and solubility in the cell culture medium. The RM(I+C)@CaP(p)
+Laser group (8) produced the strongest green signal; comparatively,
only 75% of the relative ﬂuorescence intensity in the M(I+C)@CaP(p)
+Laser group (6) was found, which was calculated by ImageJ, reﬂecting
the enhanced therapeutic effect mediated by RGD decoration.
Later, Ca2+-based ion therapy was further studied by using Fluo-3
AM (green ﬂuorescence) to visualize intracellular Ca2+ via CLSM, and
the relative intensity of Ca2+ was calculated with ImageJ (Fig. 6c). The
same groups were selected, and an 808 nm 1 W cm−2 laser was chosen
for 5 min. As expected, a noticeable increase in Ca2+ concentration was
Fig. 7 | Mitochondrial morphology changes and the apoptosis mechanism.
a Bio-TEM image for mitochondrial morphology observation. b Western blot
experiments for apoptosis-related protein detection. Eight groups (1–8) were tes-
ted, including the PBS, PBS +Laser, I + C, I + C +Laser, RM(I+C)@CaP, RM(I+C)@CaP
+Laser, RM(I+C)@CaP(p) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) +Laser groups. (n = 3 independent
experiments). c The relative ratio of each protein was calculated with ImageJ (n = 3
independent experiments, and the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs).
d Apoptosis analysis of PANC-1 cells under Annexin V-APC/PI staining. (mP means
mutated partzyme, which can only target miRNA but cannot achieve HSP70 silence;
all groups were under laser irradiation). All statistics were calculated using two-
tailed paired t tests, and all experiments (a, b, d) were repeated three times inde-
pendently with similar results. The source data from (b, c) are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
11

found in the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) ±Laser groups (7 and 8), indicating the
high efﬁciency of our designed nanoplatform for inducing mitochon-
drial Ca2+ overload. Meanwhile, compared with M(I+C)@CaP(p) ±Laser (5
and 6), Groups 7 and 8 showed 2 times higher Ca2+ relative intensity
levels, and the increases were attributable to the RGD-mediated
enhancement of the endocytosis effect. In addition, with the assistance
of curcumin, the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group showed an excellent plasma
membrane calcium pump (PMCA ATPase) silencing effect and
achieved higher Ca2+ levels than the group without Cur (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 15), indicating the synergistic function of curcumin and Ca2+-
containing nanocarriers.
Mitochondrial transmembrane potential (ΔΨm) represents the
hyperpolarization/depolarization of mitochondria. To ascertain that
the mitochondria experienced a disruption effect from our designed
nanosystem, JC-1 dye was further employed as a sensor (JC-1 aggre-
gates exhibit a red signal for healthy cells with high ΔΨm, and the JC-1
monomer exhibits a green signal for damaged cells with low ΔΨm).
The same groups were used as elucidated in Fig. 6d, and the relative
signal intensities of aggregates and monomers were calculated by
ImageJ (Fig. 6e). After laser irradiation for 5 min (808 nm 1.0 W cm−2),
compared with the PBS group (1 and 2), the I + C +Laser group (4)
showed 1.5 times higher green ﬂuorescence, suggesting a decrease in
ΔΨm. In contrast, the 2-fold higher monomer content in the
M(I+C)@CaP(p) +Laser group (6) suggested synergistic mitochondrial
damage by IR780 and Ca2+ overload. Surprisingly, with RGD decora-
tion, the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) ±Laser group (7 and 8) showed 3.16 and 3.6
times higher monomer signals, respectively, indicating that RGD
modiﬁcation signiﬁcantly enhanced the therapeutic efﬁciency of the
pure drug and efﬁciently mitigated mitochondrial dysfunction by
inducing the synergistic effect of PDT/PTT and Ca2+ overload.
Later, to directly observe the mitochondrial morphology changes,
bio-TEM was used to analyze each aforesaid group, and the inclusions
inside mitochondria were marked with a red star (Fig. 7a). In general, a
higher energy requirement for cancer cells results in more mito-
chondria with abundant cristae. As expected, we found tremendous
amounts of mitochondria with dense cristae in PANC-1 cells in the PBS
± Laser groups. In addition, mild mitochondrial destruction (slight
swelling) was observed in the I + C +Laser groups, while the therapeutic
effect was not prominent. Of note, noticeable mitochondrial swelling
and cavitation effects were detected in the M(I+C)@CaP(p) +Laser
groups, which proved that the nanosystem could signiﬁcantly enhance
mitochondrial dysfunction through IR780 and superabundant cal-
cium. It is worth mentioning that with RGD modiﬁcation, negligible
cristae were found in the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group, suggesting that RGD
mediated enhanced curative efﬁciency.
MNAzyme-mediated enhanced photothermal therapy and Ca2+
overload treatment increased mitochondrial permeability, resulting in
the release of Cyto-C and ﬁnally activating Caspase-3 to mediate
apoptosis. The apoptosis mechanism was investigated through wes-
tern blot experiments (Fig. 7b), and the relative ratio of each protein
was calculated by ImageJ (Fig. 7c). From the results, compared with the
PBS group (1 and 2), the I + C +Laser group (4) showed a slight increase
in Cyto-C, which reﬂected inefﬁcient damage to mitochondria. In
contrast, the RM(I+C)@CaP +Laser group (6) showed ~1.5 times higher
Cyto-C release than the I + C +Laser group (4), which was related to
enhanced mitochondrial calcium overload. Importantly, due to the
MNAzyme-mediated PTT-enhancing effect, the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) +Laser
treatment (8) greatly led to the release of Cyto-C from mitochondria
into the cytoplasm (2.5 times higher than that in the PBS group), which
mediated pro-caspase cleavage, and cleaved caspase-3 was found at up
to 3 times higher levels than that in the PBS group, as shown in Fig. 7c.
Therefore, the
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) nanosystem efﬁciently upregulated
apoptosis-related proteins, resulting in signiﬁcant apoptosis.
Based on the aforementioned experiments, we successfully vali-
dated the upregulation effect of the nanosystem on PTEN, the
silencing effect on HSP70, and the calciﬁcation effecton mitochondria.
Given ample evidence that these rationally designed nanoformulations
can achieve excellent cancer therapy, we further investigated their
multiple synergistic effects through WST-1 and ﬂow cytometry for
both the NHDF and PANC-1 cell lines (Supplementary Figs. 16–17 and
7d). Different groups, including PBS, I + C,
RM(I+C)@CaP (without
partzymes),
RM(I+C)@CaP
(with
mutated
partzymes)
and
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (with partzymes), were implemented under laser irra-
diation at 808 nm and 1 W cm−2 for 5 min. The mutated partzyme can
only bind with miRNA-21 but cannot recognize HSP70. The ﬁnal con-
centrations in the different groups were IR780: 4 μg/ml, Cur: 2 μg/ml,
and partzyme: 2 μM. After 24 h of treatment, compared with the PBS
group, the pure drug I + C group showed ~20% inhibition of healthy
NHDFs.
However,
the
RM(I+C)@CaP,
RM(I+C)@CaP(mP)
and
RM(I
+C)@CaP(p) groups exhibited almost no killing effect on healthy NHDFs
due to less NP endocytosis and the miRNA-21 targeting effect of the
MNAzyme system (Supplementary Fig. 16). For PANC-1 cancer cells,
compared with the PBS group, the pure drug I + C group exhibited an
~48% inhibitory effect. However, 63% of the cancer cells were inhibited
in the RM(I+C)@CaP group, which suggested that Ca2+ enhanced the
mitochondrial dysfunction effect. Approximately 75% of cells were
inhibited in the RM(I+C)@CaP(mP) group (Supplementary Fig. 17), indi-
cating that the MNAzyme system boosted cancer therapy through
miRNA-21 silencing. Of note, almost 90% of the cancer cells were
inhibited in the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group, which revealed that the part-
zyme could achieve both miRNA and HSP70 regulation and realize an
excellent synergistic effect.
From the apoptosis assay results, within 8 h of treatment
(IR780: 2 μg/ml, Cur: 1 μg/ml, partzyme: 1 μM), ~13.3% of the cells in
the pure drug I + C group had entered the late apoptotic phase,
while the percentage was 26.0% for the
RM(I+C)@CaP group,
reﬂecting Ca2+-mediated synergistic ion therapy. Moreover, 50.8%
of the cells in the RM(I+C)@CaP(mP) group were shown to enter the
late apoptotic state (Fig. 7d), which indicates the existence of a
synergistic effect through mutated partzyme-based miRNA regula-
tion. Finally, for the ﬁnal formulation, 84.5% of the cells entered the
late apoptotic phase, which was attributed to the MNAzyme-
enhanced PTT, PTEN regulation, PDT and Ca2+ overload. The gat-
ing/sorting strategies are shown in Supplementary Fig. 18.
Encouraged by the selective suppressing ability and excellent
biocompatibility in vitro, we further explored the performance of each
nanosystem in vivo, which was approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee, Zhejiang Center of Laboratory Animals
(Approval No. ZJCLA-IACUC-20020090). A pancreatic orthotopic
tumor model was constructed by injecting 107 PANC-1-luc cells into the
pancreatic site. The blood circulation and the blood half-life of the
nanomachine were investigated ﬁrst to determine its pharmacoki-
netics and potential efﬁcacy in vivo (Supplementary Fig. 19). Three
groups, including the pure drug (IR780 + curcumin + partzymes),
M(I+C)@CaP(p) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups, were compared. From the
results, we found that the M(I+C)@CaP(p) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups
had longer circulation times, with elimination half-lives (t1/2β) of
26.69 h and 25.53 h, respectively, compared to the free drug, which
had a t1/2β of 5.34 h. The prolonged circulation time of NPs is thought to
be due to the PEG shell, which shields the nanoparticle from being
recognized and cleared by the immune system.
Live animal imaging was then performed to demonstrate the
biodistribution of NPs after intravenous administration (Fig. 8a). Three
groups, including the pure drug (IR780 + curcumin + partzymes),
M(I+C)@CaP(p) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups, were tracked at 1, 8, 24 and
48 h timepoints (IR780: 1 mg/kg). For the pure drug I + C + P group, the
majority of the signal was found throughout the mouse body at the 1 h
timepoint, while a negligible signal was observed after 8 h due to the
rapid metabolism of IR780. In contrast, M(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs gradually
released the drug, which reached its maximum concentration at the
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
12

Fig. 8 | Distributions and curative effects of different preparations in vivo. a In
vivo biodistribution of nanomaterial. Tu Tumor, Li Liver, Sp Spleen, Lu Lung, Ki
Kidney, He Heart. b Tumor temperature elevation pictures. c Bioluminescence at
different timepoints. d Quantitative analysis of total ﬂux signal intensity (photons/
sec) over time (n = 4 independent experiments, and the data are presented as the
mean values ± SDs). e Isolated tumor photos. f Tumor weight (n = 4 independent
experiments, and the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs). g TUNEL
labeling of each tumor slice. h TUNEL ﬂuorescence quantitated by ImageJ (n = 3
independent experiments, and the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs). All
statistics were calculated using two-tailed paired t tests, and all experiments were
repeated three times independently with similar results. The source data from
(d, f, h) are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
13

tumor site after 8 h of intravenous administration. Moreover, due to
RGD modiﬁcation, the RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group showed better tumor
accumulation, achieving the highest ﬂuorescence signal among the
groups. Subsequently, the main organs were further harvested and
imaged to evaluate the drug biodistribution. Compared with the free
drug and M(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs,
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs resulted in pro-
nounced ﬂuorescence in the tumor tissue, proving that RGD can
facilitate tumor targeting.
Later, to assess mild PTT efﬁciency, a tumor temperature eleva-
tion
experiment
was
performed.
Four
groups
(PBS,
I + C + P,
M(I+C)@CaP(p), and
RM(I+C)@CaP(p)) were treated with a 1 W cm−2
808 nm laser at 24 h after drug administration (IR780: 1 mg/kg), and
the results are elucidated in Fig. 8b. From the results, the PBS group
elicited the least change in temperature even after 4 min of irradiation.
The pure drug I + C + P group showed an ineffective treatment tem-
perature after 4 min of irradiation (below 43 °C) due to the poor
solubility and unstable property of IR780. The M(I+C)@CaP(p) NP group
exhibited an enhanced photothermal conversion effect, and the tumor
temperature increased to 42 °C with only 20 s of irradiation. Surpris-
ingly, owing to the RGD-mediated enhanced tumor cell uptake, the
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) group showed a dramatic temperature increase to
44.4 °C after 20 s of laser irradiation, exhibiting favorable mild pho-
tothermal activity.
Subsequently, the luciferase activity of PANC-1-luc cells within in
situ carcinoma xenografts was measured to test the therapeutic
efﬁciency of the pure drug and
RM(I+C)@CaP nanosystems with/
without partzymes in vivo (Fig. 8c). The quantitative analysis of
luciferase intensity is shown in Fig. 8d. First, the results showed that
the pure drug with laser group (I + C + P + Laser) could not effectively
inhibit tumor growth, which might have been due to the easy
degradation of the pure drug in vivo. In contrast, the RM(I+C)@CaP
+Laser group effectively inhibited tumor growth for the ﬁrst 10 days
during the treatment period due to its excellent photothermal
therapeutic effect and tumor targeting. However, the tumor showed
a second round of growth after the 20th day, and the total ﬂux
changed from 5.09 × 108 p/s to ~2.72 × 109 p/s, which might be attri-
butable to acquired drug and heat resistance. Surprisingly, when
partzyme was encapsulated into the nanosystems, the therapeutic
efﬁcacy of the RM(I+C)@CaP(P) +Laser group increased signiﬁcantly
and continued until Day 40, and the total ﬂux equaled 5.04 × 108 p/s.
It is possible that after the HSP70 gene was silenced by the MNAzyme,
the tumor was unable to produce heat resistance, and the silencing of
miRNA-21 also promoted the expression of the tumor suppressor
gene PTEN protein and accelerated the apoptosis of the tumor.
Furthermore, the photographs of tumors in situ (Fig. 8e) and tumor
weight (Fig. 8f) indicated that the RM(I+C)@CaP(P) +Laser group had
the best therapeutic effect, and its tumor weight was 0.049 g, which
was ~50% of that of the PBS group. The TUNEL assay also demon-
strated the therapeutic efﬁciency of partzyme (Fig. 8g), and the RM(I
+C)@CaP(P) +Laser group revealed an 18% greater TUNEL signal than
the RM(I+C)@CaP without partzymes +Laser group (Fig. 8h).
As mentioned previously, HSP70 can protect healthy cells from
high temperature, but it is also the resistance mechanism for cancer
cells against photothermal therapy (Fig. 9a). Therefore, smart nano-
machines that can process biological signal input (miRNA-21) will sig-
niﬁcantly increase the selectivity and efﬁciency of PTT (Fig. 9b). To
further verify the tumor-targeted silencing function of our nanode-
vices, the gene and protein expression levels of HSP70 were evaluated
in both tumor and paracancerous tissues. Pure drug and RM(I+C)@CaP
nanosystem with/without partzymes groups were used.
For tumor tissue, the HSP70 protein expression level in the pure
drug group increased by ~66% under laser irradiation (Fig. 9c, d)
compared with that in the PBS +Laser group. Moreover, the
RM(I+C)@CaP (without partzymes) +Laser group also showed ~34%
HSP70 upregulation. Previous in vitro experiments showed that
RM(I+C)@CaP could downregulate HSP70 by regulating mitochondrial
function (Fig. 9e). However, these in vivo experiments suggested that
the nanomachine could mediate more efﬁcient photothermal con-
version efﬁciency than the pure drug, which exacerbated the pro-
duction of HSP70 (Fig. 9c, d). Hence, the enhancement of HSP70
expression could explain how the PTT resistance caused a second
round of tumor growth (Fig. 9d). Importantly, the nanocarrier loaded
with partzymes (RM(I+C)@CaP(P)) could achieve effective down-
regulation of HSP70 even under laser irradiation (Fig. 9c, d), which
proved the successful MNAzyme assembly. The results of the western
blot experiment also provided ample evidence of the silencing effect
of MNAzymes on HSP70 (Supplementary Fig. 20).
Nevertheless, in healthy pancreatic tissue, the HSP70 levels at the
outer edge of healthy tissue were elevated in the pure drug and
RM(I+C)@CaP groups as well as in the RM(I+C)@CaP(P) +Laser group.
Hence, as we expected, NPs and drugs inevitably penetrated healthy
paracancerous tissues, but our intelligent nanomachine was able to
distinguish cancer cells from healthy cells by virtue of its tumor signal
recognition function. Later, the qPCR results correlated with the above
phenomenon. Compared with those in the RM(I+C)@CaP group, the
HSP70 mRNA levels within the RM(I+C)@CaP(P) group were reduced by
nearly 90% (Fig. 9e) in tumor tissue. However, for healthy tissues
around tumors, our intelligent nanosystem did not affect HSP70-based
self-protection, thereby remarkably improving the targeting of the
treatment.
Subsequently, the MNAzyme system-mediated miR-21 silencing
effect was further studied. The miR-21 content was measured through
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (Fig. 9f), and the downstream
protein PTEN was characterized through IHC (Fig. 9g). First, the results
clearly showed that the content of miR-21 had no relationship with laser
irradiation and that the control group contained the highest amount of
miR-21. The content of miR-21 decreased in both the pure drug and RM(I
+C)@CaP groups since Cur can reduce the level of miR-21. However, we
found that miR-21 was almost completely silenced within the partzyme-
containing
RM(I+C)@CaP(P) group. These results indicated that part-
zymes can utilize and consume miRNA at tumor sites, which can further
achieve miR-21 silencing-based gene therapy (Fig. 9g).
PTEN has been found to be a tumor suppressor with growth and
survival regulatory functions, and silencing of miR-21 can mediate
PTEN upregulation, which in turn inhibits tumor growth65. The results
in Fig. 9g revealed that, for the RM(I+C)@CaP and I + C + P groups, the
PTEN levels were all increased, which was ascribed to Cur. The
RM(I+C)@CaP(P) group exhibited the highest PTEN level due to the
excellent miR-21 silencing effects of both Cur and the MNAzyme sys-
tem. These results reﬂect the cleverness of our designed MNAzyme. It
can not only recognize miR-21 and use it as the building block for
MNAzyme self-assembly but also silence miR-21 to achieve gene
therapy.
Discussion
For pancreatic cancer treatment, in addition to the regulation of rele-
vant oncogenes, regulation of the immune response is also a crucial
aspect that cannot be overlooked66. Furthermore, the high degree of
ﬁbrosis is another reason for the lack of effective drug interventions in
clinical cancer treatment67. Therefore, in future experiments, utilizing
immunocompetent animal models and observing whether our designed
MNAzyme system can activate the immune response, attenuate ﬁbrosis
in pancreatic cancer, and consequently enhance the accessibility of
tumor cells to nanoparticle drugs will be highly meaningful.
In this work, we successfully constructed an intelligent nano-
machine for multimodule synergistic photothermal therapy with the
ability to distinguish between tumor and paracancerous tissues. In vivo
experiments conﬁrmed that the nanomachine, upon processing bio-
logical signals (miRNA-21), was activated and speciﬁcally modulated
HSP70 mRNA only in tumor cells while maintaining the HSP protective
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
14

function in healthy cells. Furthermore, the system broke through the
stereotype of MNAzyme design and simultaneously utilized the steric
blocking mechanism of the miRNA/partzyme complex36,37 as well as
multiturnover catalytic rates to achieve up to 90% target gene silen-
cing. Meanwhile, the nanocarrier was constructed with Ca2+, which
solved the problem of insufﬁcient endogenous metal cofactors. It was
also found that Ca2+ and Cur could mediate calcium overload, med-
iating mitochondrial fragmentation and Cyto-C release as well as
apoptosis promotion. In addition, the addition of zinc ions prevented
the disadvantage of easy phase transition of calcium phosphate during
storage in water and improved the stability of the formulation.
Therefore, this multisynergistic nanomachine is expected to promote
the application of MNAzymes in the clinical treatment of cancer.
Methods
Ethical statement
Our research complied with all relevant ethical regulations. All animal
protocols were performed in line with the Guidelines for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Zhejiang Center of Laboratory
Animals (ZJCLA) (Approval No. ZJCLA-IACUC-20020090). The animal
experiments also follow the PREPARE Guidelines Checklist68.
Fig. 9 | Tumor-targeting function of the MNAzyme. a Roles of HSPs in different
cells. b Tumor-targeting mechanism for our intelligent nanodevice.
c Immunohistochemical characterization of HSP70 in tumor tissues and healthy
tissues. d HSP70 quantitated by ImageJ in tumor tissue and paracancerous tissue
(n = 3 independent experiments, and the data are presented as the mean values ±
SDs). e qPCR results for HSP70 mRNA levels (n = 3 independent experiments, and
the data are presented as the mean values ± SDs). f, g miRNA-21 content and PTEN
protein expression levels (n = 3 independent experiments). All statistics were cal-
culated using two-tailed paired t tests, and all experiments (c, f, g) were repeated
three times independently with similar results. The source data from (d, e) are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
15

Materials
All oligonucleotides were synthesized and HPLC-puriﬁed by Sangon
Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China) and are listed in Table S6.
Ammonium persulfate (APS), N,N,N,N-tetramethylethylenediamine
(TEMED), zinc nitrate, calcium chloride, and sodium dihydrogen
phosphate were all purchased from Sigma (Finland). Tris-HCl buffer
solution (pH 8.8 and 6.8), 30% acrylamide/bis, and TBS/Gly/SDS buffer
were purchased from Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. (Finland). Solutions
involved in microRNA-related experiments were prepared with DEPC-
treated water (RNase-free) (Sigma, Switzerland). A BCA kit, RIPA, Tris-
Triton, protease inhibitor, EDTA, and GelRed were purchased from
Thermo Fisher, Finland. DSPE-PEG2K-RGD, DSPE-PEG-COOH, and RGD
were acquired from Xi’an Ruixi Biological Technology Co. Ltd. IR780
and curcumin were purchased from Macklin Inc. (China). Anti-mouse
PTEN antibody, (Catalog no. ab267787), Anti-Rabbit GAPDH, (Catalog
no. ab210113), Anti-mouse Anti-Cytochrome C, (Catalog no. ab13575),
Anti-mouse Anti-beta Actin antibody [mAbcam 8226], Anti-rabbit Anti-
pro Caspase-3, (Catalog no. ab32150), Anti-rabbit Anti-Cleaved
Caspase-3 (Catalog no. ab32042) were provided from Abcam. Anti-
mouse HSP70 Antibody, (Catalog no. #4872) is purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology. PMCA ATPase Monoclonal Antibody (Catalog #
MA3-914) was provided from ThermoFisher.
Twenty percent polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) tests
Twenty percent gel solution was transferred into a plate with a shim,
and the comb was inserted immediately to ensure that there were no
air bubbles in the gel. The gel was allowed to set at room temperature
for ~30–60 min. After coagulation, the samples were loaded into a
vertical electrophoresis tank, and a prerun of ~10 min was ﬁrst per-
formed at a voltage of 5 V. Oligonucleotide samples were prepared by
mixing 2 μl of sample with 8 μl of water and 2 μl of loading buffer. At
least 10 μg of oligonucleotide sample was needed for loading. The
sample was carefully loaded into the well without introducing any air
bubbles. The gels were run at 90 V for ~2 h until the dye front was near
the bottom of the gel. The glass plates were opened with a spatula to
separate the upper glass plate. GelRed was diluted to 1:10,000, and the
gel was stained for 5–10 min. The gel was then immersed in distilled
water for 10 min to remove excess stain and reduce background
staining.
Fabrication of CaP nanoparticles
Pure CaP NPs were synthesized through a simple one-step method at
room temperature by combining two solutions for 5 min. Solution A
was composed of 0.42 ml of CaCl2 (2.0 M) and 0.84 ml of Tris buffer
(pH = 10, 10 mM) in 2 ml of Milli-Q H2O. Solution B contained 0.43 ml
HEPES buffer (280 mM NaCl, 15 mM Na2HPO4 and 50 mM HEPES) and
0.3 ml of Milli-Q H2O. Solution B was added dropwise into solution A
with stirring for 5 min at room temperature. Then, the NPs were
washed with pure ethanol 3 times to remove water molecules. The
nanoparticle stock solution was kept in ethanol.
Observation of cell morphology with unstable CaP
PANC-1 cells were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 1 × 106 cells in
one well and cultured for 12 h. Then, the medium was replaced with
2 ml of DMEM containing Pure CaP NPs at a concentration of 50 μg ml−1
for 12 h. After washing with PBS twice, the cells were treated with
trypsin and then centrifuged at 150 × g to collect the precipitate. The
obtained precipitate was ﬁxed, dehydrated, embedded, sliced, and
measured by transmission electron microscopy.
Fabrication of Zn-substituted CaP nanoparticles
Zn-stabilized CaP NPs were synthesized based on the abovementioned
simple method at room temperature by combining two solutions for
30 min. The Zn/Ca molecular ratio was 1:20. Solution A was composed
of 0.42 ml of CaCl2 (2.0 M), 0.021 ml ZnCl2 (2.0 M) and 0.84 ml of Tris
buffer (pH = 7, 10 mM) in 2 mL of Milli-Q H2O. Solution B contained
0.43 ml HEPES buffer (280 mM NaCl, 15 mM Na2HPO4 and 50 mM
HEPES) and 0.3 ml of Milli-Q H2O. Solution B was added dropwise into
solution A with stirring for 30 min at room temperature.
Fabrication of RM(I+C) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p)
For both drug coloadings, 50 mg of DSPE-PEG-RGD polymers were
dissolved in 5 ml of organic solvent composed of 70% ethanol and 30%
chloroform. Different concentrations of drugs with different IR780/
Cur ratios (0:2; 0.5:2; 1:2; 2:2; 4:2; 8:2 mg) were also dissolved in the
abovementioned organic solvent. The solution was then placed into a
rotary evaporator for ﬁlm formation. Subsequently, 10 ml of water was
added for hydration for 24 h and centrifuged for 5 min at 1400 g to
remove the unencapsulated drugs69 since both drugs possessed very
low water dissolving ability. Then, 10 ml RM(I+C) micelles were pre-
pared. To study the drug-loading capacity of IR780 and Cur separately,
we explored the loading amount of 50 mg DSPE-PEG polymer with
gradient drug concentrations. The speciﬁc method was the same as
above, with concentration ranges of 2 to 10 mg for IR780 and 0.5 to
3 mg for Cur. Drug-loading capacity = (weight of drug input minus the
undissolved drug/weight of nanoparticles) × 100%, drug loading efﬁ-
ciency = (weight of drug in nanoparticles/weight of drug used for
nanoparticle preparation) × 100%. For
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs, a 1 ml
micelle solution with 1 ml of Milli-Q H2O was used to replace the 2 ml of
Milli-Q H2O in the abovementioned solution A when preparing the CaP
NPs. Before CaP mineralization, partzymes at different concentrations
(1, 10, 50, 100, and 200 μM) were precultured with solution A. The
M(I+C) and M(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs were fabricated through the same pro-
cedure, and DSPE-PEG-RGD was replaced by DSPE-PEG. The partzymes
were modiﬁed with Cy3, enabling the measurement of none-
ncapsulated DNAzymes in the supernatant after centrifugation using
UV spectrophotometry. The drug loading for IR780, Cur and DNA-
zymes was carried out through UV–Visible spectroscopy at 780, 425
and 560 nm, respectively. For CaP-containing NPs, we used cen-
trifugation to isolate the NPs from the reaction mixture and subse-
quently washed the NP solution multiple times with a suitable solvent
to remove any impurities.
Characterization of the nanoparticles
The particle sizes of CaP, RM(I+C),
and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs were deter-
mined using dynamic light scattering with a Zetasizer Nano ZS. For
each measurement, the sample (1.0 ml) was placed in a disposable
polystyrene cuvette. The nanocarrier surface ζ-potential was measured
with a Zetasizer Nano ZS by using disposable cells. Both the size and ζ-
potential were recorded as the average of three measurements. The
TEM samples were prepared by dropping the particle solution on top
of carbon-coated copper grids and then drying it in air prior to ima-
ging. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed in
the 4000–1000 cm−1 range with a resolution of 4 cm−1 at room tem-
perature by using a Thermo Nicolet IS10 spectrometer.
Photothermal properties of RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs were diluted with PBS (concentration of IR780 was
from 0 to 100 μg/ml), and 1 ml of sample was added to a cuvette and
irradiated with an 808 nm NIR laser source at 1.0 W/cm2 for 5 min. The
temperature changes of the samples were recorded by the infrared
imaging device at intervals of 30 s. Temperature elevations of free
IR780 (dissolved in PBS), RM(I+C) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs over four NIR
on–off irradiation cycles were conducted through a 1.0 W cm−2 808 nm
laser with 50 μg/ml IR780. The photobleaching properties of free
IR780, RM(I+C) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs were investigated by diluting the
IR780 content in each group to 50 μg/ml, and laser irradiation
(808 nm, 1.0 W/cm2) was continued for 5 min. Then, the UV absor-
bance of each group was monitored. The irradiation process was
conducted 3 times.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
16

Drug release experiment
One milliliter of RM(I+C)@CaP(p) NPs (containing 0.4 mg IR780, 0.2 mg
Cur and 200 μM partzymes) was tied into a dialysis bag and released
under 20 ml sink conditions. The release medium contained 2% Tween-
80. There were four drug release conditions: pH = 7, 37 °C; pH = 7,
45 °C; pH = 6, 37 °C and pH = 6, 45 °C. At each time point, 1 ml of
release medium was extracted for drug concentration measurement
and then added back to the system. The absorbance characteristic
peak wavelengths of IR780, Cur and partzymes were observed using a
NanoDrop™2000 spectrophotometer. For MNAzyme, 1 μl of released
medium was mixed with 1 μl of miRNA-21 (10 μM). Then, 2 μl of 10 μM
HSP70 mRNA was added to the reaction, resulting in a 4 μl volume,
with a maximum of 2.5 μM MNAzyme to mediate 5 μM HSP70 mRNA
cleavage.
Cell culture and maintenance
The pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1 and normal human dermal
ﬁbroblast NHDFs were grown in DMEM with 10% FBS at 37 °C. Cells
were passaged 2–3 times a week once they reached 90–100% con-
ﬂuency. The human pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1 was purchased
from ATCC® (CRL-1469™), and normal human dermal ﬁbroblast
(NHDF) cells were purchased from PromoCell®. The cell lines were
directly purchased without further authenticated, and the cell line
were tested negative for mycoplasma contamination.
Cellular uptake study
Cells were incubated in 6-well plates (1 × 105 cells per well) overnight.
When the cells were attached, solutions of free IR780 + Cur +
partzyme, M(I+C)@CaP(P), and RM(I+C)@CaP(P) were utilized to replace
the cell growth media. All the groups were kept at a concentration of
4 μg/ml for IR780, 2 μg/ml for Cur and 2 μM for partzymes at 37 °C.
After incubation for 1 h and 8 h, the cells were observed under CLSM.
Additionally, the cells were collected with trypsin and washed with
PBS. Cellular uptake was determined with a BD LSRFortessa ﬂow
cytometer (BD Biosciences), and the results were analyzed with
FlowJo_V10. The gate was deﬁned for live cells only; 10,000 cells were
recorded per sample. The concentrations of Ca2+ in PANC-1 cells were
measured using inductively coupled plasma‒optical emission spec-
trometry (ICP‒OES). The same experimental groups were treated
with ﬁnal concentrations of IR780 at 4 μg/ml, Cur at 2 μg/ml, and
partzyme at 2 μM. After washing the cells with PBS twice, the cells
were treated with trypsin and collected through centrifugation.
Finally, 1.0 ml of concentrated nitric acid was added, and the samples
were
measured
by
using
ICP‒OES
to
determine
the
Ca2+
concentration.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) detection
A ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) kit was purchased from
Guangzhou Exons Biological Technology Co., Ltd. The probe was
diluted with hybridization buffer and denatured at 85 °C for 2 min.
Then, the probe was used for hybridization with 4% paraformaldehyde-
ﬁxed cells for 72 h. The cells were labeled with DAPI (Amax = 358,
Emax = 461). The ﬂuorescence of the probe was Cy5.5 (Amax = 683,
Emax = 703). The relative intensity of each group was calculated with
ImageJ.
Lysosome escape
IR780 and LysoTracker Green were used as the probe of the drug and
lysosome, respectively. PANC-1 cells were seeded on confocal dishes
overnight. Then, the lysosomal escape proﬁle of the RM(I+C)@CaP(p)
groups (±Laser) by PANC-1 cells at 2 h and 24 h was determined. For
both groups, after NPs and cells were cultured together for 2 h and
24 h, the cell media were replaced, and a 1 W laser was applied for
5 min. After laser irradiation, the cells were incubated with LysoTracker
Green for another 2 h, after which a 5 min incubation was performed
with 4% paraformaldehyde. Then, the cells were observed under a
ﬂuorescence confocal microscope. The colocalization scatterplots of
each group were calculated by ImageJ.
Western blot analysis
After the cells were incubated with different groups of nanomaterials
for 48 h, the cells were lysed with RIPA and Tris-HCl lysis buffer. RIPA
was used for whole-cell lysis and is suitable for destroying mitochon-
dria. For 2 ml of RIPA buffer, 20 μl of 1% protease inhibitor and 20 μl of
1% 0.5 M EDTA were added. Tris-HCl was used for cytoplasmic clea-
vage. The ﬁnal concentration of Tris was 20 mM. Twenty microliters of
1% protease inhibitor and 20 μl of 1% 0.5 M EDTA were added to 2 ml of
Tris-HCl. After 1 h of lysis, the medium buffer was centrifuged at
16,000 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was taken for quantiﬁca-
tion. Cell proteins were separated by SDS‒PAGE gradient gel and
transferred to PVDF membranes. After adding protein loading buffer,
the samples were mixed well and fully denatured at 98 °C for 10 min.
The membranes were incubated with primary antibodies against PTEN,
HSP70, Cyto-C, β-Actine, Pro-Caspase 3, cleaved-caspase 3 and GAPDH
(Abcam, Cambridge, UK) (1:1000) at 4 °C overnight. Then, the mem-
branes were incubated with the secondary antibody at 37 °C for 1 h. A
GelDoc Go Gel Imaging System (Bio-Rad) was used to evaluate protein
bands. ImageJ software was used for ﬂuorescence quantitative
analysis.
Colocalization between IR780 and mitochondria
Eight groups, including the PBS ±Laser, I + C ±Laser, M(I+C)@CaP(p)
(without RGD) ±Laser and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (with RGD) ±Laser groups,
were established and marked from 1 to 8. The laser groups were under
1 W cm−2 808 nm irradiation for 5 min. IR780 exhibited red ﬂuores-
cence, and mitochondria were labeled with MitoTracker Green. The
mitochondrial tracker was purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology
Co., Ltd. After nanosystems with a concentration of IR780: 4 μg/ml,
Cur: 2 μg/ml, and each partzyme: 2 μM were cultured with PANC-1 cells
for 6 h, the medium was replaced, and a laser was applied for 5 min.
The cells were then cultured with the mitochondrial tracker for
another 2 h. Then, the samples were observed under ﬂuorescence
confocal microscopy. ImageJ software was used for ﬂuorescence
quantitative analysis.
ROS detection
PANC-1 cells were cultured in confocal dishes at 1 × 105 cells per well.
When the PANC-1 cells reached 70–80% conﬂuency, they were treated
under different conditions, including incubation with PBS ±Laser, I + C
±Laser, M(I+C)@CaP(p) (without RGD) ±Laser and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (with
RGD) ±Laser for 6 h at 37 °C. After 6 h of incubation, dichlorodihy-
droﬂuorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) solution was added to the cell
medium70. The ROS signals were quantitatively analyzed with ImageJ
software, which indicated the intracellular 1O2 levels generated under
different experimental conditions.
Ca2+ concentration visualization
PANC-1 cells were cultured in confocal dishes at 1 × 105 cells per well.
When PANC-1 cells reached 70–80% conﬂuency, they were treated
under different conditions, including incubation with PBS ±Laser, I + C
±Laser, M(I+C)@CaP(p) (without RGD) ±Laser and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (with
RGD) ±Laser for 6 h at 37 °C. After 6 h of incubation, the Fluo-3 AM
solution was subsequently added to the cell medium. The concentra-
tion of the Fluo-3 AM probe in all samples was 1.0 µM. ImageJ software
was used for ﬂuorescence quantitative analysis.
ΔΨm detection by tracking of JC-1 monomers and aggregates
To measure the changes in mitochondrial membrane potential, PANC-
1 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate at a density of 2*105 cells per well in
2.0 ml of FPS-DMEM and cultured for 24 h. The medium was then
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
17

replaced with 1.0 ml of PBS ±Laser, I + C ±Laser, M(I+C)@CaP(p) (without
RGD) ±Laser and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (with RGD) ±Laser at the same con-
centrations, IR780: 4 μg/ml, Cur: 2 μg/ml, each partzyme: 2 μM, and
cultured for 12 h. After washing with PBS twice, the cells were stained
with JC-1 and measured by CLSM. In this detection, 1.0 ml of JC-1
working solution was added to cells containing 1.0 ml of DMEM.
Observation of mitochondrial morphology
To measure mitochondrial morphology, PANC-1 cells were seeded in a
100 mm × 20 mm dish at a density of 3.0 × 106 cells per dish and cul-
tured for 24 h. The medium was then replaced with 5.0 ml of PBS
±Laser,
I + C
±Laser,
M(I+C)@CaP(p)
(without
RGD)
±Laser
and
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) (with RGD) ±Laser at the same concentrations, IR780:
4 μg/ml, Cur: 2 μg/mL, each partzyme: 2 μM, and cultured for 12 h.
After being washed with PBS twice, the cells were treated with trypsin
and then centrifuged at 150 × g to collectthe precipitate. The cells were
then ﬁxed for 1 day at room temperature. After ﬁxation, the cells were
washed in the same buffer and postﬁxed in 1% osmium tetroxide in
0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4) for 1 h at room temperature.
The cells were then washed again with the same buffer and dehydrated
in a graded series of ethanol solutions. The obtained cells were then
embedded in epoxy resin (Epon 812) and polymerized for 48 h at
60 °C. The polymerized blocks were then sectioned into ultrathin
sections using a Leica EM UC7 ultramicrotome. The sections were
collected on copper grids and stained with uranyl acetate and lead
citrate before being examined under a JEM-1400 Plus transmission
electron microscope (TEM). During TEM imaging, at least 3 random
images were taken at a magniﬁcation of 5000–10,000× to observe the
mitochondrial ultrastructure. The mitochondrial morphology was
analyzed based on the presence or absence of cristae, the shape of the
mitochondrial membrane, and the size of the mitochondria. The
sample preparation was carried out in the Laboratory of Electron
Microscopy, Medisiina C, 2nd ﬂoor, University of Turku. A JEM-1400
Plus transmission electron microscope was used to monitor mito-
chondrial morphology.
Annexin V-APC/PI apoptosis detection
Cells were digested with trypsin solution and aspirated until the
adherent cells could be blown down by gentle pipetting. Then, the cells
were transferred into a centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 1000 × g for
5 min, and the supernatant was discarded. Subsequently, the cells were
gently resuspended in PBS and counted. A total of 50,000–100,000
resuspended cells were collected and centrifuged at 1000 × g for
5 min. Then, 195 μl of Annexin V-APC binding solution was added to
gently resuspend the cells. Then, 10 μl of propidium iodide staining
solution containing Annexin V-APC was added and mixed gently. After
incubation for 10–20 min at room temperature (20–25 °C) in the dark,
the cells were placed in an ice bath. Apoptosis was determined with a
BD LSRFortessa ﬂow cytometer (BD Biosciences), and the results were
analyzed with FlowJo V10; 10000 cells were recorded per sample.
Cytotoxicity assay
The concentrations of the therapeutics were as follows: IR780: 4 μg/
ml, Cur: 2 μg/ml and partzymes: 2 μM. The stock solution of RM(I
+C)@CaP(p) NPs (containing 0.4 mg IR780, 0.2 mg Cur and 200 μM
partzyme per ml) was diluted 100-fold to obtain 4 μg/ml IR780 and
2 μg/ml Cur, and there was 2 μM partzyme. After 24 h of incubation,
the cells were subjected to standard WST-1 experiments. All dilutions
for the cell viability assay were prepared in cell growth medium. After
incubation with free drug or nanoparticles, 10 μl of WST-1 reagent was
added to each well, and the cells were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C with 5%
CO2. After incubation, the absorbance was measured with a Varioskan
Flash Multimode Reader (Thermo Scientiﬁc Inc., Waltham, MA, USA)
at 440 nm.
Detection of IR780 by HPLC
The detection wavelength of IR780 was 700 nm with a Waters 2695
Alliance HPLC. The mobile phase ﬂow rate was set at 1.0 ml/min. The
chromatographic column used was an Eclipse plus C18 column. Mobile
phase A contained methanol and 0.2% FA, and mobile phase B con-
tained water and 0.2% FA. The ratio was 4:1 (A:B, v/v).
Orthotopic model construction procedure
The experimental procedure was based on previously reported
methods71 with certain improvements. BALBc-nu (6–8 weeks old) nude
mice were anesthetized and positioned in a left lateral recumbent
position. Following routine skin disinfection, a 1 cm oblique incision
was made just below the right costal margin, allowing access to the
abdominal cavity. Afterward, the abdominal cavity was opened,
revealing the spleen and pancreas. A prepared cell suspension was
then precisely injected into the pancreas, with attention to minimizing
tissue damage. Hemostasis was performed if necessary, and the inci-
sion was sutured to close the abdominal cavity. Finally, the surgical site
was disinfected once more, and the mouse was placed in a warm
incubator or recovery area for postoperative care, all while adhering to
ethical and animal care guidelines. The mice feeding conditions of
mice are: 12/12 day and night alternating, humidity at 50–60%, tem-
perature at 22–26 °C.
In vivo biodistribution
The I + C + P, M(I+C)@CaP(p) and RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups were used to
observe the biodistribution of nanodevices after intravenous admin-
istration. The concentrations of the therapeutics were as follows:
IR780: 2 mg/kg, Cur: 1 mg/kg and partzymes: 1 μmol/kg. In vivo ima-
ging was performed at 1, 8, 24 and 48 h timepoints. On the 48th day,
the mice from each group were sacriﬁced, and the tumor, heart, liver,
spleen, lungs and kidneys were collected for in vitro ﬂuorescence
detection.
In vivo IR thermography
Four
groups,
including
the
PBS,
I + C + P,
M(I+C)@CaP(p)
and
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) groups, were established. First, the nude mice were
anesthetized, and the tumor site was observed and marked with an
in vivo imaging system. Then, the mice were ﬁxed, and at 12 h after
administration, the tumor site was irradiated with an 808 nm laser.
In vivo anticancer efﬁcacy analysis
PANC-1 cells containing luciferase were injected into the pancreases of
BALB/c-nu (6–8 weeks old) female mice. The mice were divided into
seven groups: the PBS + Laser,
RM(I+C)@CaP,
RM(I+C)@CaP + Laser,
RM(I+C)@CaP(p),
RM(I+C)@CaP(p) + Laser, I + C + P, and I + C + P + Laser
groups. The concentrations of the therapeutics were as follows: IR780:
2 mg/kg, Cur: 1 mg/kg and partzymes: 1 μmol/kg. For the laser treat-
ment groups, the temperature of the tumor site was monitored in real
time by the in vivo imaging system. Radiation was stopped when the
temperature reached ~45 °C and continued when the temperature
dropped. The total treatment time was 5 min. The tumor volumes were
calculated using the in vivo imaging system software by monitoring
the total ﬂux of bioluminescence. After 40 days of treatment, the
tumors connected to the spleen were taken for comparison. For
orthotopic tumor models, the maximum tumor diameter allowed was
1.5 cm. Humane endpoints encompass tumor burden exceeding 10% of
normal body weight, animal weight loss surpassing 20% of the normal
animal weight, and persistent self-harm by the animal. Humane end-
points involve euthanasia through cervical dislocation under deep
anesthesia. All animal procedures adhere to the guidelines approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Zhe-
jiang Center of Laboratory Animals (ZJCLA). Pre-experimentation
ensures that orthotopic tumor weights align with established
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
18

standards during the treatment period. Also, the ex vivo photographs
in this experiment conﬁrmed that none of the tumors exceeded
this limit.
TUNEL, HSP70, and PTEN staining
After the slices were dried slightly, a circle around the tissue was drawn
with a histochemical pen (to prevent liquid from ﬂowing away), pro-
teinase K was added to the circle to cover the tissue, and the tissue was
incubated in a 37 °C incubator for 25 min. The slides were placed in PBS
(pH 7.4) on a decolorizing shaker and washed 3 times with 5 min
shaking each time. After the slices were slightly dried, working rupture
solution was added to the circle to cover the tissue, and the slides were
incubated at room temperature for 20 min. The slides were placed in
PBS (pH 7.4) and washed 3 times on a decolorizing shaker. Subse-
quently, for TUNEL staining, appropriate amounts of reagent 1 (TdT)
and reagent 2 (dUTP) were taken from the TUNEL kit, mixed 1:9 and
added to the circle to cover the tissue. Then, the slices were ﬂattened in
a wet box and incubated for 2 h at a constant temperature of 37 °C. A
small amount of water was added to the humid box to maintain
humidity. For HSP70 staining, HSP70 antibody was added to the
sample after dilution at 1:100–1:500. After washing with PBS three
times, the secondary antibody, Cy3-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG,
was added, and the slides were incubated for 60 min. For PTEN stain-
ing, the tumor sections were stained with anti-PTEN antibody. Later,
the sections were all washed with PBS (pH = 7.4) 3 times for 5 min each.
After removing the PBS, the secondary antibody, Cy3-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit IgG, was added, and the sections were incubated for
60 min. DAPI staining solution was also added to the circle, and the
sections were incubated for 10 min at room temperature in the dark.
Then, the slides were placed in PBS (pH 7.4) and washed 3 times.
Finally, the slices were observed under a ﬂuorescence microscope. The
positivity rate of the experiment was calculated with ImageJ.
Analysis of HSP70 levels by qPCR
The intratumoral and paracancerous tissue HSP70 mRNA levels were
assessed with qPCR. The forward primer and reverse primer for HSP70
were
5′-ACCAAGCAGACGCAGATCTTC-3′
and
5′-CGCCCTCGTA-
CACCTGGAT-3′, respectively. The forward primer and reverse primer
for GAPDH were 5′-GGCATGGACTGTGGTCATGA-3′ and 5′-GGCATG-
GACTGTGGTCATGA-3′, respectively.
Statistics and reproducibility
All results are expressed as the mean value ± standard deviation.
Student’s unpaired t test (two-tailed) was employed for comparisons
between different groups. All statistical analyses were performed
using GraphPad Prism 9.0. and p < 0.05 was considered to indicate
statistical signiﬁcance. The measurements were taken from distinct
samples. No statistical method was used to predetermine the sample
size. No data were excluded from the analyses. Data collection and
analysis were not performed blind to the conditions of the experi-
ments. All results may be duplicated from the available source
data ﬁles.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The authors declare that all the data supporting the ﬁndings of this
study are available within the Article, Supplementary Information or
Source Data ﬁle. The source data generated in this study have been
deposited in the Figshare database at: https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/
dataset/Source_Data_xlsx/24271477. Source data are provided with
this paper.
References
1.
Ding, F. et al. Polydopamine-coated nucleic acid nanogel for siRNA-
mediated low-temperature photothermal therapy. Biomaterials
245, 119976 (2020).
2.
Wang, B. K. et al. Gold-nanorods-siRNA nanoplex for improved
photothermal therapy by gene silencing. Biomaterials 78,
27–39 (2016).
3.
Li, G. C., Li, L., Liu, R. Y., Rehman, M. & Lee, W. M. Heat shock protein
hsp70 protects cells from thermal stress even after deletion of its
ATP-binding domain. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 89,
2036–2040 (1992).
4.
Luo, H. et al. Mutually synergistic nanoparticles for effective
thermo-molecularly targeted therapy. Adv. Funct. Mater. 27,
1702834 (2017).
5.
Tian, H. et al. Low side-effect and heat-shock protein-inhibited
chemo-phototherapy nanoplatform via co-assembling strategy of
biotin-tailored IR780 and quercetin. Chem. Eng. J. 382,
123043 (2020).
6.
Wang, Y. et al. Engineering electronic band structure of binary
thermoelectric nanocatalysts for augmented pyrocatalytic tumor
nanotherapy. Adv. Mater. 34, 2106773 (2022).
7.
Chang, M. et al. Single-atom Pd nanozyme for ferroptosis-boosted
mild-temperature photothermal therapy. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60,
12971–12979 (2021).
8.
Chen, W.-H. et al. Overcoming the heat endurance of tumor cells by
interfering with the anaerobic glycolysis metabolism for improved
photothermal therapy. ACS Nano 11, 1419–1431 (2017).
9.
Chen, Q.-W. et al. Self-mineralized photothermal bacteria hybri-
dizing with mitochondria-targeted metal–organic frameworks for
augmenting photothermal tumor therapy. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30,
1909806 (2020).
10.
Wu, C. et al. Acid-triggered charge-convertible graphene-based all-
in-one nanocomplex for enhanced genetic phototherapy of triple-
negative breast cancer. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 9, e1901187 (2020).
11.
Xin, X. et al. Redox-responsive nanoplatform for codelivery of miR-
519c and gemcitabine for pancreatic cancer therapy. Sci. Adv. 6,
eabd6764 (2020).
12.
Gong, X. et al. A smart theranostic nanocapsule for spatiotempo-
rally programmable photo-gene therapy. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
Engl. 59, 21648–21655 (2020).
13.
Ämmälä, C. et al. Targeted delivery of antisense oligonucleotides to
pancreatic β-cells. Sci. Adv. 4, eaat3386 (2018).
14.
Borggräfe, J. et al. Time-resolved structural analysis of an RNA-
cleaving DNA catalyst. Nature 601, 144–149 (2022).
15.
Yi, D., Zhao, J. & Li, L. An enzyme-activatable engineered DNAzyme
sensor for cell-selective imaging of metal ions. Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. Engl. 60, 6300–6304 (2021).
16.
Ma, L. & Liu, J. Catalytic nucleic acids: biochemistry, chemical
biology, biosensors, and nanotechnology. iScience 23,
100815 (2020).
17.
Wang, J. et al. A self-catabolic multifunctional DNAzyme nanos-
ponge for programmable drug delivery and efﬁcient gene silen-
cing. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 10766–10774 (2021).
18.
Yin, Y. et al. DNAzyme-powered three-dimensional DNA walker
nanoprobe for detection amyloid beta-peptide oligomer in living
cells and in vivo. Anal. Chem. 92, 9247–9256 (2020).
19.
Li, F. et al. A proton-activatable DNA-based nanosystem enables co-
delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 and DNAzyme for combined gene therapy.
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 61, e202116569 (2022).
20. Peng, H., Li, X.-F., Zhang, H. & Le, X. C. A microRNA-initiated DNA-
zyme motor operating in living cells. Nat. Commun. 8, 14378 (2017).
21.
Wang, Y., Nguyen, K., Spitale, R. C. & Chaput, J. C. A biologically
stable DNAzyme that efﬁciently silences gene expression in cells.
Nat. Chem. 13, 319–326 (2021).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
19

22. Lyu, M. et al. PNA-assisted DNAzymes to cleave double-stranded
DNA for genetic engineering with high sequence ﬁdelity. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 143, 9724–9728 (2021).
23. Liu, S.-Y. et al. Ultrathin 2D copper(I) 1,2,4-triazolate coordination
polymer nanosheets for efﬁcient and selective gene silencing and
photodynamic therapy. Adv. Mater. 33, 2100849 (2021).
24. Zhou, W., Chen, Q., Huang, P.-J. J., Ding, J. & Liu, J. DNAzyme
hybridization, cleavage, degradation, and sensing in undiluted
human blood serum. Anal. Chem. 87, 4001–4007 (2015).
25. Mokany, E., Bone, S. M., Young, P. E., Doan, T. B. & Todd, A. V.
MNAzymes, a versatile new class of nucleic acid enzymes that can
function as biosensors and molecular switches. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
132, 1051–1059 (2010).
26. Safdar, S., Lammertyn, J. & Spasic, D. RNA-cleaving NAzymes: the
next big thing in biosensing? Trends Biotechnol. 38,
1343–1359 (2020).
27.
Zhu, D. et al. Encoding DNA frameworks for ampliﬁed multiplexed
imaging of intracellular microRNAs. Anal. Chem. 93,
2226–2234 (2021).
28. Wang, N., Song, L., Qiu, Y., Xing, H. & Li, J. Hybridization-activated
spherical DNAzyme for cascading two-photon ﬂuorescence emis-
sion: applied for intracellular miRNA measurement by two-photon
microscopy. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 286, 250–257 (2019).
29. Yin, X., Chen, B., He, M. & Hu, B. A homogeneous multicomponent
nucleic acid enzyme assay for universal nucleic acid detection by
single-particle inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry.
Anal. Chem. 93, 4952–4959 (2021).
30. Abdou Mohamed, M. A. et al. Diagnosing antibiotic resistance using
nucleic acid enzymes and gold nanoparticles. ACS Nano 15,
9379–9390 (2021).
31.
Kozlowski, H. N. et al. A colorimetric test to differentiate patients
infected with inﬂuenza from COVID-19. Small Struct. 2,
2100034 (2021).
32. Zhou, W., Zhang, Y., Ding, J. & Liu, J. In vitro selection in serum: RNA-
cleaving DNAzymes for measuring Ca2+ and Mg2. ACS Sensors 1,
600–606 (2016).
33. Safdar, S. et al. DNA-only, microwell-based bioassay for multiplex
nucleic acid detection with single base-pair resolution using
MNAzymes. Biosens. Bioelectron. 152, 112017 (2020).
34. Wang, Z. et al. An intelligent nanomachine guided by DNAzyme
logic system for precise chemodynamic therapy. Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. 61, e202204291 (2022).
35. Giovannetti, E. et al. MicroRNA-21 in pancreatic cancer: correlation
with clinical outcome and pharmacologic aspects underlying its
role in the modulation of gemcitabine activity. Cancer Res. 70,
4528–4538 (2010).
36. Davis, S., Lollo, B., Freier, S. & Esau, C. Improved targeting of miRNA
with antisense oligonucleotides. Nucleic Acids Res. 34,
2294–2304 (2006).
37. Lima, J. F., Cerqueira, L., Figueiredo, C., Oliveira, C. & Azevedo, N. F.
Anti-miRNA oligonucleotides: a comprehensive guide for design.
RNA Biol. 15, 338–352 (2018).
38. Wang, Z. et al. A bimetallic metal–organic framework encapsulated
with DNAzyme for intracellular drug synthesis and self-sufﬁcient
gene therapy. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60, 12431–12437 (2021).
39. Liu, C. et al. Self-assembly of copper–DNAzyme nanohybrids for
dual-catalytic tumor therapy. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 60,
14324–14328 (2021).
40. Fan, H. et al. A smart DNAzyme–MnO2 nanosystem for efﬁcient
gene silencing. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 54, 4801–4805 (2015).
41.
Zheng, P. et al. A multichannel Ca(2+) nanomodulator for multilevel
mitochondrial destruction-mediated cancer therapy. Adv. Mater.
33, e2007426 (2021).
42. Santoro, S. W. & Joyce, G. F. A general purpose RNA-cleaving DNA
enzyme. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 94, 4262–4266 (1997).
43. Moon, W. J., Yang, Y. & Liu, J. Zn2+-dependent DNAzymes: from
solution chemistry to analytical, materials and therapeutic appli-
cations. ChemBioChem 22, 779–789 (2021).
44. Peracchi, A. Preferential activation of the 8–17 deoxyribozyme by
Ca 2+ ions: evidence for the identity of 8–17 with the catalytic
domain of the Mg5 deoxyribozyme*. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
11693–11697 (2000).
45. Wolfe, B. R., Porubsky, N. J., Zadeh, J. N., Dirks, R. M. & Pierce, N. A.
Constrained multistate sequence design for nucleic acid
reaction pathway engineering. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139,
3134–3144 (2017).
46. Clapham, D. E. Calcium signaling. Cell 131, 1047–1058 (2007).
47. Liu, X. et al. DNA framework-encoded mineralization of calcium
phosphate. Chem 6, 472–485 (2020).
48. Qi, C., Musetti, S., Fu, L. H., Zhu, Y. J. & Huang, L. Biomolecule-
assisted green synthesis of nanostructured calcium phosphates
and their biomedical applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48,
2698–2737 (2019).
49. Roohani, I., Cheong, S. & Wang, A. How to build a bone?—Hydro-
xyapatite or Posner’s clusters as bone minerals. Open Ceram. 6,
100092 (2021).
50. Lai, R.-H., Dong, P.-J., Wang, Y.-L. & Luo, J.-B. Redispersible and
stable amorphous calcium phosphate nanoparticles functionalized
by an organic bisphosphate. Chin. Chem. Lett. 25, 295–298 (2014).
51.
Schweikle, M. et al. Stabilisation of amorphous calcium phosphate
in polyethylene glycol hydrogels. Acta Biomater. 90,
132–145 (2019).
52. Olesen, P. T., Steenberg, T., Christensen, E. & Bjerrum, N. J. Elec-
trolytic deposition of amorphous and crystalline zinc–calcium
phosphates. J. Mater. Sci. 33, 3059–3063 (1998).
53. Chen, F. et al. Europium-doped amorphous calcium phosphate
porous nanospheres: preparation and application as luminescent
drug carriers. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 6, 67 (2011).
54. Wang, Q. et al. Multifunctional shell-core nanoparticles for treat-
ment of multidrug resistance hepatocellular carcinoma. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 28, 1706124 (2018).
55. Chen, L. et al. Autophagy inhibition contributes to the synergistic
interaction between EGCG and doxorubicin to kill the hepatoma
Hep3B cells. PLoS ONE 9, e85771 (2014).
56. Luchtel, R. A. et al. High-dose ascorbic acid synergizes with anti-PD1
in a lymphoma mouse model. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 117,
1666–1677 (2020).
57. Li, Y. et al. Co-delivery of microRNA-21 antisense oligonucleotides
and gemcitabine using nanomedicine for pancreatic cancer ther-
apy. Cancer Sci. 108, 1493–1503 (2017).
58. Patutina, O. A. et al. Mesyl phosphoramidate backbone modiﬁed
antisense oligonucleotides targeting miR-21 with enhanced in vivo
therapeutic potency. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 117,
32370–32379 (2020).
59. Yan, J. et al. Peritumoral microgel reservoir for long-term light-
controlled triple-synergistic treatment of osteosarcoma with single
ultra-low dose. Small 17, 2100479 (2021).
60. Kebebe, D. et al. Dimeric c(RGD) peptide conjugated nanos-
tructured lipid carriers for efﬁcient delivery of Gambogic acid to
breast cancer. Int. J. Nanomed. 14, 6179–6195 (2019).
61.
Calkins, K. G. Measuring Correlation (Andrews University, 2005).
62. Zhang, L. et al. Mitochondria-targeted artiﬁcial “Nano-RBCs” for
ampliﬁed synergistic cancer phototherapy by a single NIR irradia-
tion. Adv. Sci. 5, 1800049 (2018).
63. Liu, Y. et al. The targeting of non‑coding RNAs by curcumin: facts
and hopes for cancer therapy (Review). Oncol. Rep. 42,
20–34 (2019).
64. Hu, Y. et al. Preparation of photothermal responsive and ROS
generative gold nanocages for cancer therapy. Chem. Eng. J. 421,
129744 (2021).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
20

65. Yan, J. et al. Self-assembly of DNA nanogels with endogenous
microRNA toehold self-regulating switches for targeted gene reg-
ulation therapy. Biomater. Sci. 10, 4119–4125 (2022).
66. Cappellesso, F. et al. Targeting the bicarbonate transporter SLC4A4
overcomes immunosuppression and immunotherapy resistance in
pancreatic cancer. Nat. Cancer 3, 1464–1483 (2022).
67. Zheng, D. et al. Biomimetic nanoparticles drive the mechanism
understanding of shear-wave elasticity stiffness in triple negative
breast cancers to predict clinical treatment. Bioact. Mater. 22,
567–587 (2023).
68. Smith, A. J., Clutton, R. E., Lilley, E., Hansen, K. E. A. & Brattelid, T.
PREPARE: guidelines for planning animal research and testing. Lab.
Anim. 52, 135–141 (2017).
69. Yan, J. et al. Lymphatic clearance is the main drainage route of
lamotrigine-loaded micelles following delivery to the brain. J.
Pharm. Pharmacol. 71, 1488–1496 (2019).
70. Wang, K. et al. Gas therapy potentiates aggregation-induced
emission luminogen-based photoimmunotherapy of poorly immu-
nogenic tumors through cGAS-STING pathway activation. Nat.
Commun. 14, 2950 (2023).
71.
Wang, J. et al. Orthotopic and heterotopic murine models of pan-
creatic cancer exhibit different immunological microenvironments
and different responses to immunotherapy. Front. Immunol. 13,
863346 (2022).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (Grant No.
82372145 (H.Z.)). It was also supported by the Research Fellow (Grant
No. 353146 (H.Z.)), Project (Grant No. 347897 (H.Z.)), Solution for Health
Proﬁle (Grant No. 336355 (H.Z.)), and InFLAMES Flagship (Grant No.
337531 (H.Z.)) grants from the Academy of Finland, Finland, The China
Food and Health International Pilot Project (H.Z.) funded by the Finnish
Ministry of Education and Culture, The Leading Talents in Scientiﬁc and
Technological Innovation from Zhejiang Provincial Ten Thousand
Talents Plan (Grant No. 2019R52021 (X.S.)), The Key Research and
Development Program of Zhejiang Province (Grant No. 2021C03120
(X.S.)). The Key Research and Development Program of Wenzhou (Grant
No: ZY2021003 (X.S.)), the National Natural Science Foundation (Grant
Nos. 82272172 (W.S.), 81972261 (W.S.), the Medical Health Science and
Technology key Project of Zhejiang Provincial and Ministry Health
Commission (Grant No. WKJ-ZJ-2322 (W.S.)), the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (Grant No. 82071945 (S.Z.)), Shanghai Com-
mittee of Science and Technology, China (Grant No. 21S31905400
(S.Z.)), and the Shanghai Anticancer Association EYAS PROJECT (Grant
No. SACA-CY22C07 (D.Z.)). M.R. (CSC202207960005) and J.Y.
(CSC202107960001) were sponsored by the China Scholarship Council.
We are grateful to Qian Zhou, Ph.D., from the Fudan University Shanghai
Cancer Center. We are grateful to Gösta Branders research fund, Åbo
Akademi Research Foundation (Gösta Branders forskningsfond, Stiftel-
sen för Åbo Akademi).
Author contributions
J.Y. and H.Z. conceived the idea and wrote the manuscript. J.Y., X.M.,
D.L., and M.R. were responsible for carried out the experiments, material
synthesis and animal experiments. D.Z. and S.Z. assisted in manuscript
revision related to pancreatic cancer. X.C. helped to conduct partsof the
characterization. W.S., X.S., and H.Z. supervised the project and helped
with language editing. All authors discussed the results and have given
approval to the ﬁnal version of the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Weijian Sun, Xian Shen or Hongbo Zhang.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Wing Hin Lee,
and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
1Joint Centre of Translational Medicine, Wenzhou Key Laboratory of Interdiscipline and Translational Medicine, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, China. 2Department of General Surgery, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.
3Pharmaceutical Sciences Laboratory, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland. 4Turku Bioscience Centre, University of
Turku and Åbo Akademi University, Turku, Finland. 5Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The Second Afﬁliated Hospital and Yuying Children’s Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325027 Zhejiang, China. 6Department of Ultrasound, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 200032, PR
China. 7These authors contributed equally: Jiaqi Yan, Xiaodong Ma, Danna Liang, Meixin Ran.
e-mail: fame198288@126.com; shenxian@wmu.edu.cn; hongbo.zhang@abo.ﬁ
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42740-2
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:6905 
21