The EuroBiotech Journal                                                                                        REVIEW
176
VOLUME 7 ISSUE 4  |  OCTOBER 2023
         Medical Biotechnology
Abstract 
Abstract 
Bioactive peptides are protein components which are inactive within the protein structure, and upon release by enzymatic 
hydrolysis, they exhibit special physiological functions. In the last years, the characteristics of bioactive peptides obtained from 
various plant, animal and microbial sources have received much attention. Bioactive peptides are produced using hydrolysis by 
enzymes extracted from plants or microorganisms, or digestive enzymes and fermentation by proteolytic starter cultures. The 
composition and sequence of the amino acids determines their different functions, including relaxing effects, solute binding 
properties, strengthening of the immune system, antioxidant, anti-microbial, anti-inflammatory, cholesterol-lowering and 
anti-hypertensive effects. Bioactive peptides are identified by different methods including membrane separation techniques 
and chromatography from protein hydrolysis products and using spectrometric techniques. The possibility of using bioactive 
peptides as health or therapeutic components depends on ensuring their bio stability, bioavailability and safety.
Introduction 
Introduction 
Centuries of experience and research have shown that there is a direct connection be­
tween nutrition and health. The ability of foods and their compounds to enhance the 
overall quality of life has been the focus of scientists for years. Until now, many bioac­
tive compounds have been derived from macro biomolecules (such as lipids and pro­
teins). Although the compounds made from proteins are among the most important and 
commonly studied types, there are still many open questions In the human body, many 
protein hydrolysis products have shown different health benefits. Protein hydrolysis prod­
ucts (bioactive peptides) are special protein components that have significant biological 
effects and exhibit a positive effect on the function or condition of the body, so they have 
health-giving effects and are economically very important due to their use in the produc­
tion of super-beneficial foods and medicines (Shahidi and Zhong, 2008). The different 
physiological roles of peptides have made them a suitable choice for the manufacturing of 
therapeutic compounds (Akbarian et al., 2022). Different types of physiological activities 
of bioactive peptides have been reported, which depend on the type, number, sequence 
and properties of amino acids in the peptides (Danquah and Agyei, 2012).
From a nutritional standpoint, the bioavailability (=degree of biological availability) of 
peptides is higher than that of proteins and free amino acids. In addition, smaller peptides 
have fewer sensitizing effects compared to primary proteins, and for this reason, protein 
hydrolysis products are widely used in infant food formulations (Danquah and Agyei, 
2012).
Concerning therapeutic applications of bioactive peptides, much attention has been 
paid to the use of bioactive peptides in the field of pharmaceuticals and the production 
of beneficial foods. Peptides are preferable to traditional drugs for the following reasons: 
1. They have more specialized activity towards the target tissue and therefore have little or 
no toxicity effects and can be effective even at low concentrations (Akbarian et al., 2022). 
This feature is very effective in the treatment of chronic diseases. 
2. Chemical compounds from synthesis that are typically used as medicine have a kind of 
1 Department of Animal Science, Ahar Faculty of 
Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Tabriz, 
Ahar, Iran. mbesharati@tabrizu.ac.ir (M.B.)
2 Circe Biotechnologie GmbH, Kerpengasse 125, 1210 
Vienna, Austria. m.lackner@circe.at (M.L.)
DOI:
DOI: 10.2478/ebtj-2023-0013
© 2023 Maghsoud Besharati et al., published by Sciendo 
This work was licensed under the Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 License.
Bioactive peptides: a review
Maghsoud Besharati1*, Maximilian Lackner2*

177
The EuroBiotech Journal
cumulative effect in the organism. These chemical compounds 
may cause environmental problems due to their disposal while 
they are still active. On the contrary, bioactive peptides do not 
accumulate in organisms and are easily destroyed in the en­
vironment (De Castro and Sato, 2015). A number of positive 
physiological effects of bioactive peptides include antioxidant, 
antimicrobial, antihypertensive, immune system strengthen­
ing, etc. They were reported in vitro or in vivo, each of which 
occurs due to the effect on one of the body’s systems (Figure 1). 
Due to the importance of natural antioxidants, many research­
es on the antioxidant activity of bioactive peptides have been 
carried out and natural antioxidants have been identified as 
suitable substitutes for artificial antioxidants. Also, many stud­
ies have been done about the antimicrobial properties of bio­
active peptides. Bioactive peptides are compounds of natural 
origin that can be obtained from different sources (plants, an­
imals, marine) was extracted and used in the formulation of 
food and medicine (Gobbetti et al., 2007; Bazinet and Firdaous, 
2009). During the past two decades, special attention has been 
paid to bioactive peptides that are released from food proteins 
(Korhonen and Pihlanto, 2006). Bioactive peptides are inactive 
in the main sequence of proteins, but they show multiple prop­
erties after being released, which is achieved through enzymat­
ic hydrolysis. Enzymatic hydrolysis is one of the methods used 
to improve Application and nutritional features of food pro­
teins as well as the production of bioactiv e peptides (Marambe, 
2011). 
The results of studies by many researchers have shown that 
peptides obtained from different food sources have a wide 
range of multiple biological activities such as antioxidant activ­
ity, antihypertensive activity, antimicrobial and other charac­
teristics (Akbari Adregani and Shabani, 2018).
Today, about 150 types of peptides are used in the pharma­
ceutical and medical industries (Lau and Dunn, 2018). So far, 
more than 60 types of drugs have been produced using bio­
active peptides (Fosgerau and Ohshima, 2015). Bioactive pep­
tides have valuable nutritional properties that can improve the 
health of different body organs. These compounds are especial­
ly used in the production of useful foods and many medicines 
(Shahidi and Zhong, 2008.) because small peptide particles 
cause less sensitivity compared to proteins (the main sensitivity 
is digestive sensitivity; in other words, peptides are more sen­
sitive to proteins are easier to digest and absorb) so they can 
easily be used in infant food formulation (Agyei and Danquah, 
2012). Peptides have a series of antimicrobial activities that can 
obtained by the hydrolysis of food proteins and secondary me­
tabolites of some bacteria, such as bacteriocins.
Lactoferrin is one of the most important antimicrobial pep­
tides known, whose enzymatic digestion leads to the produc­
tion of other antimicrobial peptides with greater killing and 
inhibitory activity compared to lactoferrin itself (Mirdamadi 
et al, 2017). Antimicrobial peptides prevent the growth of mi­
crobial cells and thus destroy many bacterial and fungal cells 
(Sanchez and Vazquez, 2017).
Antimicrobial peptides
Antimicrobial peptides
Antimicrobial peptides are ancient (evolutionary) weapons 
(Moghaddam et al., 2023). Their widespread distribution 
throughout the world of animals and insects shows that anti­
microbial peptides play a vital role in the evolution of multi­
cellular organisms. Antimicrobial peptides are still effective de­
fensive weapons, disproving the common belief that bacteria, 
fungi, and viruses can become resistant to any imaginable sub­
stance (Moghaddam et al., 2023). Antimicrobial peptides target 
the poorly understood “Achilles heel of the microbe,” a key part 
of the microbe’s cell membrane design that distinguishes mi­
crobes from multicellular animals and plants. The knowledge 
gained from extensive research has led to commercialization 
efforts to invent new disinfection treatments.
Peptides with antimicrobial activity can be obtained both 
through the hydrolysis of proteins in foodstuff and as second­
ary metabolites from bacteria (bacteriocins). Until now, pep­
tides with different antimicrobial activity have been detected 
in milk, of which lactoferrin is one of the most important ones. 
Enzymatic digestion of lactoferrin leads to the production of 
other antimicrobial peptides with more killing or inhibitory 
activity than lactoferrin (Mirdamadi et al., 2017).
The mechanism of antimicrobial activity of these peptides 
was found to be diverse. Although most of them destroy the 
stability of the target membrane by creating a hole in the cyto­
plasmic membrane, a group of peptides by targeting intracel­
lular molecules and disrupting the synthesis of protein, DNA, 
enzyme activity or cell wall lead to the destruction of the target 
cell (Nicolas, 2009).
By binding to the surface of the target bacteria, the pore-cre­
ating peptides disturb the activity of the target cell membrane 
and as a result lead to its destruction (Abdou et al., 2007) stud­
ies show that the amine terminal region in this group of pep­
tides plays a role in the killing activity (Dionysius and Milne, 
1997). Penetrating the cytoplasmic membrane, these peptides 
are usually short sequences that have the ability to pass through 
the target cell membrane and are unstructured in solutions and 
as soon as they contact the cytoplasmic membrane, they find a 
secondary structure of alpha helix or beta sheets. In this situa­
tion, a biphilic structure is seen in these peptides. In this way, 
the polar part with the polar head of lipids and the non-polar 
part with the acyl head of the membrane (Last et al., 2013). 
Study has shown that most of these peptides contain less than 
92 amino acids and are rich in cationic and hydrophobic amino 
acids. Previous research has also shown that the short length of 
the peptide chain reduces the probability of the peptide bind­
ing to the membrane. Because for antimicrobial activity to oc­
cur, it is necessary for the peptide to fill the thickness of the cell 
membrane, which is about 42 Å. In addition, the holes created 
by small peptides will not be stable enough. On the other hand, 
reducing the length of the peptides reduces their tendency to 
create the second type of alphahelix structure. Research has 
shown that it plays an important role in the antimicrobial activ­
ity of peptides (Strömstedt et al., 2010). Peptides smaller than 3 
kilo Daltons (kDa) obtained from the hydrolysis of camel milk 

178  |  VOLUME 7 ISSUE 4  |  OCTOBER 2023   
or from whey proteins by protease K have more antibacteri­
al activity against Escherichia coli compared to other peptide 
components. The reason for that is the easier passage of small 
peptides through the membrane of bacteria compared to larg­
er peptides (Salami et al., 2010). The peptide component (9-12 
kDa) was obtained from the autolysis of the yeast Chloromyces 
marcianus at a concentration of 21.2±3.13 mg/ml. It prevents 
the growth of both Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus 
aureus bacteria, and at a concentration of 32.9 mg/ml, Bethrat­
ib has inhibitory activity of 2±82.44% and 1.9±77.18% against 
Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus (Mirzaei et 
al., 2015).
Investigations show that the inhibitory activity of bacterio­
cins, another group of antimicrobial peptides, depends on the 
composition of the culture medium and the growth conditions 
of the producing bacteria. NaCl concentration and green­
house time are effective in the optimal production of pentocin 
bacteriocin. The two mentioned factors among other factors 
(amount of tween, amount of peptone, amount of yeast extract, 
size of inoculum) were selected as the most effective factors in 
the production of pentocin using the statistical program of the 
response surface method (Motahari et al., 2016; Mirdamadi et 
al., 2017).
Cancer is one of the main causes of death worldwide, and in 
the last decades, significant progress has been made in the field 
of its diagnosis and treatment (Ferlay et al., 2010; Nourbakhsh 
et al., 2018). Common types of cancer treatments include ra­
diation therapy, chemotherapy, and their combination, which 
can lead to the creation of resistance, toxicity, and damage to 
healthy cells in addition to removing cancer cells (Harris et al., 
2013). In general, today, finding a suitable, cheap and less-com­
plicated treatment for various cancers is one of the main con­
cerns of cancer research (Panahi et al., 2018).
One of these solutions is the use of anti-cancer peptides, 
which have attracted the attention of many scientists due to 
their selectivity towards cancer cells, fewer side effects, and 
their effectiveness (Hoskin and Ramamoorthy, 2008). One of 
the types of peptides used is the antimicrobial peptide, which is 
part of the innate immune response against microbes in many 
species. These peptides have a low molecular weight (10-40 
amino acids) and an amphipathic and cationic structure that 
allows them to target the negative membranes of cancer cells 
(like bacteria). In recent decades, the use of these peptides 
as anticancer agents has been considered as a new treatment 
method (Wang and Wang, 2004; Ejtehadifar et al., 2017; Sch­
weizer, 2009). Antimicrobial peptides can act against cancer 
cells through various mechanisms such as apoptosis, necrosis, 
cell membrane lysis, inhibition of angiogenesis, and activation 
of the immune system (Ejtehadifar et al., 2017; Schweizer, 2009; 
Chernysh et al., 2002).
Opioid peptides (Relaxing peptides)
Opioid peptides (Relaxing peptides)
Previous studies showed that a group of peptides can play an 
important role in the nervous system, and these were called 
opioid molecules (Teschemacher et al., 1997). Opioid peptides 
are small molecules with two hormonal and neurotransmit­
ter activities. Based on their biological activity, these peptides 
are divided into agonist and antagonist groups, which imitate 
the activity of opiates in the brain with their short amino acid 
sequences. Opioid peptides obtained from food usually have 
4 to 8 amino acids. These peptides create different activities 
by connecting to dissimilar types of receptors. The control of 
bowel movement and sedative effect are among the activities 
of this group of peptides (Shrikant Sharma and Rana, 2011). 
Beta-casomorphins are the first known opioid peptides derived 
from food proteins from milk beta-casein protein. Beta-caso­
morphin-7 having the sequence Tyr-Pro-Phe-Pro-Gly-Pro-Ile 
is the most famous peptide of this family (Mirdamadi et al., 
2017).
The sequence of this peptide may be slightly different due 
to differences in the structure of the casein protein in vari­
ous breeds of cattle. Alphalactorphin “Tyr-Gly-Leu-Phe” and 
betalactorphin “Tyr-Leu-Leu-Phe” are opioid peptides derived 
from milk proteins (Chakrabarti and Wu, 2016). Enzymatic di­
gestion of the proteins in wheat gluten yielded several opioid 
peptides whose amino acid sequence was determined. It differs 
from peptides derived from other sources (Rutherfurd-Mark­
wick, 2012).
Opioid peptides that are formed in the body act as neuro­
modulators, which alter the actions of other neurotransmitters 
in the central nervous system. As a result of this modulation, 
opioid peptides can—among other functions—induce pain re­
lief and euphoria as well as affect certain behaviors, including 
alcohol consumption (Froehlich, 1997).
“Endogenous opioid peptides are produced and often re­
leased together with other neurotransmitter molecules in the 
brain, pituitary gland, and adrenal gland as well as by single 
neurons in the central and peripheral nervous systems. For ex­
ample, neurons in the carotid body simultaneously release an 
encephalin and dopamine” (Froehlich, 1997). Similarly, single 
neurons in the peripheral nervous system of rats simultaneous­
ly release an encephalin and the neurotransmitter norepineph­
rine (Froehlich, 1997).
Peptides that modulate the immune system
Peptides that modulate the immune system
There is a clear connection between human nutrition and 
immunity. Bioactive peptides derived from different protein 
sources have immune system enhancing effects in both in vi­
tro and in vivo studies. Peptides that strengthen the immune 
system can be produced naturally during digestive digestion 
and thus affect immunological responses and cell function, or 
they can be produced during enzymatic hydrolysis in labora­
tory conditions and used as food and medicine. In addition 
to its usual nutritional roles, milk plays an important role in 
strengthening the immune system of babies at birth (Mirdama­
di et al., 2017).
Previous studies show that bioactive peptides derived from 
casein or whey are effective in stimulation and proliferation 
of lymphocytes, macrophages, antibody synthesis, regulation 
of cytokines and phagocytotic activity. A group of these pep­

179
The EuroBiotech Journal
tides, such as beta casein f191, play a role in stimulating macro­
phages. Beta casein f63 is effective in stimulating phagocytosis. 
Although in vivo research shows that both mentioned peptides 
are ineffective in creating immunity in mice (Fiat et al., 1993). 
Also, studies found that peptides derived from milk proteins 
are also effective in the proliferation of human peripheral lym­
phocytes (Kayser and Meisel 1996), monocytes and Helper T 
cells are among the cells that interact with these peptides.
Lactoferrin acts similarly to opsonin (Mohanty et al., 2016) 
after breaking down and creating β-lactoferrin by binding to 
neutrophils (Mohanty et al., 2016). Lymphocytes and the type 
of activity are affected by the concentration of the peptide. The 
types that have inhibitory activity at low concentrations and 
have stimulating effects at higher concentrations (Trompette 
et al., 2003).  Angiotensin converting enzyme with cutting the 
carboxyl end turns angiotensin I into angiotensin II and as a 
result increases blood pressure. Antihypertensive peptides pre­
vent blood pressure increase by inhibiting this enzyme. Most 
known antihypertensive peptides have been isolated from 
cow’s milk casein. Although antihypertensive peptides such 
as alphalactorphin and betalactorphin are also better isolated 
from alphalactalbumin and lactaglobin proteins (Mohanty et 
al., 2016).
The relationship between the size of peptides and the in­
hibitory activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme peptides 
reported (Ruiz-ruiz et al., 2013). Also, research showed that 
peptide components were smaller than 3 and 9-3 kilodaltons 
when made through the hydrolysis of proteins of the yeast 
Clauromyces marcianus by trypsin and chymotrypsin enzymes. 
They have the highest ACE inhibitory activity (Mirzaei et al., 
2016). Both regions of the mentioned enzyme (region C and 
N) have the active site containing His-Glu-XX-His sequence. 
These active sites are located in the gap between the two regions 
and are protected by the amine cap. This cap limits the access of 
large polypeptides to the active site and this issue can explain 
the greater effect of small peptides in preventing the activity of 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (Gobbetti et al., 2002).
Although detailed information about the effect of the struc­
ture on the function of this group of peptides is not available, 
research shows that binding of peptides to angiotensin-con­
verting enzyme is dependent on the carboxyl end of the pep­
tide, and peptides with hydrophobic amino acids in this section 
are stronger inhibitors. These amino acids actually interact with 
the active site of the enzyme. On the other hand, other research 
reports that most aromatic amino acids, including tryptophan, 
tyrosine, and phenylalanine, as well as proline, are effective on 
this interaction (Cheung et al., 1980). The ratio of hydrophilic/
hydrophobic amino acids in the peptide sequence plays a key 
role in the level of ACE inhibitory activity. Because the hydro­
philic amino acids limit the access of the peptide to the active 
site of the enzyme (Li et al., 2004).
Peptides that bind to minerals in proteins enter interaction 
with ions in these minerals through their side chain amino ac­
ids. For example, alpha casein and beta casein interact with di­
valent and trivalent cations such as Ca2+. But in addition to pro­
teins, peptides also have mineral binding activity. For example, 
phosphopeptides derived from casein, which are called casein 
phosphopeptides, also have this activity (Walther and Sieber, 
2011). These phosphopeptides play a role in maintaining calci­
um, phosphorus, and other mineral elements in a soluble form 
under intestinal pH conditions (Akbarian et al., 2023). This ac­
tivity is a result of the presence of phosphorylated amino acid 
serine, which has the ability to create salt with minerals such 
as calcium. As a result of the enzymatic digestion of milk, a di­
verse group of these peptides are produced (Miquel et al, 2005). 
The anionic structure of these peptides protects them from fur­
ther proteolytic digestion and leads to the creation of a soluble 
complex with calcium and, as a result, the formation of calcium 
phosphate, which is practically insoluble in water. The type of 
amino acid composition in the phosphorylated region plays an 
essential role in the level of calcium binding activity in this cat­
egory of peptides (Gagnaire et al., 1996). These peptides have 
also been reported to be effective in preventing tooth decay, 
osteoporosis, insomnia, and elevated blood pressure (Akbar­
ian et al., 2023). Studies in animals report the positive effect of 
these peptides on calcium absorption in animals (Akbarian et 
al., 2023). A group of researchers have shown that whey protein 
fermentation with Lactobacillus heloticus is effective in the pro­
liferation of osteoblasts in vitro (Akbarian et al., 2022). There 
are other reports based on increasing the bioavailability of iron 
in laboratory mouse models (Korhonen and Pihlanto, 2000).
 
Antioxidant peptides
Antioxidant peptides
Peptides with antioxidant activity can be won from enzymatic 
hydrolysis of proteins contained in food (Daliri et al., 2021). 
Extensive research on antioxidant peptides derived from ca­
sein, whey proteins, soybean, rice bran, wheat protein, egg 
protein and marine products was performed (Chang et al., 
2013; Zhang et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2015; Wattanasiritham et 
al.,2015; Cian et al., 2015; Ko et al., 2013; Nimalaratne et al., 
2015). These peptides are effective with various mechanisms 
including the removal of free radicals, the inhibition of lipid 
peroxidation ((the attac on lipids containing carbon-carbon 
double bond(s), especially polyunsaturated fatty acids (PU­
FAs)), avoidance of chelation of metal ions and formation of 
additional compounds. In addition to being important in the 
survival of body cells, antioxidation is also important in food 
and in order to reduce the possibility of spoilage (Walther and 
Sieber, 2011). Most of the studied peptides in this group are 
derived from casein-αs. Various studies have shown that pep­
tides with low molecular weight have more antioxidant proper­
ties than types with high molecular weight (Daliri et al., 2021). 
This effect is related to the better reaction of active free radi­
cals with small peptides and was previously reported about the 
peptide components obtained from the hydrolysis products of 
meat, barley and canola proteins (Bamdad et al., 2011; He et 
al., 2013; Alashi et al., 2014). Also, the results of the research 
showed that the antioxidant activity of the protein hydrolysis 
product of sardine fish waste increases with the increase in the 
degree of hydrolysis and suggested that short chain peptides are 

180  |  VOLUME 7 ISSUE 4  |  OCTOBER 2023   
better antioxidants compared to long chain peptides (Bougatef 
et al., 2010). Further studies showed that the smaller peptide 
component from 3 kilo Daltons obtained from Saccharomy­
ces cerevisiae yeast protein hydrolysis by trypsin enzyme has 
more DPPH and ABTS radical inhibitory activity than other 
peptide components (Mirzaei et al., 2015). Hydrophobic amino 
acids increase the solubility of peptides in the lipid phase and 
their accessibility to hydrophobic radicals, thus increasing their 
antioxidant activity (Chen et al., 1996). The high reactivity of 
aliphatic groups in alanine and valine with hydrophobic poly­
unsaturated fatty acids has been reported (Qian et al., 2008). 
They have also reported the presence of the amino acid alanine 
in the terminal positions and proline in the sequence of pep­
tides with antioxidant properties isolated from gluten (Suetsu­
na and Chen 2002). In addition, to the role of aromatic amino 
acids, especially tyrosine, in the antioxidant activity of peptides 
(Duan et al., 2014; Pena-Ramos et al., 2004).
Bioactive peptides were also shown to exhibit mineral-binding 
activity (Akbarian et al., 2023). Proteins basically interact with 
mineral ions through their side chain amino acids and form 
the so-called chelate (Akbarian et al., 2023). For example, alpha 
casein and beta casein proteins interact with inorganic cations 
such as calcium (Walter and Sieber, 2011). Peptides derived 
from casein are highly effective in maintaining calcium, phos­
phorus and other mineral elements in soluble form under in­
testinal pH conditions (Miquel et al, 2005; Table 1).
Peptone
Peptone
Peptone is a compound with a limited number of amino acids, 
usually between 3 and 10 amino acids, which is obtained from 
the breakdown (hydrolysis) of protein, usually milk and animal 
meat (mostly of bovine and porcine origin). Other sources are 
also possible, e.g. bacterial single cell protein (SCP) (Lackner et 
al., 2022), yeast or plants. Microbial-derived peptone current­
ly sees a strong increase and demand (Newsnet, 2023). Pep­
tones act as nutritional mediators in the growth of bacteria and 
fungi. Bacteria and cells need a source of carbon and nitrogen 
for their growth and development, and peptones are the single 
most important and main source of nitrogen for their growth 
and development (Tuysuz et al., 2021). Peptones are usually 
prepared in the form of powder or granules by the spray-dryer 
method and are soluble in water and aqueous solvents.
Peptones are used in various industries such as vaccine and 
drug production institutes, cosmetics and hygiene, yeast and 
yeast production factories, production of bacterial and cell cul­
ture media, including in medical diagnosis laboratories, some 
food industries that produce processed foods and ready meals, 
as well as ice cream production and The production of supple­
ments, concentrates, and animal and poultry feed and many 
other productions of biological (biological) products are widely 
used.
Peptones are among the most important organic nitrogen 
sources which are added to culture media for growing micro­
organisms. They are defined as protein hydrolysates that are 
readily soluble in water and are not precipitable by heat, by 
alkalis, or by saturation with ammonium sulfate (Taskin and 
Kurbanoglu, 2011).
Peptones are proteins that have been broken down into 
smaller parts by enzymes or acids. In fact, the result of this 
decomposition is the production of peptides and amino acids. 
Tryptone is a special type of peptone that is actually a protein 
(usually the milk protein casein) that is digested by the enzyme 
trypsin. The composition of peptone depends on the protein 
source and how it is digested. These factors determine the 
penetration rate of amino acids and peptides. For example, a 
common type of peptone is the peptone obtained from the di­
gestion of soy protein by papin enzyme. Compared to tryptone, 
this type of peptone has a lower weight percentage of total ni­
trogen, as well as a different distribution of amino acids and 
the amount of carbohydrates is more than its other differences.
The proteose peptone fraction of milk is defined as the pro­
teins/peptides soluble in 12% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) after 
milk has been heated to 95ºC for 30 min and acidified to pH 
4.6 (Deeth and Bansal, 2019). Heating followed by acidification 
precipitates caseins and the major whey proteins denatured by 
the heat treatment (O’Mahony & Fox, 2013). Proteose peptones 
account for 0.8-1.2 g/L of milk (Claeys et al. 2014; Sørensen & 
Petersen, 1993).
“Proteose peptones are a mixture of proteins/peptides. They 
can be classified as those resulting from proteolysis of caseins 
and those indigenous to milk. The major products of prote­
olysis in this fraction are proteose peptone 5 (PP5), proteose 
peptone 8 (slow) (PP8s), and proteose peptone 8 (fast)(PP8f). 
These are, respectively, the following fragments of β-casein 
resulting from plasmin-catalyzed proteolysis: f1-105/107, f29-
105/107, and f1-28. Other minor fractions such as f29-105 and 
f29-107 have been identified; several other fractions are pres­
ent in low concentrations” (Deeth and Bansal, 2019). As these 
peptides are casein proteolytic products they can be considered 
with the caseins (O’Mahony and Fox, 2013). The main proteose 
peptones in milk were found to be proteose peptone 3 (PP3) 
and osteopontin (Deeth and Bansal, 2019).
Production methods of bioactive peptides
Production methods of bioactive peptides
As the most common method for producing bioactive pep­
tides, enzymatic hydrolysis by digestive enzymes can be named 
(Marambe, 2011). Once the amino acid sequence of the mol­
ecules is known, peptides may be synthesized by chemical 
synthesis or recombinant DNA technology (Marambe, 2011). 
Chemical synthesis methods are suitable for the production of 
short sequences and recombinant DNA technology for the pro­
duction of larger peptides (Moller et al., 2008).
Basically, bioactive peptides can be produced from precur­
sor proteins in three ways (Figure 1): a- enzymatic hydrolysis 
by enzymes extracted from microorganisms or plants, b- enzy­
matic hydrolysis by digestive enzymes, c- fermentation by pro­
teolytic starter cultures, in most studies, a combination (a) and 
(b) or (a) and (c) have been effective in the production of short 
chain peptides (Korhonen and Pihlanto, 2006).

181
The EuroBiotech Journal
Enzymatic hydrolysis
Enzymatic hydrolysis
Specific as well as non-specific proteases are preferably used to 
obtain bioactive peptides, due to a shorter time needed to reach 
the same degree of hydrolysis and better control over the hy­
drolysis process to get peptides with specific molecular weights 
and amino acid compositions. In this process, various enzymes 
such as pepsin, bromelain, trypsin, chymotrypsin and papain 
are used under their optimal pH and temperature conditions 
Table 1. 
Table 1. Some bioactive peptides isolated from different protein sources.
Protein source
Used microorganism or enzyme
Peptide sequence
Therapeutic use
Reference
Beta-casein-casein as1
Lactobacillus GG
enzymes+pepsin & trypsin
YPFP
Opioid
Park and Nam 
(2015)
Saccharomyces cere­
visiae
Trypsin
YGKPVAVPAR
antihypertensive 
and Antioxidants
Mirzaei et al., 
(2015)
Camel milk and cow 
milk
L. rhamnosus PTCC 1637
Peptides weighing 
9-12 and Less than 9 
kilo Daltons
Antioxidants and 
antihypertensive
Moslehishad et 
al. (2013)
Milk
Streptococcus thermophiles
Lactobacillus bulgaricus
YPYY
antihypertensive
Tsai et al., (2008)
Sodium Caseinate
L. acidophilus subsp. ATCC 4356 lactis 
G
Peptides with a mo­
lecular weight of less 
than 3 kilodaltons
immune system 
imrovement
Stuknyte et al., 
(2011)
Hydrolysates of camel 
milk protein
KDLWDDFKGL and 
MPSKPPLL
Antidiabetic
Mudgil et al., 
(2018)
Hydrolysates of camel 
milk protein
LPVPG
Antidiabetic
Nongonierma et 
al., (2017)
Fermented goat milk
Lactobacillus plantarum 69
ND
ACE inhibitor
Chen et al., 
(2018)
Hydrolyzed goat milk
ND
Antimicrobial 
activity
Zanutto-Elgui et 
al., (2019)
Figure 1.
Figure 1. Physiological function of bioactive peptides

182  |  VOLUME 7 ISSUE 4  |  OCTOBER 2023   
(Singh et al., 2014).
Many of the known bioactive peptides have been produced, 
mainly using digestive enzymes, including pepsin and trypsin. 
For example, ACE-inhibiting peptides and calcium-binding 
phosphopeptides, CPPs) (CPPs are commonly produced by 
trypsin). Other digestive enzymes (Korhonen and Pihlanto, 
2006) and different enzyme combinations of proteinases, in­
cluding alcalase, chymotrypsin, pancreatin, pepsin, and ther­
molysin, as well as enzymes from bacterial and fungal sources, 
have also been used to produce bioactive peptides from dif­
ferent proteins (Kilara and Panyam, 2003). In addition, several 
enzymes with plant sources, such as papain and pronase have 
been used for enzymatic hydrolysis of soybean flour and wheat 
flour. Many bioactive peptides, such as biogenic, opioid, im­
munomodulatory, solute-binding, antihypertensive and anti­
microbial peptides can be obtained by enzymatic hydrolysis of 
food such as milk, animal meat and fish, corn, wheat, soy and 
eggs (Singh et al., 2014).
In industrial applications, the use of stabilized enzymes is 
more common than conventional soluble enzymes due to sev­
eral advantages (Akbarian et al., 2022). Immobilized enzymes 
can save costs to lower losses. They also enable enzymatic hy­
drolysis under milder and more controlled conditions than 
caustic or acidic hydrolysis. In addition, the stabilized enzyme 
can be recovered and the production of secondary metabolites 
caused by the autolysis of enzymes can be prevented (Agyei and 
Danquah, 2011). Also, industry typically relies on continuous 
hydrolysis processes, which is more effective and less expensive 
than conventional batch methods and is obtained by using re­
actors equipped with ultrafiltration membranes with different 
components, which may be combined with other purification 
techniques or units (Dionysius et al., 1997). 
Fermentation by proteolytic starter cultures
Fermentation by proteolytic starter cultures
Many dairy starter cultures that are used industrially have high 
proteolytic power. Therefore, bioactive peptides can be pro­
duced by both initiator and non-initiator bacteria used in fer­
mented food products. Lactic acid bacteria, which are a large 
group of beneficial bacteria in nature and found in our diges­
tive system, are used to produce bioactive peptides. Their role 
in the preparation of fermented products is not only because of 
their physiological effect but also because of their technological 
importance in the development of texture and taste (Singh et 
al., 2014).
The proteolytic system of lactic acid bacteria such as Lac­
tococcus lactis, Lactobacillus heloticus, and Lactobacillus del­
bruecki subspecies bulgaricus is now well known. This system 
consists of a protein attached to the cell wall and a number of 
intracellular proteins including endopeptidases, aminopepti­
dases, tripeptidases and dipeptidases (Christensen et al., 1999; 
Kunjiet et al., 1996).
Some studies have shown that the use of multiple fermen­
tation as well as enzymatic hydrolysis in combination with 
the fermentation process increases the production of bio­
active peptides. In a research, it has been reported that milk 
fermentation with a commercial starter culture including five 
strains of lactic acid bacteria increases the ACE inhibitory ac­
tivity (Chen et al., 2007). Treatment of milk with trypsin en­
zyme before fermentation with yogurt starter cultures leads 
to the creation of components rich in phosphopeptides. So, in 
the fermented samples treated with trypsin, the production of 
calcium phosphopeptides (CPP) β-CN (1-25)-4P and -αs1 CN 
(43-79)-7 was reported, while the amount of proteolysis was 
not significant in the samples that were fermented alone (Lo­
renzen and Meisel, 2005). High activity of inhibiting ABTS and 
DPPH radicals of camel milk fermented with Leconostoc lactis 
bacteria has been reported (Soleymanzadeh et al., 2016). In ad­
dition to living microorganisms, proteolytic enzymes isolated 
from lactic acid bacteria have been successfully used to create 
bioactive peptides from milk proteins. In a study, they mea­
sured the ACE inhibitory activity of casein hydrolysis prod­
uct using 5 different commercial proteolytic enzymes. Among 
these enzymes, peptides produced from a protease isolated 
from Aspergillus aureus show the highest ACE inhibitory activ­
ity in vitro compared to other peptides (Mizuno et al., 2005). 
In comparison, microbial fermentation is a cheaper method to 
produce bioactive peptides than enzymatic hydrolysis. Because 
microorganisms are a cheap source of proteases and are known 
to be safe. The cost of bacterial cultures is relatively low due to 
the minimum nutritional requirements and short growth time, 
in addition, the proteases of lactic acid bacteria are expressed 
on the cell wall, which makes the extraction protocols relatively 
easy and cheap (Agyei and Danquah, 2011).
Concentration, purification and identification of bioac­
Concentration, purification and identification of bioac­
tive peptides
tive peptides
The product of enzymatic hydrolysis of proteins contains a va­
riety of peptides with different lengths and amino acid com­
positions. Therefore, separation and purification of bioactive 
peptides is an important part in the process of identifying 
bioactive peptides and determining their physical and chem­
ical properties and evaluating their biological activity. Bioac­
tive peptides are isolated from protein hydrolysis products by 
different methods, including membrane separation techniques 
and chromatography (Aluko, 2012).
In the membrane separation method, the protein hydroly­
sis product is poured on the surface of the porous membrane 
using pressure, and depending on the characteristics of the 
membrane, separation is performed based on the size of the 
peptide or electrical charge. Membranes are divided into types 
of microfiltration, ultrafiltration and nanofiltration. The most 
common types of ultrafiltration membranes are types with 1, 
9, 3, 12 cut-off. However, other types of membranes, for exam­
ple, with a cut-off of 2 and 1 kilodalton, have also been used 
in various researches to separate peptide components (Aluko, 
2012). Reverse phase chromatography is the most common 
method for separating and purifying peptides, which allows for 
quick separation and identification of peptides and, in addi­
tion, determines their hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties. 
Chromatography device is usually used in combination with 

183
The EuroBiotech Journal
quantitative and qualitative analysis equipment such as UV de­
tector or mass spectrometry. Usually, a combination of several 
techniques is used to isolate and purify peptides. For example, 
first the peptide components are separated using membrane fil­
tration and then purification is done using reverse phase chro­
matography. Protein sequencer and amino acid analyzer are 
the most common devices that to determine the composition 
of amino acids and their sequence. Other methods such as UV-
Mass, fluorescence detection, Electrospray Ionization-tandem 
detection, and mass spectrometry are also used to identify pep­
tides (Shahidi and Zhong, 2008).
Use of bioactive peptides in formulation functional foods 
Use of bioactive peptides in formulation functional foods 
The presence of bioactive peptides as food components has 
been reported as health or therapeutic components in many 
fermented food products, and there is certainly a potential for 
the use of proteins and bioactive peptides as functional foods. 
People who are concerned about their health and people with 
special nutritional needs are the target groups for foods en­
riched with bioactive peptides. In addition, it is possible to add 
pure or synthetic bioactive peptides with different biological 
activities to different foods. For example, two peptides VPP 
and IPP with antihypertensive activity have been identified and 
commercially produced (Korhonen and Phlanto, 2006), but the 
use of bioactive peptides depends on solving problems such as 
biostability of peptides and their bioavailability.
When beneficial compounds are added to a food or bever­
age, they are subject to reactions with other compounds and 
may have significant effects on the overall quality of the prod­
uct. Therefore, checking the stability and quality is the first step 
in the production of ultra-beneficial foods. The loss of one or a 
number of nutritional or flavor compounds or the creation of 
bad taste are factors that reduce the shelf life of products (Ha­
mid et al., 2002; Abdul-Hamid et al., 2002).
The stability of bioactive peptides during the storage of food 
products is also an important issue that affects their bioavail­
ability and factors such as light intensity, oxygen level, pack­
aging permeability, temperature, relative humidity and inter­
nal factors including surface hydrophobicity, the presence of 
regenerating sugars, moisture content, pH and the degree of 
hydrolysis affect the stability of peptides (Rao et al., 2012; Day 
et al., 2009). For example, they investigated the effect of heat 
treatment in combination with acid and base on the inhibito­
ry activity of ACE peptides derived from bovine casein. The 
results of their research showed that heating at a temperature 
of 122 °C at a pH of 5 to 12 decreased the activity of ACE in­
hibitory peptides and the appearance of the peptides darkened 
significantly. After heating in the presence of acid and alkali, 
the content of amino groups of peptides decreased significantly 
(Wu et al., 2014), but in the research of ACE inhibitory pep­
tides obtained from dry-ripened Spanish meat, they have the 
same activity before and after heat treatment (from 92-117 de­
grees Celsius) in 12-3 minutes (Escudero et al., 2014).
For the biological activity of peptides, it is necessary for 
these compounds to remain in active form after digestive diges­
tion and be absorbed from the digestive system (Mirdamadi et 
al., 2017). Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the bioavail­
ability of food bioactive peptides before their mass production.
When bioactive proteins and peptides enter the digestive sys­
tem after consumption, the function of digestive enzymes may 
affect their biological activity by changing their structure (Dan­
iel and Kottra, 2004). The released peptides may show different 
functions. Some of them show their effects in the digestive sys­
tem and some after absorption and distribution in the blood 
stream and reaching the target organ. Di and tripeptides can be 
absorbed intact from the digestive system (Shimizu and Son, 
2007).
In addition, animal studies have shown that larger peptides 
(91-12 amino acids), resulting from the digestion of food pro­
teins, can also be absorbed intact in the digestive tract and 
show their biological effects. However, the bioavailability of 
peptides and their absorption mechanism are still under study. 
The research showed that the activity of ACE inhibitory pep­
tides obtained from Spanish dry-ripened meat did not change 
significantly after digestion by digestive enzymes in the in vitro 
environment (Escudero, Mora et al., 2014). 
One of the practical methods to increase the stability of bio­
active peptides is their microcoating. The microcoating of the 
compounds protects the sensitive components in the capsule 
and thus isolates them from the outside environment. This bar­
rier provides protection against various factors such as oxygen, 
light and water and causes controlled release of compounds and 
prevents contact with other compounds. Another benefit of 
microcoating is the ability of controlled release of compounds, 
which provides their targeted transfer at the right time. The 
gradual release of compounds can increase the effect of food 
additives and ensure their dosage. The use of liposomes in coat­
ing proteins and other food components has been studied and 
different methods for the preparation of liposomes have been 
studied in different researches. Therefore, microcoating of pro­
tein hydrolysis products can protect them until they reach and 
release in food or human body (da Rosa Zavareze, Telles et al. 
2014).
Safety of bioactive peptides
Safety of bioactive peptides
Although peptides have great potential to be used as food addi­
tives, they may not be suitable for all food applications, and it is 
important to check the safety and toxicity of these compounds 
(Phelan, Aherne et al. 2009). In general, there is little concern 
about the safety of bioactive peptides derived from food pro­
teins. Because the body normally hydrolyzes food proteins 
into peptides and food grade enzymes and processes are used 
to produce bioactive peptides. Many studies have reported the 
non-toxicity of bioactive peptides in cell cultures (Udenigwe 
and Aluko, 2012). The issue of safety of peptides derived from 
milk has been investigated (Phelan, Aherne et al. 2009). In ad­
dition, new studies have shown that both single dose (2000 mg/
kg) and repeated daily dose (1000 g/kg for four weeks) of ca­
sein hydrolysis products containing antihypertensive peptides 
have a negative effect on clinical parameters (including blood 

184  |  VOLUME 7 ISSUE 4  |  OCTOBER 2023   
biochemical properties, hematology, or histopathology) or 
mortality of mice. The amounts of consumed doses have been 
much higher than the amount that is necessary to perform 
pharmacological activities (Anadón, Martínez et al. 2010).
Conclusions
Conclusions
Bioactive peptides represent an interesting class of protein 
components that remain dormant within their parent protein 
structures until enzymatic hydrolysis triggers their physiolog­
ical activities. The exploration of bioactive peptides sourced 
from diverse origins like plants, animals, and microorganisms 
(yeasts and bacteria), e.g. single cell protein, has gained signifi­
cant traction. The potential integration of bioactive peptides as 
health-promoting or therapeutic agents hinges upon address­
ing concerns of biostability, bioavailability, and safety to ensure 
their suitability for such applications. As growth medium sup­
plement, peptone is widely used.
References
References
1.	
Abdul-Hamid, A., Bakar, G. and Bee, G.H. (2002). Nu­
tritional quality of spray dried protein hydrolysate from 
Black Tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus). Food Chem­
istry 78(1): 69-74.
2.	
Agyei, D. and Danquah, M.K. (2011). Industrial-scale 
manufacturing of pharmaceutical-grade bioactive pep­
tides. Biotechnology Advances 29(3): 272-277. 
3.	
Agyei, D., and Danquah, K.M. (2012). “Rethinking food 
derived bioactive peptides for antimicrobial and immuno­
modulatory activities.” Trends in Food Science & Technolo­
gy, 23(2), 62-69.
4.	
Agyei, D., Ongkudon, C.M., Wei, C.Y., Chan, A.S. and 
Danquah, M.K. (2016). Bioprocess challenges to the isola­
tion and purification of bioactive peptides. Food and Bio­
products Processing 98: 244-256.
5.	
Akbari Adregani, B. and Shabani, P. 2018. Evaluation of 
physicochemical and functional properties of hydrolyzed 
protein obtained from cottonseed meal by alkalase en­
zyme. Journal of Research and Innovation In Food Science 
and Technology, (84) 15, 313-301(in Persian).
6.	
Akbarian M, Khani A, Eghbalpour S, Uversky VN. Bio­
active Peptides: Synthesis, Sources, Applications, and 
Proposed Mechanisms of Action. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 
Jan 27;23(3):1445. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031445. PMID: 
35163367; PMCID: PMC8836030.
7.	
Alashi, A. M., Blanchard, C.L., Blanchard, C.L., Mailer, 
R.G., Agboola, S.O., Mawson, J., et al. (2014). Antioxidant 
properties of Australian canola meal protein hydrolysates. 
Food Chemistry 146: 500-506.
8.	
Aluko, R. E. (2012). Bioactive peptides. Functional foods 
and nutraceuticals. New York, Springerverlag.
9.	
Anadón, A., Martínez, M.A., Ares, I., Ramos, E., Marti­
nez-Larranaga, M.R., Contreras, M.M., et al. (2010). Acute 
and repeated dose (4 weeks) oral toxicity studies of two an­
tihypertensive peptides, RYLGY and AYFYPEL, that cor­
respond to fragments (90–94) and (143–149) from αs1-ca­
sein. Food and Chemical Toxicology 48(7): 1836-1845. 
10.	 Antila, P., Paakkari, I., Jarvinen, A., Mattila, M.J., Lauk­
kanen, M., Pihlanto-leppala, A., et al. (1991). Opioid pep­
tides derived from in-vitro proteolysis of bovine whey pro­
teins. International Dairy Journal 1(4): 215-229.
11.	 Bamdad, F., Wu, J., Chen, L. (2011). Effects of enzymatic 
hydrolysis on molecular structure and antioxidant activity 
of barley hordein. Journal of Cereal Science 54(1): 20-28.
12.	 Bazinet, L. and Firdaous, L. 2009. Membrane processes 
and devices for separation of bioactive peptides. Recent 
Patents on Biotechnology, 3, 61-72.
13.	 Bougatef, A., Nedjar-Arroume, N., Manni, L., Ravallec, R., 
Barkia, A., Guillochon, D., et al. (2010). Purification and 
identification of novel antioxidant peptides from enzymat­
ic hydrolysates of sardinelle (Sardinella aurita) by-prod­
ucts proteins. Food Chemistry 118(3): 559-565.
14.	 Chakrabarti, S. and Wu, J. (2016). Bioactive peptides on 
endothelial function. Food Science and Human Wellness 
5(1): 1-7.
15.	 Chang, O. K., Ha, G.E., Han, G.S., Seol, K.H., Kim, H.W., 
Jeong, S.G., et al. (2013). Novel antioxidant Peptide derived 
from the ultrafiltrate of ovomucin hydrolysate. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry 61(30): 7294-7300. 
16.	 Chen, G.-W., Tsai, J.-S. Pan, B.S. (2007). Purification of 
angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitory peptides and 
antihypertensive effect of milk produced by protease-fa­
cilitated lactic fermentation. International Dairy Journal 
17(6): 641-647.
17.	 Chen, H., Muramoto, K., Yamauchi, F., Nokihara, K., 
(1996). Antioxidant activity of designed peptides based 
on the antioxidative peptide isolated from digests of a soy­
bean protein. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 
44: 2619-2623.
18.	 Chen, L., Zhang, Q., Ji, Z., Shu, G., Chen, H.J.L. (2018). 
Production and fermentation characteristics of angioten­
sin-I-converting enzyme inhibitory peptides of goat milk 
fermented by a novel wild Lactobacillus plantarum 69. 
Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft and Technologie 91: 532–540. 
doi: 10.1016/j.lwt.2018.02.002.
19.	 Chernysh S, Kim S, Bekker G, Pleskach V, Filatova N, An­
ikin V, et al. Antiviral and antitumor peptides from insects. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2002; 99(20):12628-32. [DOI:10.1073/
pnas.192301899]
20.	 Claeys, W. L., Verraes, C., Cardoen, S., De Block, J., 
Huyghebaert, A., Raes, K., Herman, L. (2014). Consump­
tion of raw or heated milk from different species: An eval­
uation of the nutritional and potential health benefits. 
Food Control, 42, 188201.
21.	 Da Rosa Zavareze, E., Telles, A.C., Halal, S.L.M., Meritaine, 
D.R., Colussi, R., Assis, L.M.D. et al. (2014). Production 
and characterization of encapsulated antioxidative protein 
hydrolysates from Whitemouth croaker (Micropogonias 
furnieri) muscle and byproduct. LWT - Food Science and 
Technology 59(2, Part 1): 841-848.
22.	 Daliri, H., Ahmadi R., Pezeshki, A., Hamishehkar, H., Mo­

185
The EuroBiotech Journal
hammadi, M., Beyrami, H., Khakbaz Heshmati, M.,  Ghor­
bani, M., (2021), Quinoa bioactive protein hydrolysate 
produced by pancreatin enzyme- functional and antioxi­
dant properties, LWT, Volume 150, 2021, 111853, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2021.111853. 
23.	 Danquah, MK. and Agyei, D. (2012). Pharmaceutical ap­
plications of bioactive peptides. OA Biotechnology 1: 5. 
24.	 Day, L., Seymour, R.B., Pitts, K.F., Konczak, I., Lundin, L. 
(2009). Incorporation of functional ingredients into foods. 
Trends in Food Science & Technology 20(9): 388-395. 
25.	 De Castro, R. J. S. and Sato, H.H. (2015). Biologically ac­
tive peptides: Processes for their generation, purification 
and identification and applications as natural additives in 
the food and pharmaceutical industries. Food Research 
International 74: 185-198.
26.	 Deeth H.C., Bansal N. (editors), Whey proteins from milk 
to medicine, Academic Press, India, 2019, ISBN: 978-0-12-
812124-5
27.	 Dionysius, D. A. and Milne, J.M. (1997). Antibacterial 
peptides of bovine lactoferin:purification and characteri­
zation. Journal of Dairy Science 80: 667-674. 
28.	 Ejtehadifar M, Halabian R, Fooladi AAI, Ghazavi A, Mo­
sayebi G. Anti-cancer effects of Staphylococcal Enterotoxin 
type B on U266 cells co-cultured with Mesenchymal Stem 
Cells. Microb Pathog. 2017; 113:438-44. [DOI:10.1016/j.
micpath.2017.11.024] [PMID] 
29.	 Escudero, E., L. Mora, Toldra, F. (201 4). Stability of ACE 
inhibitory ham peptides against heat treatment and in vi­
tro digestion. Food Chemistry 161: 305-311.
30.	 Ferlay J, Shin HR, Bray F, Forman D, Mathers C, Parkin 
DM. Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 2008: 
GLOBOCAN 2008. Int J Cancer. 2010; 127(12):2893-917. 
[DOI:10.1002/ijc.25516]  
31.	 Fiat, A.M, Migliore-Samour, D., Jolles, P., Drouet, L., Bal 
dit Sollier, C., Caen, J. (1993). Biologically active peptides 
from milk proteins with emphasis on two examples con­
cerning antithrombotic and immunomodulating activi­
ties. Journal of dairy science 76(1): 301-310.
32.	 Fosgerau, K., and Ohshima, T. (2015). “Peptide therapeu­
tics: current status and future directions.” Drug Discovery 
Today, 20, 122–128.
33.	 Froehlich JC. 1997. Opioid peptides. Alcohol Health Res 
World. 21(2):132-6.
34.	 Gagnaire, V., Pierre, A., Molle, D., Leonil, J. (1996). 
Phosphopeptides interacting with colloidal calcium phos­
phate isolated by tryptic hydrolysis of bovine casein mi­
celles. Journal of Dairy Research 63: 405-422.
35.	 Gobbetti, M., Hui, Y.H. and Willy, J. 2007. Bioactive pep­
tides in dairy products. Hand Book of Food Products 
manufacturing, 489-517.
36.	 Gobbetti, M., Stepaniak, L.,De Angelis, M., Corsetti, A., D 
Cagno, R. (2002). Latent bioactive peptides in milk pro­
teins: proteolytic activation and significance in dairy pro­
cessing. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 
42(3): 16.
37.	 Harbourne, N., Marete, E., Jacquier, J.C., O,Riordan, D. 
(2013). Stability of phytochemicals as sources of anti-in­
flammatory nutraceuticals in beverages A review. Food 
Research International 50(2):480-486.
38.	 Harris F, Dennison SR, Singh J, Phoenix DA. On the selec­
tivity and efficacy of defense peptides with respect to can­
cer cells. Med Res Rev. 2013; 33(1):190-234. [DOI:10.1002/
med.20252]  
39.	 He, R., Girgih, A.T., Malomo, S. A., Ju, X., Aluko, R.E. 
(2013). Antioxidant activities of enzymatic rapeseed pro­
tein hydrolysates and the membrane ultrafiltration frac­
tions. Journal of Functional Foods 5(1): 219-227.
40.	 Hoskin DW, Ramamoorthy A. Studies on anticancer activi­
ties of antimicrobial peptides. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008; 
1778(2):357-75. [DOI:10.1016/j.bbamem.2007.11.008] 
41.	 Kayser, H. and Meisel, H. (1996). Stimulation of human 
peripheral blood lymphocytes by bioactive peptides de­
rived from bovine milk proteins.” FEBS Letters 25, 383 (1-
2):18-20.
42.	 Kilara, A. and Panyam, D. (2003). Peptides from milk pro­
teins and their properties. Critical Review in Food Science 
and Nutrition 43: 607-633.
43.	 Korhonen, H. and Pihlanto, A. (2006). Bioactive peptides: 
Production and functionality. International Dairy Journal 
16(9): 945-960.
44.	 Korhonen, H. and Pihlanto, A. 2006. Bioactive Peptides: 
Production and functionality. Internatinal Dairy Journal, 
16(9), l945-960.
45.	 Lackner, M., Drew, D., Bychkova, V., Mustakhimov, I. 
(2022), Value-Added Products from Natural Gas Using 
Fermentation Processes: Fermentation of Natural Gas as 
Valorization Route, in: Takht Ravanch M. (ed.), Natural 
Gas: New Perspectives and Future Developments, Inte­
chOpen, DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.103813
46.	 Last, N.B., Schlamadinger, D.E., Miranker, A.D. (2013). A 
common landscape for membrane-active peptides. Pro­
tein Science 22: 870-882.
47.	 Lau, J.L., and Dunn, M.K. (2018). “Therapeutic pep­
tides:historical perspectives current development trends 
and future directions.” Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry 
Journal, 26, 2700–2707.
48.	 Li, G.-H., Le, G.W., Shi, Y.H., Shrestha, S. (2004). Angio­
tensin I–converting enzyme inhibitory peptides derived 
from food proteins and their physiological and pharmaco­
logical effects. Nutrition Research 24: 469-486.
49.	 Lorenzen, P. C. and Meisel, H. (2005). Influence of trypsin 
action in yoghurt milk on the release of caseinophospho­
peptide-rich fractions and physical properties of the fer­
mented products. International Journal of Dairy Technol­
ogy 58(2): 119-124.
50.	 Marambe, Pathiraja Weerasingha Mudiynseralahamilage 
Lesanthi Harsha Kumari (2011).  
51.	 GENERATION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF BIO­
ACTIVE PEPTIDES FROM FLAXSEED (Linum usitatis­
simum L.) PROTEINS

186  |  VOLUME 7 ISSUE 4  |  OCTOBER 2023   
52.	 A Thesis Submitted to the College of Graduate Studies and 
Research in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for 
the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the Department of 
Food and Bioproduct Sciences University of Saskatchewan 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada 
53.	 Miquel, E., Gomez, J.A., Aleqria, A., Barbera, R., Farre, R., 
and et al. (2005). “Identification of casein phosphopeptides 
released after simulated digestion of milk based infant for­
mulas.” Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53, 
3426 -3433
54.	 Miquel, E., Gomez, J.A., Aleqria, A., Barbera, R., Farre, R., 
Recio, I.(2005). Identification of casein phosphopeptides 
released after simulated digestion of milk-based infant 
formulas. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 53: 
3426-3433. 
55.	 Mirdamadi, S., Soleymanzadeh, N., Mirzaei, M., Motaha­
ri, P. (2017). Bioactive peptides: production, health effects 
and application as natural supplements for functional 
foods production. Journal of Food Hygiene, 7(25): 1-20. 
(In Persian)
56.	 Mirzaei, M., Mirdamadi, S., Ehsani, M.R., Aminlari, M. 
(2016). Antioxidant, ACE-Inhibitory and antibacterial ac­
tivities of Kluyveromyces marxianus protein hydrolysates 
and their peptide fractions. Functional Foods in Health 
and Disease 6(7): 425-439.
57.	 Mirzaei, M., Mirdamadi, S., Ehsani, M.R., Aminlari, M. 
Hosseini, E. (2015). Purification and identification ofan­
tioxidant and ACE-inhibitory peptide from Saccharomy­
ces cerevisiae protein hydrolysate. Journal of Functional 
Foods 19: 259-268.
58.	 Mizuno, S., Matsuura, K., Gotou, T., Nishimura, S., Ka­
jimoto, O., Yabune, M. et al. (2005). Antihypertensive ef­
fect of casein hydrolysate in a placebo-controlled study in 
subjects with highnormal blood pressure and mild hyper­
tension. British Journal of Nutrition 94(1): 84-91.
59.	 Moghaddam M.M., Farhadie B., Mirnejad R., Kooshki H., 
Evaluation of an antibacterial peptide-loaded amniotic 
membrane/silk fibroin electrospun nanofiber in wound 
healing, Int Wound J.2023;1–14, https://doi.org/10.1111/
iwj.14215
60.	 Mohanty, D. P., Mohapatra, S., Misra, S., Sahu, P.S. (2016). 
Milk derived bioactive peptides and their impact on hu­
man health – A review. Saudi Journal of Biological Scienc­
es 23(5): 577-583.
61.	 Möller N.P., KE, S.-A. Roos, N., Schrezenmeir, J. et al. 
(2008). Bioactive peptides and proteins from foods: indi­
cation for health effects. European Journal of Nutrition. 
47: 171-182.
62.	 Moslehishad, M., Ehsani, M.R., Salami, M., Mirdamadi, S., 
Ezzatpanah, H., Niasari Naslaji, A., et al. (2013). The com­
parative assessment of ACE-inhibitory and antioxidant 
activities of peptide fractions obtained from fermented 
camel and bovine milk by Lactobacillus rhamnosus PTCC 
1637. International Dairy Journal 29: 82-87.
63.	 Motahari, P., Mirdamadi, S., Kiani Rad, M. (2016). A Se­
quential Statistical Approach Towards an Optimized Pro­
duction of Bacteriocin by Lactobacillus pentosus TSHS. 
Journal of Food Processing and Preservation 40(6):1238-
1246.
64.	 Mudgil, P., Kamal, H., Yuen G.C., Maqsood, S. (2018). 
Characterization and identification of novel antidiabetic 
and anti-obesity peptides from camel milk protein hydro­
lysates. Food Chemistry 259: 46–54. doi: 10.1016/j.food­
chem.2018.03.082.
65.	 Nakamura, Y., Yamamoto, N., Sakai, K., Takano, T. (1995). 
Antihypertensive effect of sour milk and peptides isolated 
from it that are inhibitors to angiotensin I-converting en­
zyme. Journal of Dairy Science, 78: 1253-1257.
66.	 Nakano, D., OGURA K., Miyakoshi, M., Ishii, F., Kawan­
ishi, H., Kurumazuka, D., et al. (2006). Antihypertensive 
effect of angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitory pep­
tides from a sesame protein hydrolysate in spontaneous­
ly hypertensive rats. Bioscience, Biotechnology and Bio­
chemistry 70: 1118-1126.
67.	 Narva, M., Rissanen, J., Halleen, J., Vapaatalo, H., 
Vaananen, K., Korpela, R. (2007). Effects of bioactive pep­
tide, valyl-prolyl-proline (VPP), and lactobacillus helveti­
cus fermented milk containing VPP on bone loss in ova­
riectomized rats. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism 51: 
65-74.
68.	 Newsnet, 
2023: 
https://www.newsnetmedia.com/sto­
ry/48645895/microbial-peptone-market-to-see-massive-
growth-by-2031
69.	 Nicolas, P. (2009). Multifunctional host defense peptides: 
intracellular-targeting antimicrobial peptides. Febs Jour­
nal 276: 6483-6496.
70.	 Nongonierma, A.B., Paolella, S., Mudgil, P., Maqsood, S., 
FitzGerald, R.J. (2017). Dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-IV) 
inhibitory properties of camel milk protein hydrolysates 
generated with trypsin. Journal of Functional Foods 34: 
49–58. doi: 10.1016/j.jff.2017.04.016.
71.	 Nourbakhsh P, Ganji A, Farahani I, Hosseinian R, Yegane­
fard F, Mirzaee R, et al. Adipokine omentin-1: A diagnos­
tic tool in breast cancer. Int J Basic Sci Med. 2018; 3(2):89-
93. [DOI:10.15171/ijbsm.2018.16]
72.	 O’Mahony, J. A., & Fox, P. F. (2013). Milk proteins: Intro­
duction and historical aspects. In P. L. H. McSweeney, & 
P. F. Fox (Eds.), Advanced dairy chemistry. Vol. 1a 
Proteins: Basic aspects (pp. 4385). New York, NY: 
Springer.
73.	 Panahi Z, Abdoli A, Mosayebi G, Mahdavi M, Bahrami F. 
Subcutaneous administration CpG-ODNs acts as a potent 
adjuvant for an HIV-1-tat-based vaccine candidate to elicit 
cellular immunity in BALB/c mice. Biotechnol Lett. 2018; 
40(3):527-33. [DOI:10.1007/s10529-017-2497-9]  
74.	 Park, Y. W. and Nam, M.S. (2015). Bioactive Peptides in 
Milk and Dairy Products: A Review. .”Korean Journal for 
Food Science of Animal Resources 35: 831-840.
75.	 Pellegrini, A., Dettling, C., Thomas, U., Hunziker, P. 
(2001). Isolation and characterization of four bactericidal 

187
The EuroBiotech Journal
domains in the bovine beta-lactoglobulin. Biochimica and 
Biophysica Acta. 1526:131-140.
76.	 Phelan, M., Aherne, A., FitzGerald, R.J. O´Brien, N.M. 
(2009). Casein-derived bioactive peptides: Biological ef­
fects, industrial uses, safety aspects and regu (2008) .Free 
radical scavenging activity of a novel antioxidative peptide 
purified from hydrolysate of bullfrog skin, Rana catesbei­
ana Shaw. Bioresource Technology 99(6): 1690-1698.
77.	 Raikos, V., Dassios, T. (2014). Health-promoting proper­
ties of bioactive peptides derived from milk proteins in 
infant food: a review. Dairy Science & Technology 94: 91-
101.
78.	 Rao, S., Sun, J., Liu, Y., Zeng, H., Su, Y., Yang, Y. (2012). 
ACE inhibitory peptides and antioxidant peptides derived 
from in vitro digestion hydrolysate of hen egg white lyso­
zyme. Food Chemistry 135: 1245-1252.
79.	 Ruiz-ruiz, J., Davila-Ortiz, G., Chel-Guerrero, L., Betan­
cur-Ancona, D., Ruiz-Ruiz, J., Davila-Ortiz, G., et al. 
(2013). Angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitory and 
antioxidant peptide fractions from hard-to-cook bean en­
zymatic hydrolysates. Journal of Food Biochemistry 37: 
26-35.
80.	 Rutherfurd-Markwick ,K. J. (2012). Food proteins as a 
source of bioactive peptides with diverse functions. British 
Journal of Nutrition, 108.
81.	 Sabeena Farvin, K. H., Baron, C.P., Nielsen, N.S., Otte, J., 
Jacobsen, C. (2010). Antioxidant activity of yoghurt pep­
tides: Part 2 – Characterisation of peptide fractions. Food 
Chemistry, 123: 1090-1097.
82.	 Salami, M., Moosavi-movahedi, A.A., Ehsani, M.R., Youse­
fi, R., Haertle, T., Chobert, J.M. et al. (2010). Improvement 
of the antimicrobial and antioxidant activities of camel 
and bovine whey proteins by limited proteolysis. Journal 
of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 58: 3297-3302.
83.	
Sanchez, A., and Vazquez, A. (2017). “Bioactive 
peptides: A review.” Food Quality and Safety, 1, 29-46.
84.	 Schweizer F. Cationic amphiphilic peptides with can­
cer-selective toxicity. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009; 625(1-3):190-
4. [DOI:10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.08.043] [PMID] 
85.	 Seppo, L., Jauhiaineh, T., Poussa, T., Korpela, R. (2003). 
A fermented milk high in bioactive peptides has a blood 
pressure–lowering effect in hypertensive subjects. The 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 77: 326-330.
86.	 Shahidi, F. and Zhong, Y. (2008). Bioactive Peptides. Jour­
nal of AOAC International, 91: 914-931.
87.	 Sheih, I. C., Wu, T.K., Fang, T.J. (2009). Antioxidant prop­
erties of a new antioxidative peptide from algae protein 
waste hydrolysate in different oxidation systems. Biore­
source Technology 100:3419-3425.
88.	 Shimizu, M. and Son, D.O. (2007). Food-derived peptides 
and intestinal functions. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 
13: 885-895.
89.	 Singh, B. P., Vij, S., Hati, S. (2014). Functional significance 
of bioactive peptides derived from soybean. Peptides 54: 
171-179.
90.	 Soleyanzadeh, N., Mirdamadi, S., KianiRad, M. (2016). 
Antioxidant activity of camel and bovine milk fermented 
by lactic acid bacteria isolated from traditional fermented 
camel milk (Chal). Dairy Science & Technology 96: 443-
457.
91.	 Sørensen, E. S., & Petersen, T. E. (1993). Purification and 
characterization of 3 proteins isolated from the proteose 
peptone fraction of bovine-milk. Journal of Dairy Re­
search, 60, 189197.
92.	 Stuknyte, M., De Noni, I., Guglielmetti, S., Minuzzo, M., 
Mora, D. (2011). Potential immunomodulatory activity of 
bovine casein hydrolysates produced after digestion with 
proteinases of lactic acid bacteria. International Dairy 
Journal 21(10): 763-769.
93.	 Suetsuna, K. and Chen, J.R. (2002). Isolation and Charac­
terization of Peptides with Antioxidant Activity Derived 
from Wheat Gluten. Food science and technology research 
8: 227-230.
94.	 Taskin M., E.B. Kurbanoglu, Evaluation of waste chicken 
feathers as peptone source for bacterial growth, Journal 
of Applied Microbiology, Volume 111, Issue 4, 1 October 
2011, Pages 826–834, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
2672.2011.05103.x
95.	 Teschemacher, H., Koch, G., Brantl, V. (1997). Milk pro­
tein-derived opioid receptor ligands. Biopolymers 43: 99-
117.
96.	 Trompette, A., Claustre, J., Caillon, F., Jourdan, G., Chay­
vialle, J.A., Plaisancie, P. (2003). Milk bioactive peptides 
and beta-casomorphins induce mucus release in rat jeju­
num. Journal of Nutrition 133: 3499-3503.
97.	 Tsai, J. S., Chen, T.J., Pan, B.S., Gong, S.D., Chung, M.Y. 
(2008). Antihypertensive effect of bioactive peptides pro­
duced by protease-facilitated lactic acid fermentation of 
milk. Food Chemistry 106:552-558.
98.	 Tuysuz, E., Ozkan, H., Arslan, N.P., Adiguzel, A., O. Balta­
ci, M., Taskin, M. (2021), Bioconversion of waste sheep 
wool to microbial peptone by Bacillus licheniformis EY2, 
Biofpr,  https://doi.org/10.1002/bbb.2232 
99.	 Udenigwe, C. C. and Aluko, R.E. (2012). Food protein-de­
rived bioactive peptides: production, processing, and po­
tential health benefits. Journal of Food Science 77: 11-24.
100.	Walther, B. and Sieber, R. (2011). Bioactive proteins and 
peptides in foods. International Journal of Vitamin and 
Nutrition Research 81: 181-192.
101.	Walther, B., and Sieber, R. (2011). “Bioactive proteins and 
peptides in foods.” International Journal of Vitamin and 
Nutrition Research, 81, 181-192.
102.	Wang Z, Wang G. APD: The antimicrobial peptide da­
tabase. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004; 32(suppl. 1):D590-D2. 
[DOI:10.1093/nar/gkh025]  
103.	Wu, W., Yu, P.P., Zhang, F.Y., Hx, C., ZM, J. (2014). Sta­
bility and cytotoxicity of angiotensin-Iconverting enzyme 
inhibitory peptides derived from bovine casein. Journal of 
Zhejiang University- Science B 15(2): 143-152.
104.	Yamamoto, N., Maenom, M., Takano, T. (1999). Purifica­

188  |  VOLUME 7 ISSUE 4  |  OCTOBER 2023   
tion and characterization of an antihypertensive peptide 
from a yogurt-like productfermented by Lactobacillus hel­
veticus CPN4. Journal of Dairy Science 82: 1388-1393.
105.	Zanutto-Elgui, M.R., Vieira, J.C.S., do Prado, D.Z., Bu­
zalaf, M.A.R., de Magalhães Padilha, P., de Oliveira, D.E., 
Fleuri, L.F. (2019). Production of milk peptides with an­
timicrobial and antioxidant properties through fungal 
proteases. Food Chemistry 278: 823–831. doi: 10.1016/j.
foodchem.2018.11.119.