HAL Id: hal-04253881
https://hal.science/hal-04253881v1
Submitted on 23 Oct 2023
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Copyright
Room Temperature Electron Spin Coherence in
Photogenerated Molecular Spin Qubit Candidates
Maximilian Mayländer, Philipp Thielert, Theresia Quintes, Andreas Vargas
Jentzsch, Sabine Richert
To cite this version:
Maximilian Mayländer, Philipp Thielert, Theresia Quintes, Andreas Vargas Jentzsch, Sabine Richert.
Room Temperature Electron Spin Coherence in Photogenerated Molecular Spin Qubit Candidates.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2023, 145 (25), pp.14064-14069. ￿10.1021/jacs.3c04021￿.
￿hal-04253881￿

Room temperature electron spin coherence in photogenerated
molecular spin qubit candidates
Maximilian Mayländer,1,† Philipp Thielert,1,† Theresia Quintes,1 Andreas Vargas Jentzsch,2 ∗
Sabine Richert 1 ∗
1 Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Freiburg, Albertstraße 21, 79104 Freiburg, Germany
2 SAMS Research Group, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Institut Charles Sadron UPR 22, 67000 Strasbourg,
France
∗E-mail: vargasjentzsch@unistra.fr, sabine.richert@physchem.uni-freiburg.de
† These authors contributed equally.
Abstract. One of the main challenges in the emerging field of molecular spintronics is the identification of new
spin qubit materials for quantum information applications. In this regard, recent work has shown that photoexcited
chromophore−radical systems are promising candidates to expand our repertoire of suitable candidate molecules.
Here, we investigate a series of three chromophore−radical compounds composed of a perylene diimide (PDI)
chromophore and a stable 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-piperidin-1-oxyl (TEMPO) radical by transient electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) techniques. We explore the influence of isotope labelling of the TEMPO moiety on the EPR
spectra and electron spin coherence times of the molecular quartet states generated upon photoexcitation and
illustrate that (i) a coherent manipulation of the spin state is possible in these systems even at room temperature
and that (ii) a spin coherence time of 0.7 µs can be achieved under these conditions.
This demonstration of
electron spin coherence at ambient temperatures paves the way for practical applications of such systems in
functional molecular devices.
1 Introduction
A lot of recent work in the emerging field of molecular spintronics has focussed on the identification of novel ma-
terials that can generate, transfer, and store spin information efficiently.[1–5] Among these materials, photoexcited
chromophore−radical systems have emerged as a new class of compounds with promising properties.[6,7] In perylene
diimide (PDI)−radical derivatives, it could, for instance, be shown that the molecular quartet state formed after
photoexcitation has properties required for quantum logic and memory applications and is thus viable as a spin
qudit:[8,9] in analogy to NV−centres, it can be initialised by light in a highly pure initial state. In addition, it is
long-lived, and exhibits coherence times that are much longer than typical pulse microwave-driven gate operation
times, even at moderate temperatures of 80 K.
This demonstration of coherent spin properties in frozen solution at 80 K was remarkable since most previous
studies on molecular qubit candidates were limited to liquid helium temperatures, often as low as 2−10 K.[10–12]
However, for the integration of such coherent molecular spin systems in practical spintronic devices, it would be
desirable to be able to measure them at even higher temperatures, ideally under ambient conditions.
The magnetic properties of some chromophore−radical systems investigated thus far have already been studied
by transient continuous wave electron paramagnetic resonance (trEPR) spectroscopy in liquid solution,[9,13,14] but
a coherent manipulation of the resulting spin states, by pulse EPR spectroscopy at room temperature, has not
been demonstrated, yet.
In the present study, we investigate a series of three different PDI based chromophore−radical systems by
trEPR and transient pulse EPR techniques.
The three molecules differ with respect to the isotope labelling
of the TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-piperidin-1-oxyl) radical moiety.
The optical properties of the unlabelled
1

PDI−TEMPO system were already studied earlier,[8,15] allowing us here to focus on the effect of isotope labelling
and different measurement conditions on the coherent spin properties of PDI−TEMPO.
We demonstrate, that, by embedding the molecules in a rigid polymer matrix, spin relaxation can be slowed
down sufficiently to enable a pulse EPR investigation of the photogenerated spin system at room temperature.
Compared to the values obtained in isotropic frozen solution at 80 K, the spin coherence times in polymer films at
room temperature are shortened by about a factor of four, making these molecules still well competitive with other
molecular organic and inorganic systems studied so far at elevated temperatures.[16,17] Further, by performing Rabi
oscillation experiments, we demonstrate that a coherent manipulation of the spin system is feasible even under
ambient conditions, paving the way for the integration of similar molecular systems into organic spintronic devices.
2 Results and Discussion
Optical characterisation. Figure 1 gives an overview of the structures of the three investigated PDI−TEMPO
derivatives as well as the processes occurring after photoexcitation of the PDI chromophore, which lead to the
formation of novel spin states. All synthetic details can be found in the Supporting Information (SI, Section 1).
After photoexcitation of PDI at 535 nm, the chromophore triplet state is rapidly generated in these systems with a
time constant of ∼110 ps and a yield of ∼50 %.[15] As would be expected, isotope labelling of the TEMPO moiety
has no discernible influence on neither the excited state energies nor the rates and yields of the excited singlet state
deactivation, as reflected by identical optical spectra and an identical fluorescence quantum yield of 0.04±0.01 for
all three dyads. The UV-vis absorption spectra and experimental procedures can be found in the SI (Section 2.1,
Figure S2).
JTR
Q
1
2
–
3
2
–
3
2
+
1
2
+
1
2
–
1
2
+
⎧
⎨
⎧
⎧⎨
1
2
–
1
2
+
1
2
–
1
2
+
3
2
1PDI– 2R
•
1*PDI– 2R
•
3*PDI– 2R
•
4*[3PDI– 2R
•]
2*[3PDI– 2R
•]
a
b
PDI—TEMPO
N
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O O
R
R =
PDI—TEMPO-d17-15N
PDI—TEMPO-d17
N
CD3
CD3
CD3
CD3
O
D
D D
D
D
15N
CD3
CD3
CD3
CD3
O
D
D D
D
D
N O
hν
EISC
fluorescence
Figure 1: Structures of the three investigated PDI−TEMPO dyads (a) and overview of the underlying photophysical scheme
(b).
The numeric superscripts in panel b indicate the spin multiplicity and the grey arrow pointing from the
chromophore excited state to its ground state represents radiationless excited state deactivation by enhanced
internal conversion. The black double-headed arrows indicate transitions that can be induced by microwaves. The
splitting of the energy levels of the quartet and excited doublet states is shown here for the strong coupling regime
and ferromagnetic coupling. In the intermediate coupling regime, doublet and quartet states are mixed, leading to
additional transitions. [7] Abbreviations: R−radical, T−triplet, EISC−enhanced intersystem crossing, Q−quartet
state.
EPR characterisation in frozen solution. In our previous study,[8] we reported on the magnetic properties of
unlabelled PDI−TEMPO in isotropic frozen solution at 80 K. Transient nutation measurements revealed that all
features in the transient spectrum can be attributed to a species with quartet multiplicity. Further, we showed
2

that the complex central feature, observed in the trEPR spectrum of PDI−TEMPO, can be reproduced in spectral
simulations if the effect of hyperfine coupling to the nitrogen nucleus of the TEMPO moiety is taken into account
in addition to the zero-field splitting of the quartet state. The four quartet sublevels are thus further split by
the nitrogen (I = 1) hyperfine interaction, resulting in a total of twelve accessible spin states. In addition, pulse
EPR measurements showed that this photogenerated molecular multi-level system may be viable as a spin qudit
candidate as it can be initialised by light in a pure quartet spin state, is long-lived and exhibits coherence times
that are longer than typical pulse microwave-driven gate operation times.
Spin qudits (i.e., qubits with more than two levels) can only be realised with organic[8,9] or inorganic[10–12,18–20]
molecular high-spin (S, I > 1/2) systems or dopants (as opposed to mesoscopic solid state systems such as
semiconductors and vacancy centres) and their use in quantum information science has the striking advantages
that the number of iterations in quantum algorithms as well as the error rate can, in principle, be decreased
and more complex gate operations can be performed in a single physical unit without the need for inter-qubit
communication.[3,21]
Given the potential of PDI−TEMPO as a photogenerated molecular spin qudit, the aim of the EPR investigations
presented here was to explore different possibilities of enhancing the spin coherence times in this molecule and to
make the system amenable to a coherent manipulation of the spin state populations under ambient conditions.
The two different strategies pursued here to limit spin decoherence are (i) isotope labelling of the radical moiety
and (ii) the embedding of the molecules in a rigid polymer matrix.
To explore the effect of isotope labelling of the radical moiety, we started by characterising the three different
PDI−TEMPO compounds and identifying any differences between them with respect to their magnetic properties,
using trEPR. The measurements were carried out at Q-band frequencies in isotropic frozen toluene solution at
80 K and the corresponding data are shown in Figure 2 together with the best numerical fits to the data.
Figure 2: TrEPR spectra of the three dyads recorded at the Q-band in isotropic frozen toluene solution at 80 K together with
the best numerical fits to the data. The spectra were recorded in direct detection mode (a: enhanced absorption,
e: emission). To the right of each spectrum, the relative quartet (Q) sublevel populations are visualised by circles
of different sizes. The simulation parameters are given in the text and a detailed overview is provided in the SI
(Tables S1−S3).
Comparing the experimental transient EPR spectra of the three dyads (see also Figures S7 and S8 in the SI),
3

we observe that the overall spectral shape is qualitatively similar in all cases. All spectra are characterised by an
aeeaae multiplet polarisation (a: enhanced absorption, e: emission) and a dominant central feature, the so-called
"net polarisation" associated with the quartet |mS = + 1
2⟩↔|mS = −1
2⟩transition, with aea polarisation. While
the central feature was previously proposed to arise from an unequal population of hyperfine states,[8] the observed
multiplet polarisation pattern indicates a selective population of the high-field quartet sublevels with | ± 1
2⟩, which
was suggested to be caused by a mechanism involving electron transfer from TEMPO to PDI followed by fast
charge recombination to the chromophore triplet state.[15]
Regarding the multiplet polarisation of the coupled spin system, we would not expect any qualitative difference
between the three dyads since no difference in the triplet state formation mechanism is expected. However, given
that the central feature was assumed to arise from a splitting of the quartet sublevels by the nitrogen hyperfine
interaction of TEMPO, the observation of a central three-line pattern for all compounds including PDI−TEMPO-
d17-15N was unexpected at first, but could be clarified with the help of numerical simulations of the spectra using
EasySpin[22] (v6.0.0-dev.50) as will be explained in the following. A detailed overview of the simulation strategy
is presented in the SI (Section 2.5) and a visual explanation of the observation of a central three-line pattern for
both the PDI−TEMPO and PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N compounds is provided in Figure S14.
For the simulation of the trEPR spectra, a coupled triplet−radical spin system (S1 = 1, S2 = 1
2) was assumed.
The number of variable simulation parameters could be significantly reduced by a separate determination of the
coupling parameters of the triplet and radical precursors, which were then kept fixed during the fitting procedure.
To obtain the g- and A-tensors of the radical, a global fit of a X-band continuous wave (cw) EPR spectrum and a
Q-band pulse EPR spectrum in frozen solution was performed (Figures S3 and S4), while gT, DT, and ET of the
triplet state were obtained from a simulation of the trEPR spectrum of PDI (see Figure S6). The only variable
parameters were thus the coupling parameters (JTR, DTR) as well as the populations of the spin states. The latter
are visualised next to the trEPR spectra in Figure 2.
The peak separation and linewidth of the central spectral feature is different for PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N, which
correlates well with the expected difference in hyperfine coupling. The simulations reveal further that the shape of
the complex central feature is not only affected by the populations of the hyperfine levels, but also by the coupling
regime (i.e., the exchange and dipolar coupling parameters). We find that, in particular, the outer spectral features
and spectral intensities can only be reproduced well, if the system is assumed to be in the upper intermediate
coupling regime with |JTR| ∼1200 MHz. This coupling regime is still consistent with the observation of quartet
signatures in transient nutation experiments[8] and might, at the same time, explain the unequal population of the
hyperfine states, as the quartet and excited doublet states are close in energy and mixing between them is efficient.
Such an unequal population would be rather unexpected for a system in the strong coupling regime since the energy
difference between the hyperfine levels is very small compared to that between the quartet and excited doublet
states.
In summary, the magnetic parameters and sublevel populations were found to be very similar for unlabelled
PDI−TEMPO and PDI−TEMPO-d17, which is consistent with the fact that the spectral shape is mainly dominated
by the zero-field splitting and nitrogen hyperfine interactions. A careful analysis of the trEPR spectra of all three
dyads by spectral simulations revealed that the observation of a central three-line pattern for all isotopologues can
be ascribed to the system being in the intermediate coupling regime, where additional transitions are expected (see
also Figure S14).[7] However, the difference in peak intensities and peak separations between PDI−TEMPO and
PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N can only be explained if the contribution of nitrogen hyperfine coupling of TEMPO to the
spectral shape is taken into account.
Coherence decay in frozen solution. To explore the influence of isotope labelling on the spin coherence times of
both the nitroxide radical as well as the quartet spin state generated upon photoexcitation, pulse EPR measurements
were carried out at the Q-band in frozen toluene solution at 80 K. The spin coherence times (Tm) measured at
a field position corresponding to the intensity maximum of the nitroxide signal (see Figure S5 for the pulse EPR
4

spectra) are compared for the three PDI−TEMPO dyads in Figure 3a. To obtain the Tm values listed in the figure,
the data were fitted with a single stretched exponential of the form[23–25]
VSE = exp

−(2τ/Tm)β
(1)
where τ indicates the inter-pulse delay in the Hahn-echo detection sequence.
While the trace for unlabelled
PDI−TEMPO shows no discernible nuclear ESEEM effects, clear nuclear modulations with a frequency charac-
teristic for deuterium are superimposed on the decay of the two d17-labelled isotopologues. The variations in the
measured coherence times are relatively minor, ranging from 3.8 µs for unlabelled PDI−TEMPO to 4.4 µs for
PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N. Deuteration of the protons on TEMPO seems to have only a very minor influence, as
reflected by the similarity of the decay measured for PDI−TEMPO and PDI−TEMPO-d17 (4.0 µs vs. 3.8 µs),
while the effect of the replacement of 14N by 15N is somewhat larger (4.0 µs vs. 4.4 µs).
Figure 3: Comparison of the spin coherence times of the nitroxide (a) and quartet state (b) for the three different
PDI−TEMPO dyads.
The values obtained by fitting of the data using a stretched exponential function are
indicated in the figure. The nitroxide coherence times were measured at the intensity maximum of the corre-
sponding field-swept echo-detected EPR spectrum, corresponding to B0 values of 1208.4 mT, 1208.2 mT, and
1208.7 mT for PDI−TEMPO, PDI−TEMPO-d17, and PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N, respectively. The coherence times
of the corresponding quartet states were measured at a field position corresponding to the central emissive line,
i.e. B0 values of 1210.5 mT, 1210.3 mT, and 1210.5 mT. All magnetic field values refer to a microwave frequency
of exactly 34.0 GHz.
The fact that the effect of isotope labelling on the coherence times of the nitroxide is small, is in line with literature
observations suggesting that the rotation of the methyl groups is the dominant factor causing spin decoherence
in TEMPO radicals. For instance, a replacement of the two methyl groups on each side of the NO-group by
spirocyclohexyl has been shown to lead to much improved coherence times over a wide temperature range.[26,27]
Figure 3b shows the coherence times measured for the quartet state |mS = + 1
2⟩↔|mS = −1
2⟩transition at a
field position corresponding to the central line with emissive spin polarisation. The values obtained for Tm are again
listed in the figure. Interestingly, the effect on Tm observed for the labelled nitroxide radicals is perfectly reflected
in the corresponding quartet state coherence times. It seems that the coherence time of the radical has a direct
impact on the coherence time of the quartet state generated by photoinduced spin mixing: Between PDI−TEMPO
and PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N an increase in Tm from 2.0 to 2.6 µs (factor 1.3) is observed, which compares well with
the increase of Tm by a factor of 1.2 observed for the corresponding radicals. This observation could turn out to
be crucial for any future investigations and applications of photogenerated high-spin systems, as it suggests that
the coherence properties of the photogenerated state can be optimised and further enhanced by improvement of
the radical coherence times, for which synthetic strategies already exist.[28]
Room temperature spin coherence.
To demonstrate electron spin coherence under ambient conditions, we
developed experimental protocols to embed the molecules in rigid polymer films suitable for pulse EPR measurements
at Q-band frequencies. Details regarding the sample preparation using poly(methyl methacrylate), PMMA, can
be found in the SI (Section 2.2). Since PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N showed the most promising magnetic properties
in frozen solution, room temperature pulse EPR experiments are only shown here for this compound, while the
5

corresponding data obtained for unlabelled PDI−TEMPO are presented in the SI (see Figures S10 and S11).
While no transient pulse EPR measurements are feasible with these molecules in isotropic solution at room
temperature, the partial immobilisation of the molecular motions by insertion of the compounds in a polymer host
matrix makes them amenable to a coherent spin manipulation by microwave pulses, as illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4a shows the echo-detected field-swept pulse EPR spectra of the nitroxide and the light-induced quartet
state. To obtain the spectrum of the pure quartet state, a small residual nitroxide signal needed to be subtracted
from the data. While the nitroxide spectrum is remarkably similar to that measured in isotropic frozen solution
(see Figure S5), the intensity of the outer wings of the quartet spectrum (multiplet polarisation) relative to that
of the central features (net polarisation) is found to be considerably reduced in polymer films at room temperature
(see also Figure S10).
The central quartet feature with aea polarisation, which dominates the appearance of
the corresponding frozen solution spectrum, can, however, clearly be recognised and identified. To confirm the
assignment of this feature to the quartet |mS = + 1
2⟩↔|mS = −1
2⟩transition, transient nutation experiments
were performed as detailed in the SI and shown in Figure S12.
Referenced against the nitroxide signal (pure
doublet, ω0), a frequency of 2 ω0 was determined experimentally, as would be expected based on ωmS,mS+1 =
ω0 ·
p
S(S + 1) −mS(mS + 1),[29–31] leaving no doubt about the quartet nature of the observed signal.
Figure 4: Illustration of the coherent spin properties of the molecular quartet state of PDI−TEMPO-d17-15N in a PMMA
host matrix at room temperature. Room temperature Q-band pulse EPR spectra of the nitroxide and quartet state
(a), spin coherence decays measured for the nitroxide and quartet state (b), and Rabi oscillation experiments on
the quartet state recorded at different microwave attenuations (c). The coherence time of the nitroxide and the
coherence time and Rabi oscillations for the quartet state were measured at a magnetic fields of 1208.7 mT and
1210.5 mT, respectively, referring to a microwave frequency of 34.0 GHz.
The measured coherence decays for the nitroxide and quartet state are shown in Figure 4b. A stretched ex-
ponential fit to the data yields Tm values of 1.1 µs and 0.7 µs for the nitroxide and quartet state, respectively.
The ratio of the nitroxide and quartet coherence times is found to be similar compared to that in frozen solution
(4.4 µs/2.6 µs = 1.7 vs 1.1 µs/0.7 µs = 1.6), supporting our previous statement that these coherence times might
be directly correlated.
Although the coherence time of the quartet state is reduced by a factor of about four at room temperature
compared to the measurements at 80 K, the measured Tm value of 0.7 µs at 295 K still compares favourably with
values reported for other molecular spin qubit candidate systems investigated under ambient conditions.[16,17] In
addition, the investigated system represents the only photogenerated molecular system studied so far under these
conditions and we expect that an optimisation of the film preparation conditions (molecular packing) and/or the
choice of a different polymer host material may lead to a further enhancement of Tm.
To demonstrate the possibility of a coherent manipulation of the photogenerated spin system, Rabi oscillation
experiments were carried out in addition to the measurement of the coherence decay, as shown in Figure 4c. The
measurements were performed at different microwave attenuations (as indicated in the figure) to demonstrate that
the Rabi frequency is linear with the applied microwave B1 field. For microwave attenuations of 15 dB, 18 dB, and
21 dB, Rabi frequencies ΩR of 16.2, 12.0, and 8.3 MHz were obtained, respectively, demonstrating the linearity
and thus confirming that the oscillations are of pure Rabi type.[21] Considering the measured values for Tm and
ΩR, the number of single-qubit logic operations, ΩM, feasible with this system under the applied conditions, can be
6

calculated from ΩM = 2 Tm ΩR and amounts to ∼22. This shows that the quartet state can reach any arbitrary
superposition state and can be coherently manipulated for at least 20 rotations at room temperature.
3 Conclusions
By investigating a series of three PDI−TEMPO dyads, we explored two different strategies to make photogenerated
coupled spin systems amenable to a coherent manipulation of the spin state at room temperature using pulse EPR
techniques. The latter requires an enhancement of the spin coherence properties which may either be achieved (i)
by isotope labelling to limit the coupling to neighbouring protons or (ii) by embedding the molecules into a rigid
matrix to limit decoherence by molecular motion.
Isotope labelling of the TEMPO moiety was found to have only a minor influence on the measured spin coherence
times. However, it turned out to be a convenient method to investigate the relationship between the coherence
time of the radical precursor and that of the photogenerated high-spin state. It appears that any increase in the
nitroxide coherence time is directly correlated with a corresponding increase in the coherence time of the quartet
state, generated by spin coupling. Since synthetic strategies to enhance the coherence times of stable radicals
already exist, this observation may be crucial: We expect that it will provide an important handle for improving the
design of photogenerated multi-spin systems and their applications in QIS.
In addition, isotope labelling could be used here to unambiguously confirm the contribution of hyperfine coupling
to the shape of the EPR spectrum measured for the coupled system, which was suggested in our earlier work.[8]
Numerical simulations of the EPR spectra, using a spin Hamiltonian approach, further reveal, that the coupling
between the triplet and doublet spin centres, generated after photoexcitation, falls in the upper intermediate coupling
regime. Consequently, we could show that this system represents one of the rare examples[32] of covalently-linked
photogenerated high-spin systems where it is possible to determine the magnitude of the exchange coupling constant
JTR reliably.
Importantly, we demonstrated here that room temperature EPR measurements are well feasible with photo-
generated organic multi-spin systems when embedding them in rigid polymer matrices and we expect that the
experimental protocols developed in this context will also be transferable to other photogenerated high-spin sys-
tems, making them amenable to pulse microwave manipulations at room temperature. To our knowledge, the
present study also represents the first observation of room temperature quantum coherence in a photogenerated
organic triplet−doublet spin system which exhibits properties that are suitable for applications in the field of quan-
tum information technology,[5,7,8,33] such as quantum sensing. Coherence times close to 1 µs and Rabi oscillations
could be measured under ambient conditions, which is a first and necessary step for the integration of such or
similar systems in practical molecular spintronic devices.
Supporting Information.
Synthetic procedures and characterisation, UV-vis spectra, description of the EPR
sample preparation, EPR measurement conditions and parameters, complementary EPR data, details of the data
analysis including simulation parameters.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) – Project number 417643975. The authors would like to thank the SIBW/DFG for financing EPR
instrumentation that is operated within the MagRes Center of the University of Freiburg (grant no. INST 39/928-1
FUGG). A.V.J. acknowledges support by the CNRS via the Emergence@INC program. We would further like to
thank Prof. Thorsten Hugel for providing us access to his steady state fluorescence and fluorescence quantum yield
spectrometers.
Author contributions. Spectroscopic characterisation of the compounds, EPR data acquisition and analysis, draft
editing and data visualisation M.M.; Establishment of the methodology for the preparation of polymer film samples
suitable for Q-band pulse EPR measurements at room temperature, EPR sample preparation, draft editing P.T.;
7

EPR data analysis and simulations, draft editing T.Q.; Synthesis and characterisation of the compounds, draft
editing A.V.J.; Conceptualisation, project administration, funding acquisition, supervision of the optical and EPR
experiments, original draft writing, data visualisation S.R.
Competing interests. The authors declare no competing interests.
References
[1] Troiani, F.; Affronte, M. Molecular spins for quantum information technologies. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 3119–3129.
[2] Cornia, A.; Seneor, P. The molecular way. Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 505–506.
[3] Moreno-Pineda, E.; Godfrin, C.; Balestro, F.; Wernsdorfer, W.; Ruben, M. Molecular spin qudits for quantum algo-
rithms. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, 47, 501–513.
[4] Atzori, M.; Sessoli, R. The second quantum revolution: role and challenges of molecular chemistry. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2019, 141, 11339–11352.
[5] Wasielewski, M. R. et al. Exploiting chemistry and molecular systems for quantum information science. Nat. Rev. Chem.
2020, 4, 490–504.
[6] Teki, Y. Excited-state dynamics of non-luminescent and luminescent π-radicals. Chem. Eur. J. 2020, 26, 980–996.
[7] Quintes, T.; Mayländer, M.; Richert, S. Properties and applications of photoexcited chromophore-radical systems. Nat.
Rev. Chem. 2023, 7, 75–90.
[8] Mayländer, M.; Chen, S.; Lorenzo, E. R.; Wasielewski, M. R.; Richert, S. Exploring photogenerated molecular quartet
states as spin qubits and qudits. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143, 7050–7058.
[9] Qiu, Y.; Equbal, A.; Lin, C.; Huang, Y.; Brown, P. J.; Young, R. M.; Krzyaniak, M. D.; Wasielewski, M. R. Optical
spin polarization of a narrow linewidth electron spin qubit in a chromophore/stable-radical system. Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. 2023, 62, e2022146.
[10] Wedge, C. J.; Timco, G. A.; Spielberg, E. T.; George, R. E.; Tuna, F.; Rigby, S.; McInnes, E. J. L.; Winpenny, R.
E. P.; Blundell, S. J.; Ardavan, A. Chemical engineering of molecular qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 107204.
[11] Sproules, S. Molecules as electron spin qubits. Electron Paramag. Reson. 2017, 25, 61–97.
[12] Gaita-Ariño, A.; Luis, F.; Hill, S.; Coronado, E. Molecular spins for quantum computation. Nat. Chem. 2019, 11,
301–309.
[13] Giacobbe, E. M.; Mi, Q.; Colvin, M. T.; Cohen, B.; Ramanan, C.; Scott, A. M.; Yeganeh, S.; Marks, T. J.; Rat-
ner, M. A.; Wasielewski, M. R. Ultrafast intersystem crossing and spin dynamics of photoexcited perylene-3,4:9,10-
bis(dicarboximide) covalently linked to a nitroxide radical at fixed distances. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 3700–3712.
[14] Colvin, M. T.; Smeigh, A. L.; Giacobbe, E. M.; Conron, S. M. M.; Butler Ricks, A.; Wasielewski, M. R. Ultrafast
intersystem crossing and spin dynamics of zinc meso-tetraphenylporphyrin covalently bound to stable radicals. J. Phys.
Chem. A 2011, 115, 7538–7549.
[15] Mayländer, M.; Nolden, O.; Franz, M.; Chen, S.; Bancroft, L.; Qiu, Y.; Wasielewski, M. R.; Gilch, P.; Richert, S.
Accessing the triplet state of perylenediimide by radical-enhanced intersystem crossing. Chem. Sci. 2022, 13, 6732–
6743.
[16] Atzori, M.; Tesi, L.; Morra, E.; Chiesa, M.; Sorace, L.; Sessoli, R. Room-temperature quantum coherence and Rabi
oscillations in vanadyl phthalocyanine: toward multifunctional molecular spin qubits. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138,
2154–2157.
[17] Bader, K.; Dengler, D.; Lenz, S.; Endeward, B.; Jiang, S.-D.; Neugebauer, P.; van Slageren, J. Room temperature
quantum coherence in a potential molecular qubit. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5304.
[18] Zadrozny, J. M.; Niklas, J.; Poluektov, O. G.; Freedman, D. E. Multiple quantum coherences from hyperfine transitions
in a vanadium(IV) complex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 15841–15844.
[19] Ferrando-Soria, J.; Moreno Pineda, E.; Chiesa, A.; Fernandez, A.; Magee, S. A.; Carretta, S.; Santini, P.; Vitorica-
Yrezabal, I. J.; Tuna, F.; Timco, G. A.; McInnes, E. J. L.; Winpenny, R. E. P. A molecular design of molecular qubits
to implement universal quantum gates. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11377.
8

[20] Asaad, S.; Mourik, V.; Joecker, B.; Johnson, M. A. I.; Baczewski, A. D.; Firgau, H. R.; Madzik, M. T.; Schmitt, V.;
Pla, J. J.; Hudson, F. E.; Itoh, K. M.; McCallum, J. C.; Dzurak, A. S.; Laucht, A.; Morello, A. Coherent electrical
control of a single high-spin nucleus in silicon. Nature 2020, 579, 205–209.
[21] Moreno-Pineda, E.; Martins, D.; Tuna, F. Molecules as qubits, qudits and quantum gates. Electron Paramag. Reson.
2021, 27, 146–187.
[22] Stoll, S.; Schweiger, A. EasySpin, a comprehensive software package for spectral simulation and analysis in EPR. J.
Magn. Reson. 2006, 178, 42–55.
[23] Johnston, D. C. Stretched exponention relaxation arising from a continuous sum of exponential decays. Phys. Rev. B
2006, 74, 184430.
[24] Wang, W.; Ma, W.-L.; Liu, R.-B. Quantum many-body theory for electron spin decoherence in nanoscale nuclear spin
baths. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2016, 80, 016001.
[25] Soetbeer, J.; Millen, M.; Zouboulis, K.; Hülsmann, M.; Godt, A.; Polyhach, Y.; Jeschke, G. Dynamical decoupling in
water−glycerol glasses: a comparison of nitroxides, trityl radicals and gadolinium complexes. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.
2021, 23, 5352–5369.
[26] Kathirvelu, V.; Smith, C.; Parks, C.; Mannan, M. A.; Miura, Y.; Takeshita, K.; Eaton, S. S.; Eaton, G. R. Relaxation
rates for spirocyclohexyl nitroxyl radicals are suitable for interspin distance measurements at temperatures up to about
125 K. Chem. Commun. 2009, 454–456.
[27] Kuzhelev, A. A.; Strizhakov, R. K.; Krumkacheva, O. A.; Polienko, Y. F.; Morozov, D. A.; Shevelev, G. Y.; Pysh-
nyi, D. V.; Kirilyuk, I. A.; Fedin, M. V.; Bagryanskaya, E. G. Room-temperature electron spin relaxation of nitroxides
immobilized in threhalose: effect of substituents adjacent to NO-group. J. Magn. Reson. 2016, 266, 1–7.
[28] Haugland, M. M.; El-Sagheer, A. H.; Porter, R. J.; Peña, J.; Brown, T.; Anderson, E. A.; Lovett, J. E. 2’-
Alkynylnucleotides: a sequence- and spin label-flexible strategy for EPR spectroscopy in DNA. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2016, 138, 9069–9072.
[29] Astashkin, A. V.; Schweiger, A. Electron-spin transient nutation: a new approach to simplify the interpretation of ESR
spectra. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1990, 174, 595–602.
[30] Mizuochi, N.; Ohba, Y.; Yamauchi, S. A two-dimensional EPR nutation study on excited multiplet states of fullerene
linked to a nitroxide radical. J. Phys. Chem. A 1997, 101, 5966–5968.
[31] Mizuochi, N.; Ohba, Y.; Yamauchi, S. First observation of the photoexcited quintet state in fullerene linked with two
nitroxide radicals. J. Phys. Chem. A 1999, 103, 7749–7752.
[32] Moons, H.; Goovaerts, E.; Gubskaya, V. P.; Nuretdinov, I. A.; Corvaja, C.; Franco, L. W-band transient EPR and
photoinduced absorption on spin-labeled fullerene derivatives. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 3942–3951.
[33] DiVincenzo, D. P. The physical implementation of quantum computation. Fortschr. Phys. 2020, 48, 771–783.
9