1 
 
 
Title: Direct propylene epoxidation via water activation over Pd-Pt 
electrocatalysts  
Authors: Minju Chung1, Joseph H. Maalouf1, Jason S. Adams2, Chenyu Jiang2, Yuriy Román-
Leshkov1, Karthish Manthiram2* 
5 
Affiliations: 
 
1Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Cambridge, 
MA 02139, United States  
2Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology; 
Pasadena, CA 91125, United States 
10 
*Corresponding author. Email: karthish@caltech.edu 
 
Abstract: Direct electrochemical propylene epoxidation using water oxidation intermediates 
presents a sustainable alternative to existing routes that involve hazardous chlorine or peroxide 
reagents. Here we report an oxidized palladium-platinum alloy catalyst (PdPtOx/C), which reaches 
15 
a Faradaic efficiency of 66±5% toward propylene epoxidation at 50 mA/cm2 at ambient 
temperature and pressure. Embedding platinum into the palladium oxide crystal structure 
stabilized oxidized platinum species, resulting in improved catalyst performance. The reaction 
kinetics suggest that epoxidation on PdPtOx/C proceeds through electrophilic attack by metal-
bound peroxo (OO*) intermediates. This work demonstrates an effective strategy for selective 
20 
electrochemical oxygen-atom transfer from water, without mediators, for diverse oxygenation 
reactions. 
 
One-Sentence Summary: Our work contributes toward advancing the sustainable synthesis of 
epoxides using water as the oxygen atom source. 
25 
 
 
 

 
2 
 
Main Text:  
Propylene oxide (PO) is an important chemical building block used in the production of many 
commodity chemicals such as polyurethanes and polyesters (1). Currently, PO production relies 
on highly reactive, corrosive, or explosive chemical oxidants such as molecular chlorine (Cl2) or 
peroxides (2). While direct oxidation of propylene using molecular oxygen has been explored as 
5 
an alternative solution, achieving high selectivity for PO is challenging due to the allylic hydrogen 
stripping in propylene and consequent further oxidation (2). In this regard, a selective direct 
propylene epoxidation pathway using water as a cleaner and easily accessible oxygen source would 
present a compelling alternative to the current epoxidation methods.  
Electrochemistry offers a promising approach for using water as a sustainable source of oxygen 
10 
atoms at ambient temperature and pressure. In water electrolysis, typically oxygen and hydrogen 
are generated, but alternatively, commodity chemicals can be synthesized via oxidative processes 
at the anode of an electrochemical cell combined with the hydrogen evolution at the cathode. For 
example, chloride oxidation can be conducted at the anode to generate Cl2, which acts as a redox 
mediator in alkene epoxidation (Fig. 1A, bottom) (3–5). This electrified version of the 
15 
chlorohydrin process was demonstrated to be effective at industrially relevant current densities and 
selectivity (4). However, this method produces byproducts such as hypochlorite, chlorinated 
organic compounds, and brine streams that pose serious environmental challenges unless 100% 
selectivity and recycling of the chloride electrolytes can be achieved. Rather than relying on Cl2 
as a redox mediator, it should be possible to directly transfer reactive intermediates typically seen 
20 
in water oxidation to the alkene before the intermediates are fully oxidized into molecular oxygen 
(O2) (Fig. 1A, top) (6–8). This direct electrochemical alkene epoxidation approach does not 
involve hazardous oxidizing agents, such as Cl2, making it an attractive avenue for high-demand 
propylene epoxidation. 
Catalytic performance of PdPtOx/C and design principle  
25 
Previously studied catalysts for electrochemical propylene epoxidation can be clustered into 
palladium- (Pd) (9–12), platinum- (Pt) (13–15), and silver- (Ag) (16, 17) derived groups (Fig. 1B 
and table S1), and the best catalytic performance for electrochemical epoxidation has been 
observed with oxidized Pd and Pt catalysts. Studies on Pd catalysts have shown that epoxidation 
occurs on the surface oxide layer at anodic potentials above 1.1 V vs. RHE, while allylic oxidation 
30 
producing acrolein and acrylic acid occurs on the metallic surface at lower potentials (9, 12). The 
performance enhancement of oxidized Pt catalysts was correlated with an increase in surface 
presence of Pt(II) and Pt(IV) species, while pure PtO2 was less active (14). Moreover, a theoretical 
study has identified weak oxygen-binding metal oxides as promising catalyst candidates for 
propylene epoxidation, and cautioned that the metallic phase of strong binding metals, such as Pt 
35 
and Pd, may facilitate the production of unwanted side products through dehydrogenation (18). 
These findings suggest that the catalytic performance may be further optimized by adjusting the 
oxidation states of the metal. However, preparing Pt oxide catalysts with high concentrations of 
oxidized Pt species is challenging due to their instability. On the other hand, stable Pd oxide 
catalysts can be obtained through high-temperature annealing, but they generally exhibit lower 
40 
rates of epoxidation.  
Alloying Pt with Pd can be a strategy that leverages complementing properties of the two elements, 
enabling the attainment of optimal oxidation states and structures for an epoxidation catalyst (Fig. 
1C). Under aerobic conditions, Pt nanoparticles tend to sinter into a metallic form when annealed 
above 400 ℃ (19) because volatile PtO2 species mediate the sintering process by facilitating 
45 

 
3 
 
Ostwald ripening (20, 21). In contrast, stable PdO nanoparticles can be produced through 
annealing of Pd nanoparticles without significant sintering (19, 22). Importantly, PdO can trap 
mobile PtO2 species, which results in less sintering of Pd-Pt alloy nanoparticles compared to Pt 
nanoparticles (20, 23). In addition, Pd and Pt share very similar crystal structures and atomic sizes, 
allowing homogeneous distributions of Pd and Pt components in their alloys. 
5 
 
Fig. 1. Background and demonstration of direct electrochemical propylene epoxidation. (A) Comparison of 
chlorine-mediated and direct electrochemical propylene epoxidation. (B) Compilation of previously reported direct 
electrochemical propylene epoxidation and our work. (C)  Effect of annealing on Pt, Pd, and Pd-Pt nanoparticles. (D 
and E) Direct electrochemical propylene epoxidation performance with different compositions of Pd-Pt-on-carbon 
10 
catalysts in (D) water-acetonitrile electrolyte and (E) aqueous electrolyte. Potentials in this figure were 100% iR-
compensated (i = current, R= resistance). The vertical error bars represent standard deviations from the mean of 
multiple replicates (n=3) of the same experiment. 
In this study, we designed a Pd-Pt alloy catalyst containing both Pd and Pt oxide by embedding 
and stabilizing Pt oxide species in Pd oxide. A series of alloys with varying ratios of Pd and Pt 
15 
were synthesized using a co-reduction method (24) on an amorphous carbon substrate and 
subsequently annealed under static air before being tested for their activity in propylene 

 
4 
 
epoxidation (Supplementary Materials Methods, fig. S1-3). Our catalyst is compatible with a 
blended electrolyte comprised of acetonitrile and water (Fig. 1D) that can accommodate a broad 
spectrum of alkene substrates, as well as aqueous electrolytes (Fig. 1E) that can minimize overall 
cell voltage for gaseous alkene epoxidation (fig. S4). The alloy catalyst with an equimolar 
composition of Pd and Pt annealed at 500 ℃ (PdPtOx/C) was most active toward propylene 
5 
epoxidation and outperformed previously reported catalysts for direct anodic epoxidation under 
ambient conditions (Fig. 1B and table S1). Furthermore, alloys with metal compositions of Pd3Pt1 
and Pd1Pt3 exhibited epoxidation activities on par with PdPtOx/C; when Pd and Pt are integrated 
at the nanometer scale (fig S2 and S3), Pd-Pt alloy catalysts can achieve enhanced epoxidation 
rates and Faradaic efficiencies relative to either Pd or Pt alone (Fig. 1D-E, fig S5).  
10 
In an electrolytic cell equipped with circulating liquid electrolytes (fig. S4), we demonstrated 
continuous propylene oxide production with high Faradaic efficiency averaging 66±5% (propylene 
glycol; 1.3±0.3%) for 3 hours at a constant current density of 50 mA/cm2. Additionally, PdPtOx/C 
catalyzed cyclooctene epoxidation with a Faradaic efficiency of ~90%, a notable improvement 
over the results observed in our previous studies using Ir-MnOx (~50%) and MnOx (~30%) 
15 
catalysts (table S2) (7, 8). 
 
 
Catalyst characterizations 
We examined the bulk and surface properties of our annealed PdPt/C, Pd/C, and Pt/C catalysts 
(PdPtOx/C, PdOx/C, and PtOx/C, respectively) to shed light on the enhanced performance of 
20 
PdPtOx/C compared to PdOx/C and PtOx/C.  
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns showed that although PdOx/C and PtOx/C only exhibited oxide 
and metallic phases, respectively, the PdPtOx/C contained both phases (Fig. 2A and fig. S6). The 
oxide phase of PdPtOx/C resembles that of PdOx/C, as the (101) peak in PdPtOx/C at 33.7° occurs 
at a similar angle as the PdOx/C peak at 33.9°. Similarly, the metallic phase of PdPtOx/C parallels 
25 
that of PtOx/C, with the (111) peak shifted from 39.8° in PtOx/C to 40.0° in PdPtOx/C. Furthermore, 
the broader peaks in the PdPtOx/C XRD pattern indicate that the PdPtOx/C has smaller crystallites 
than PtOx/C (table S3), which is consistent with our hypothesis that the sintering of PdPt/C is less 
severe than that of Pt/C upon annealing.  
Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) measurements revealed that, within fitting 
30 
errors, Pd and Pt coordinate with the same number of oxygens in PdPtOx/C; the Pd-O and Pt-O 
coordination numbers were estimated to be 3.7±0.4 and 2.8±0.6, respectively (Fig. 2B-C and table 
S4-6). The local coordination environments of Pd in PdPtOx/C and PdOx/C were similar to that of 
PdO, while PtOx/C resembled the Pt foil standard and did not show any contribution from the Pt-
O scattering path. In contrast, the local environment of Pt in PdPtOx/C was different from that in 
35 
Pt foil or PtO2 standard, and the first-shell scattering path of PdPtOx/C was fit with a combination 
of Pt-O and Pt-Pd/Pt scattering paths. These EXAFS data suggest that blending Pt in the PdO 
structure induced a local coordination environment of Pt resembling that of PtO, which is unstable 
alone.  
The mixing of Pd and Pt on the surface, matching the bulk composition, was confirmed through 
40 
cyclic voltammetry (CV) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses. A single peak of 
surface oxide reduction (at ~ 0 V vs. Fc/Fc+) was observed in the CV of the PdPtOx/C electrode, 
suggesting that Pd and Pt coexist on the catalyst surface (Fig. 2D and fig. S7). Furthermore, near-
surface compositions derived from XPS survey spectra also indicate that Pd and Pt are present in 

 
5 
 
an equimolar ratio near the surface (table S7), matching the bulk composition determined using 
inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (table S8).  
XPS analysis showed that alloying Pt with Pd stabilizes oxidized Pt on the catalyst surface. Pt(0) 
species were dominant in the PtOx/C, while a higher content of Pt(II) species was observed in 
PdPtOx/C (Fig. 2F). The ratio of Pt(II):Pt(0) increased from 1.0 to 6.4 as the catalyst treatment 
5 
temperature was increased from 400 ℃ to 500 ℃ (table S9). A small amount of Pd(0) was present 
in PdPtOx/C annealed at 400 ℃, while Pd(II) was exclusively observed in the catalyst annealed at 
500 ℃ (Fig. 2E). The epoxidation rate and selectivity also improved with the treatment 
temperature for PdPt/C (fig. S8-9), indicating that the higher ratio of oxidized Pd and Pt species is 
contributing to the enhancement in the catalyst performance.  
10 
 
Fig. 2. Ex-situ characterizations of annealed PdPt/C, Pd/C, and Pt/C catalysts. (A) Magnified XRD patterns 
around the peak associated with the oxide and metallic phases of annealed catalysts at 500 ℃. (B and C) EXAFS 
spectra of standards and catalysts at (B) Pd K-edge and (C) Pt L3-edge. (D) Cyclic voltammetry traces of the catalysts. 
The scans were recorded at 50 mV/sec scan rate with 85% automatic iR-compensation (i = current, R= resistance). 
15 
(E) High-resolution Pd 3d XPS spectra of annealed Pd/C and PdPt/C catalysts. (F) High-resolution Pt 4f XPS spectra 
of annealed Pt/C and PdPt/C catalysts. 
Operando x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) experiments probing the Pd K-edge and Pt L3-
edges during epoxidation highlighted again that achieving more oxidized Pt may have a critical 
role in improving catalytic activity toward propylene epoxidation. Progressively more oxidative 
20 
potentials were applied from 0.45 V to 1.15 V vs. Fc/Fc+, and then a reductive potential of -1.35 
V followed by oxidative potentials back to 1.15 V were applied during the measurements. The 
average metal valency at each condition was estimated from linear combination fitting of x-ray 
absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra using reference spectra from standard materials. 
The results indicate that Pd oxide stabilizes oxidized Pt species in Pd-Pt alloys, leading to a higher 
25 
average oxidation state of Pt in PdPtOx/C (+2), compared to that in PtOx/C (0). This difference is 
maintained under anodic potentials (0.45-1.15 V vs. Fc/Fc+, Fig. 3A). Unlike the stark contrast in 
Pt valency between PdPtOx/C and PtOx/C, the Pd valency stayed the same (+2) in both PdPtOx/C 

 
6 
 
and PdOx/C (Fig. 3B). These observations suggest that the more oxidized Pt species contribute to 
the enhancement in the production rate and selectivity of PO. 
Furthermore, EXAFS fitting of catalysts under operating conditions showed that coordination 
numbers and scattering path lengths of Pd and Pt did not change during electrolysis (table S5-6). 
Applying a cathodic potential followed by an anodic potential demonstrated that the edge energies 
5 
and the coordination environment of Pd and Pt respond to applied potentials in a partially, albeit 
not fully, reversible fashion (Fig. 3, fig. S10-11).  
Fig. 3. Operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy. (A) Changes of Pt average valency in PdPtOx/C and PtOx/C in 
responses to applied potentials. (B) Changes of Pd average valency in PdPtOx/C and PdOx/C in responses to applied 
10 
potentials. Potentials in this figure were 100% iR-compensated (i = current, R= resistance). 
In summary, the results from XRD, CV, and the elemental analysis collectively suggest that Pd 
and Pt are mixed in both the bulk and surface of the PdPtOx/C catalyst. XANES and XPS results 
revealed that a larger quantity of oxidized Pt species is stabilized in PdPtOx/C compared to PtOx/C. 
XAS data suggest that Pd stabilizes Pt at a similar oxidation state (around +2) and crystal structure 
15 
as PdO, which together improve catalytic performance. 
 
Electrochemical kinetic study and proposed reaction mechanism 
Understanding the mechanism of direct propylene epoxidation on PdPtOx/C can help us develop 
more efficient catalysts and process conditions for producing PO. The reaction mechanism was 
20 
investigated using a multi-faceted approach including kinetic rate measurements, deuterium 
kinetic isotope effect measurements, probe substrate analysis, and substrate-based descriptor 
assessment.   
Electrochemical kinetic rate measurements were conducted to examine electrolyte species 
dependences for direct anodic epoxidation on PdPtOx/C (Fig. 4, fig. S12-13). The reaction rates, 
25 
represented by the partial current density toward epoxidation, were measured using 
chronoamperometry in conjunction with product quantification by 1H-NMR (Supplementary 
Materials Methods).  
We hypothesized that the direct alkene epoxidation pathway at the anode may involve multiple 
coupled proton-electron transfer steps from water to the electrode, followed by oxygen-atom 
30 
transfer from intermediates typically seen in water oxidation to propylene. O2 was observed to be 

 
7 
 
the major byproduct with the PdPtOx/C catalyst, while a small amount of CO2 was also observed 
(fig. S14). It is worth noting that the selectivity of PO over other propylene-derived products 
(propylene glycol, acetone, and CO2) reaches 92%. Therefore, in our proposed mechanism, only 
the competition between epoxidation and oxygen evolution was considered.  
 
5 
Fig. 4. Kinetic data on direct anodic epoxidation with PdPtOx/C catalysts. (A) Anodic potential dependence of 
current density at 1 atm propylene in a 10 M water, 0.4 M teterabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TBABF4) 
acetonitrile solution (B) Water molar concentration dependences of propylene epoxidation current density at different 
propylene partial pressures. (C) Propylene partial pressure dependences of propylene epoxidation current density at 
different water concentrations. (D) A putative reaction mechanism including the direct anodic epoxidation and oxygen 
10 
evolution pathways. (E) Simulated propylene partial pressure dependences of intermediate species coverage at 10 M 
water, 1.1 V vs. Fc/Fc+ condition. Potentials in this figure were 100% iR-compensated (i = current, R= resistance). 
Dotted lines in A-C represent best-fit from kinetic model of proposed mechanism in D (more details are shown in 
Supplementary Text S1, Case 2d). The vertical error bars represent standard deviations from the mean of multiple 
replicates (n=3) of the same experiment. 
15 
In cases where the surface coverage is primarily determined by a single reactive intermediate and 
a rate-limiting step is evident, the measured Tafel slope of 119±5 mV/dec implies that the rate-
limiting step involves a single electron transfer, and that no pre-equilibrated electron transfer steps 
occur between the abundant reactive intermediate and the rate-limiting step (Fig. 4A). 
Nevertheless, non-integer and non-linear reaction orders were observed in the water and propylene 
20 
dependencies, signaling the presence of more intricate kinetic control. 

 
8 
 
At 1 atm propylene condition, the observed dependence of rates on water molar content exhibited 
~2nd order behavior at lower water ratio, which decreased to ~1st order at higher water ratio (Fig. 
4B and fig. S12).  At lower propylene pressures, the water dependence showed more linear ~1st 
order dependence in the whole water concentration range. For propylene, the rate showed 1st order 
dependence on propylene activity at lower propylene pressures, but the dependence decreased at 
5 
elevated propylene pressures (Fig. 4C and fig. S13). 
To address the complexity arising from non-integer reaction orders and variations in orders with 
reactant concentrations, we implemented a multiparameter kinetic model and fitted it to the kinetic 
data collected over a wide range of experimental conditions. We initially hypothesized that 
surface-adsorbed hydroperoxo (OOH*), peroxo (OO*), or oxo (O*) species might serve as the 
10 
reactive oxygen species for epoxidation. We then proposed various elementary steps and 
corresponding rates for each hypothesis (Supplementary Text S1). Given that acetonitrile is a less 
effective proton acceptor than water, we suggested elementary steps where two distinct water 
molecules play explicit roles in the reaction, one as a reactant and the other as a proton acceptor. 
Then, we employed kinetic modeling to deduce which intermediate would most likely react with 
15 
propylene. This approach was viable as the reaction of different species (OOH*, OO*, and O*) 
with propylene generates distinct surface intermediates following epoxidation (OH*, O*, and *, 
respectively). In contrast, the evolution of O2 invariably leaves vacant (*) surface sites. The 
goodness-of-fit of model was evaluated by the root-mean-square-error (RMSE) between the 
experimental data and the simulated data from the model, with the lowest value indicating the best-
20 
fit model.  
Our experimental data best matched the mechanism suggesting OO* as the key intermediate for 
epoxidation, with an RMSE of 0.48 mA/cm2. Diverse derivatives of this mechanism involving the 
OO* epoxidation intermediate are plausible, dependent on whether a dual or single site is 
presumed for OO* and O* intermediates. We selected the model with the lowest RMSE as our 
25 
representative mechanism (Fig. 4D), and the model provides a quantitative explanation of the data 
illustrated in Fig. 4A-C. We also simulated surface coverage using the model (Fig. 4E, 
Supplementary Text S1). At higher propylene pressures where O* and OH* are abundant, the 
overall epoxidation rate would be largely determined by the rate of water oxidation to form OOH*. 
However, the comparable prevalence of different surface oxygen intermediates underscores the 
30 
necessity for a comprehensive kinetic model that does not assume a single dominant reactive 
intermediate and a rate-limiting step.  
Kinetic isotope labeling and stilbene control experiments further support our hypothesis asserting 
OO* as the key intermediate in epoxidation. The use of deuterated water lowered the epoxidation 
rate (kH / kD =1.8±0.5; fig. S15 and table S10) while the Faradaic efficiency remained similar. The 
35 
difference observed in the epoxidation rate is consistent with the kinetically-relevant water 
oxidation steps involving O-H cleavages in our proposed mechanism. Moreover, our mechanism 
identifies OO* as the branching intermediate for both epoxide and O2 evolution (Fig. 4D), 
providing an explanation for the marginal selectivity difference, since neither of these pathways 
from OO* involves O-H cleavage. In addition, cis-stilbene was used as a probe substrate to help 
40 
determine whether epoxidation proceeds through a concerted mechanism with OOH* or a stepwise 
pathway with OO* (25, 26). Cis-stilbene (96%) epoxidation with PdPtOx/C produced 23% cis-
stilbene oxide and 77% trans-stilbene oxide, which suggests that alkene epoxidation over 
PdPtOx/C occurs through a stepwise mechanism (fig. S16) with OO* reactive intermediates.  
 
45 

 
9 
 
Correlation between alkene electrophilicity and epoxidation rate 
Additional insights into direct anodic epoxidation on PdPtOx/C were obtained from evaluating the 
correlation between the electrophilicity of alkene substrates and the epoxidation rate. Previous 
studies on thermochemical epoxidation suggest that either electrophilic (27–29) or nucleophilic 
(30, 31) epoxidation can be a reasonable reaction pathway for electrochemical propylene 
5 
epoxidation on late-transition metal catalysts (Supplementary Text S2). By understanding the 
electronic nature of the oxygen transfer during the reaction, we can enhance our understanding of 
the mechanism and guide future catalyst development.  
The global electrophilicity index (ω) can be calculated by taking the square of alkene chemical 
potential divided by chemical hardness, and is expressed in units of energy (32, 33). A higher value 
10 
of ω indicates that the molecule is more electrophilic. Furthermore, the Fukui functions can be 
used to determine the local reactivity of each atom in a molecule by predicting the redistribution 
of electron density during electrophilic, nucleophilic, and radical attacks. The local electrophilicity 
(ω-) at each atom center can be obtained by multiplying the global electrophilicity by the value of 
the Fukui function for the removal of an electron. 
15 
The average ω- of the vinyl carbons as a substrate-based descriptor was assessed against the 
epoxidation rates of a wide range of alkene substrates. A total of 11 distinct aliphatic alkenes with 
various structures and functional groups were selected, with ω- values ranging from 12-44 kJ/mol. 
In order to ensure consistent reactant chemical potential across different substrates, the gaseous 
substrates were fed until saturation, and the liquid substrates were added to the electrolyte near the 
20 
phase-separation point, corresponding to approximately 0.2 M substrate for a 0.11 M 
tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TBABF4), 10 M water in acetonitrile (table S11). The 
substrates were tested at the same potential referenced to the ferrocene redox couple (1.05 V vs. 
Fc/Fc+).  
A negative correlation between the logarithm of rate and the alkene electrophilicity was observed, 
25 
with more nucleophilic alkenes displaying higher reactivity towards epoxidation (Fig. 5). The 
results suggest that the epoxidation may proceed through an electrophilic attack by oxygen species, 
and that the energy barriers to this attack are lower for more nucleophilic alkenes. Furthermore, 
the correlation suggests that a frontier-orbital interaction between the LUMO of the oxygen species 
and the HOMO of the alkene modulates the reactivity. 
30 
 
Fig. 5. Correlation between the alkene electrophilicity index and the direct anodic epoxidation rate. Pearson’s r 
value = -0.85. 

 
10 
 
 
Electrolyte choice and the effect of solvent medium on the reaction kinetics  
 
The successful operation of direct epoxidation via water activation hinges on whether the 
electrolyte system is compatible with a particular combination of catalyst and alkene substrate. 
5 
Water-acetonitrile blended electrolytes were employed to investigate the epoxidation of various 
alkene substrates, since the acetonitrile co-solvent enhances the solubility of hydrophobic alkene 
substrates in the water-rich phase. However, the use of an organic solvent can lead to an increase 
in the ohmic resistance throughout the electrolyte (fig. S4). The use of water alone as the solvent 
for the electrolyte, without an organic co-solvent, would be ideal as water is required as a reactant 
10 
and able to effectively solvate electrolyte ions, minimizing the ohmic resistance of the overall 
electrolyte. For gaseous substrates that are sparingly soluble in water, like propylene, gas-diffusion 
electrodes (GDEs) could be utilized to reduce the distance that reactant gases must diffuse through 
the electrolyte to reach the catalyst, and therefore aqueous electrolytes would be sufficient for 
epoxide production. Indeed, the PdPtOx/C catalyst showed ~60% FE toward propylene 
15 
epoxidation at 1.65 V vs. SHE in a sodium phosphate aqueous electrolyte when incorporated into 
a carbon-paper GDE with Nafion binder (Fig. 1E and fig. S4). Adding the ionomer onto the 
electrode was critical to achieve epoxidation performance commensurate with water-acetonitrile 
electrolytes, as the hydrophobic backbone of the ionomer generates partially wetted channels that 
are effective for transport of the reactant gases to the catalyst.  
20 
 
The microenvironment of electrolytes also affects the conversion of epoxides into glycols. A 
noticeable amount of propylene glycol (PG) was observed in the aqueous propylene epoxidation 
(~10% FE), higher than observed in the blended water-acetonitrile electrolyte. Furthermore, 
using 0.1 M HClO4 or any acidic electrolyte results in the exclusive formation of PG, with no 
25 
detected PO (table S1). As epoxides are known to undergo acid-catalyzed hydrolysis to afford 
glycols, it is imperative to find a pH regime where hydrolysis is minimized to ensure high 
selectivity toward the product of interest in aqueous electrolytes. The reaction rates of PO to PG 
in aqueous electrolytes with pH 4 to 7 were measured using 1H-NMR; the hydrolysis of PO to 
generate PG was found to be significantly faster in the pH 4 buffer solution with almost 40% 
30 
consumption of PO after 7 hours whereas the hydrolysis in less acidic solutions, at pH 5-7, was 
largely suppressed with less than around 10% PO to PG conversion (fig. S18). Thus, maintaining 
a near-neutral pH in the aqueous electrolyte is essential to optimize PO production. 
 
The practical industrial operation of this system will likely require the use of a membrane-electrode 
35 
assembly (MEA), resembling a water electrolyzer with humidified propylene gas fed to the anode. 
The MEA is advantageous for minimizing ohmic loss and separating PO from liquid electrolytes. 
However, our analysis on the influence of pH on the PO hydrolysis rate suggests that minimizing 
the interfacial pH gradient at the anode would be the key challenge for maximizing PO production 
over PG in MEAs operated at high current densities. 
40 
 
As long as the issues of mass-transport limitation and hydrolysis of PO are addressed, mechanistic 
insights on propylene epoxidation obtained in water-acetonitrile electrolyte may be extended to 
aqueous systems. The investigation on water activity in water-acetonitrile electrolyte suggests that 
aqueous electrolyte may be viewed as an extreme case of the water-acetonitrile electrolyte with 
45 
the water mole ratio approaching unity. In the water-acetonitrile electrolyte system, positive 
deviation from Raoult's law (fig. S17) indicates that the water in this electrolyte prefers self-

 
11 
 
interactions over mixing, meaning that the activity coefficient of water in this case is greater than 
unity (γwater > 1), and that it approaches unity with increasing water concentration. The comparison 
between the rate order with respect to water activity and water concentration provides information 
about the activity coefficient of the transition state (γ‡) as well (Supplementary Text S4). At lower 
water concentrations (1-5 M), the propylene epoxidation rate showed ~4th order dependence on 
5 
water activity while ~2nd order dependence on water mole ratio was observed. The 2nd order 
dependence is consistent with our hypothesis that the predominant rate determining step leading 
to the formation of OOH* involves a first water molecule that is a reactant and a second water 
molecule that is a proton acceptor.The abnormally high apparent 4th order dependence on water 
activity suggests that the stabilization of the transition state may be achieved by augmenting the 
10 
water content. However, ~2nd order dependences in both water activity and concentration were 
observed at higher water concentrations (5-12 M). This can be rationalized if γ‡ scales with γwater 
at low water concentrations but remains relatively unchanged at higher water concentrations. This 
hypothesis aligns with our chemical intuition: once a sufficient quantity of water is present around 
the transition state, adding more water does not significantly alter the near-transition-state 
15 
chemical environment. Therefore, once the water concentration exceeds 5 M in acetonitrile, the 
chemical environment at the active site should be akin to that of an aqueous electrolyte. In this 
case, the transition from water-acetonitrile electrolyte to aqueous electrolyte may be a simple 
extrapolation of water mole ratio to one, without a discontinuous change in the solvent properties. 
This interpretation is supported by the measured reaction rates in aqueous electrolytes that is 
20 
consistent with the predictions from the mechanistic model derived from kinetic studies in water-
acetonitrile electrolytes (fig. S12).  
 
Collectively, the results from multiple orthogonal analyses provide a comprehensive 
understanding of the mechanism of electrochemical epoxidation on PdPtOx/C. Our findings are 
25 
consistent with a mechanistic hypothesis that OO* is the key species involved in the electrophilic 
epoxidation of propylene. The PdO crystal structure embedding Pt(II) species was found to be 
effective for catalyzing direct anodic epoxidation, suggesting that other materials with similar 
structures and stronger inductive effects on Pt may also produce effective catalysts by promoting 
more electrophilic epoxidation pathways. Additionally, we discovered through fundamental 
30 
kinetic analysis that the identity of reactive oxygen species may vary between catalysts. For 
instance, the proposed reactive oxygen species for epoxidation on PdPtOx/C and MnOx-based 
catalysts are OO* and O*, respectively. Developing species that stabilize OO* may enhance 
epoxidation on noble metals while avoiding oxygen evolution. Our work contributes toward 
advancing the sustainable synthesis of epoxides, which currently have significant energy and 
35 
environmental footprints. The molecular-level understanding of direct anodic epoxidation 
obtained from this study may have implications to other electrocatalytic oxygen-atom transfer 
reactions driven by reactive water-activation intermediates. 
 
References and Notes 
40 
1.  
M. W. Allsopp; G. Vianello, Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry - Wiley 
Online Library (Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, 2012; 
http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/14356007.a21_717). 
2.  
S. J. Khatib, S. T. Oyama, Direct Oxidation of Propylene to Propylene Oxide with 
Molecular Oxygen: A Review. Catal. Rev. 57, 306–344 (2015). 
45 

 
12 
 
3.  
J. A. M. Leduc, “Electrochemical Process for the Production of Organic Oxides, U.S. 
Patent 3,288,692” (1966), (available at 
https://patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/19/89/45/5c616161f9dc57/US3288692.pdf). 
4.  
W. R. Leow, Y. Lum, A. Ozden, Y. Wang, D.-H. Nam, B. Chen, J. Wicks, T.-T. Zhuang, 
F. Li, D. Sinton, E. H. Sargent, Chloride-mediated selective electrosynthesis of ethylene 
5 
and propylene oxides at high current density. Science (80-. ). 368, 1228–1233 (2020). 
5.  
M. Chung, K. Jin, J. S. Zeng, K. Manthiram, Mechanism of Chlorine-Mediated 
Electrochemical Ethylene Oxidation in Saline Water. ACS Catal. 10, 14015–14023 
(2020). 
6.  
J. Adrien, M. Le Duc, S. Hills, United States Patent Office ELECTROLYTIC 
10 
PRODUCTION OF OLEFINE OXDES (1969). 
7.  
M. Chung, K. Jin, J. S. Zeng, T. N. Ton, K. Manthiram, Tuning Single-Atom Dopants on 
Manganese Oxide for Selective Electrocatalytic Cyclooctene Epoxidation. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 144, 17416–17422 (2022). 
8.  
K. Jin, J. H. Maalouf, N. Lazouski, N. Corbin, D. Yang, K. Manthiram, Epoxidation of 
15 
Cyclooctene Using Water as the Oxygen Atom Source at Manganese Oxide 
Electrocatalysts. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 141, 6413–6418 (2019). 
9.  
X. C. Liu, T. Wang, Z. M. Zhang, C. H. Yang, L. Y. Li, S. Wu, S. Xie, G. Fu, Z. Y. Zhou, 
S. G. Sun, Reaction Mechanism and Selectivity Tuning of Propene Oxidation at the 
Electrochemical Interface. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, 20895-20902 (2022) 
20 
10.  
A. Winiwarter, L. Silvioli, S. B. Scott, K. Enemark-Rasmussen, M. Sariç, D. B. Trimarco, 
P. C. K. Vesborg, P. G. Moses, I. E. L. Stephens, B. Seger, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff, 
Towards an atomistic understanding of electrocatalytic partial hydrocarbon oxidation: 
propene on palladium. Energy Environ. Sci. 12, 1055–1067 (2019). 
11.  
R. P. H. Jong, E. Dubbelman, G. Mul, Electro-oxidation of propylene by palladium 
25 
functionalized titanium hollow fibre electrodes. J. Catal. 416, 18–28 (2022). 
12.  
S. Koroidov, A. Winiwarter, O. Diaz-Morales, M. Görlin, J. Halldin Stenlid, H.-Y. Wang, 
M. Börner, C. M. Goodwin, M. Soldemo, L. G. M. Pettersson, J. Rossmeisl, T. Hansson, 
I. Chorkendorff, A. Nilsson, Chemisorbed oxygen or surface oxides steer the selectivity in 
Pd electrocatalytic propene oxidation observed by operando Pd L-edge X-ray absorption 
30 
spectroscopy. Catal. Sci. Technol. 11, 3347–3352 (2021). 
13.  
K. Otsuka, T. Ushiyama, I. Yamanaka, K. Ebitani, Electrocatalytic Synthesis of Propylene 
Oxide During Water Electrolysis. J. Catal. 157, 450–460 (1995). 
14.  
S. Iguchi, M. Kataoka, R. Hoshino, I. Yamanaka, Direct epoxidation of propylene with 
water at a PtOx anode using a solid-polymer-electrolyte electrolysis cell. Catal. Sci. 
35 
Technol. 12, 469–473 (2022). 
15.  
I. Yamanaka, K. Sato, K. Otsuka, Electrolytic Synthesis of Propene Oxide from Propene 
and Water in the Gas Phase. Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 2, 131–132 (1999). 
16.  
L. L. Holbrook, H. Wise, Electrooxidation of olefins at a silver electrode. J. Catal. 38, 
294–298 (1975). 
40 
17.  
J. Ke, J. Zhao, M. Chi, M. Wang, X. Kong, Q. Chang, W. Zhou, C. Long, J. Zeng, Z. 
Geng, Facet-dependent electrooxidation of propylene into propylene oxide over Ag3PO4 
crystals. Nat. Commun. 2022 131. 13, 1–8 (2022). 
18.  
H. Li, C. S. Abraham, M. Anand, A. Cao, J. K. Nørskov, Opportunities and Challenges in 
Electrolytic Propylene Epoxidation. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 13, 2057–2063 (2022). 
45 
19.  
M. CHEN, Morphology and composition of Pt$z.sbnd;Pd alloy crystallites on SiO2 in 
reactive atmospheres*1. J. Catal. 56, 198–218 (1979). 
20.  
C. Carrillo, T. R. Johns, H. Xiong, A. Delariva, S. R. Challa, R. S. Goeke, K. 

 
13 
 
Artyushkova, W. Li, C. H. Kim, A. K. Datye, Trapping of mobile Pt species by PdO 
nanoparticles under oxidizing conditions. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 5, 2089–2093 (2014). 
21.  
P. N. Plessow, F. Abild-Pedersen, Sintering of Pt Nanoparticles via Volatile PtO2: 
Simulation and Comparison with Experiments. ACS Catal. 6, 7098–7108 (2016). 
22.  
E. D. Goodman, A. A. Ye, A. Aitbekova, O. Mueller, A. R. Riscoe, T. Nguyen Taylor, A. 
5 
S. Hoffman, A. Boubnov, K. C. Bustillo, M. Nachtegaal, S. R. Bare, M. Cargnello, 
Palladium oxidation leads to methane combustion activity: Effects of particle size and 
alloying with platinum. J. Chem. Phys. 151, 154703 (2019). 
23.  
A. Aitbekova, C. Zhou, M. L. Stone, J. S. Lezama-Pacheco, A.-C. Yang, A. S. Hoffman, 
E. D. Goodman, P. Huber, J. F. Stebbins, K. C. Bustillo, P. Ercius, J. Ciston, S. R. Bare, P. 
10 
N. Plessow, M. Cargnello, Templated encapsulation of platinum-based catalysts promotes 
high-temperature stability to 1,100 °C. Nat. Mater. 21, 1290–1297 (2022). 
24.  
D. Gao, H. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Miao, F. Yang, G. Wang, J. Wang, X. Bao, Size-Dependent 
Electrocatalytic Reduction of CO2 over Pd Nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 137, 4288–
4291 (2015). 
15 
25.  
D. T. Bregante, P. Priyadarshini, D. W. Flaherty, Kinetic and spectroscopic evidence for 
reaction pathways and intermediates for olefin epoxidation on Nb in *BEA. J. Catal. 348, 
75–89 (2017). 
26.  
C. K. Sams, K. A. Jørgensen, S. V. Lindeman, J. Songstad, Mechanistic Aspects of 
Vanadium-Catalysed Oxygen Transfer Reactions. Acta Chem. Scand. 49, 839–847 (1995). 
20 
27.  
C. Kim, T. G. Traylor, C. L. Perrin, MCPBA epoxidation of alkenes: Reinvestigation of 
correlation between rate and ionization potential. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 9513–9516 
(1998). 
28.  
X. Yang, S. Kattel, K. Xiong, K. Mudiyanselage, S. Rykov, S. D. Senanayake, J. A. 
Rodriguez, P. Liu, D. J. Stacchiola, J. G. Chen, Direct Epoxidation of Propylene over 
25 
Stabilized Cu+ Surface Sites on Titanium-Modified Cu2O. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 54, 
11946–11951 (2015). 
29.  
Y. Le, F. Mehmood, S. Lee, J. Greeley, B. Lee, S. Seifert, R. E. Winansl, W. Elám, R. J. 
Meyer, P. C. Redfern, D. Teschner, R. Schlö’Gl, M. J. Pellin, L. A. Curtiss, S. Vajda, 
Increased silver activity for direct propylene epoxidation via subnanometer size effects. 
30 
Science (80-. ). 328, 224–228 (2010). 
30.  
A. R. Chianese, S. J. Lee, M. R. Gagné, Electrophilic Activation of Alkenes by 
Platinum(II): So Much More Than a Slow Version of Palladium(II). Angew. Chemie Int. 
Ed. 46, 4042–4059 (2007). 
31.  
A. Zanardo, F. Pinna, G. Strukul, R. A. Michelin, Kinetic study of the epoxidation of 1-
35 
Octene with hydrogen peroxide catalyzed by platinum(II) complexes. Evidence of the 
involvement of two metal species in the oxygen-transfer step. Inorg. Chem. 27, 1966–
1973 (1988). 
32.  
F. De Vleeschouwer, V. Van Speybroeck, M. Waroquier, P. Geerlings, F. De Proft, 
Electrophilicity and nucleophilicity index for radicals. Org. Lett. 9, 2720–2724 (2007). 
40 
33.  
R. Pal, P. K. Chattaraj, Electrophilicity index revisited. J. Comput. Chem. 44, 278–297 
(2023). 
34. 
M. Chung et al., Direct propylene epoxidation via water activation over Pd-Pt 
electrocatalysts, Version 3, Dryad (2024); https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.s7h44j1dd. 
Only cited in the Supplementary Materials: 
45 
35.  
Y. Yoon, B. Yan, Y. Surendranath, Suppressing Ion Transfer Enables Versatile 
Measurements of Electrochemical Surface Area for Intrinsic Activity Comparisons. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 2397–2400 (2018). 

 
14 
 
36.  
C. C. L. Mccrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters, T. F. Jaramillo, Benchmarking Heterogeneous 
Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction (2013), doi:10.1021/ja407115p. 
37.  
K. Williams, A. Limaye, T. Weiss, M. Chung, K. Manthiram, Accounting for species’ 
thermodynamic activities changes mechanistic interpretations of electrochemical kinetic 
data (2022), doi:10.26434/CHEMRXIV-2022-VK5Z9. 
5 
38.  
C. Tse-Chuan, C. Jang-Chyang, Anodic oxidation of propylene on a screen electrode. 
Chem. Eng. Sci. 35, 1581–1590 (1980). 
39.  
X. Lin, Z. Zhou, Q. Y. Li, D. Xu, S. Y. Xia, B. L. Leng, G. Y. Zhai, S. N. Zhang, L. H. 
Sun, G. Zhao, J. S. Chen, X. H. Li, Direct Oxygen Transfer from H2O to Cyclooctene 
over Electron-Rich RuO2 Nanocrystals for Epoxidation and Hydrogen Evolution. Angew. 
10 
Chemie Int. Ed. 61, e202207108 (2022). 
 
 
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Steven Ehrlich, Lu Ma, Eli Stavitski, and Denis Leshchev 
for their help in operating XAS experiments. We also appreciate Aubrey Penn for taking high-
15 
resolution energy dispersive spectroscopy mapping of catalysts. 
Funding:  
This research was supported by the US Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science, 
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Catalysis Science Program, award no. DE-SC0023207. 
K.M. gratefully acknowledges the support of the Sloan Foundation. This research used 
20 
resources of the National Synchrotron Light Source II, a US DOE Office of Science User 
Facility operated by Brookhaven National Laboratory under contract no. DE-SC0012704. 
Author contributions:  
Conceptualization: M.C., K.M. 
Methodology: M.C. 
25 
Investigation: M.C., J.H.M., J.S.A. 
Validation: M.C., J.S.A. 
Visualization: M.C. 
Funding acquisition: K.M. 
Project administration: M.C., K.M. 
30 
Supervision: K.M., Y.R.-L. 
Writing – original draft: M.C. 
Writing – review & editing: M.C., J.H.M., J.S.A., C.J., Y.R.-L., K.M. 
Competing interests: M.C. and K.M. have filed a provisional patent application (no. 
63/544,664) regarding the design of catalysts and electrodes. 
35 
Data and materials availability: There are no restrictions on materials. All data needed to 
evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper or the supplementary materials. 
Tabular data underlying the figures are deposited in the Dryad data repository (34). 

 
15 
 
Supplementary Materials 
Materials and Methods 
Supplementary Text 
Figs. S1 to S25 
Tables S1 to S12 
5 
References (35–39) 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 

 
16 
 
 
 
Supplementary Materials for 
 
Direct propylene epoxidation via water activation over Pd-Pt 
5 
electrocatalysts 
 
Minju Chung, Joseph H. Maalouf, Jason S. Adams, Chenyu Jiang, Yuriy Román-Leshkov, 
Karthish Manthiram* 
Corresponding author: karthish@caltech.edu 
10 
 
 
The PDF file includes: 
 
Materials and Methods 
15 
Supplementary Text 
Figs. S1 to S25 
Tables S1 to S12 
 
20 

 
17 
 
Materials and Methods 
Materials 
 
Catalyst preparation 
Palladium(II) chloride (PdCl2, Sigma Aldrich), Chloroplatinic acid hexahydrate (H2PtCl6∙6H2O, 
5 
Sigma Aldrich), sodium citrate dihydrate (Sigma Aldrich), Vulcan XC-72R (Fuel cell store, 
SKU:590106-1), Sodium borohydride (NaBH4, Sigma Aldrich), Hydrochloric acid (HCl, ACS 
reagent, 37%, Sigma Aldrich), ethanol (Anhydrous, KOPTEC USP), 5% Nafion 117 solution 
(Sigma Aldrich) were purchased and used without additional treatment.  
 
10 
Electrochemical study 
Electrolyte / Calibration / Reference material/quantification 
Tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TBABF4, 98+%, TCI America), Acetonitrile (ACN, 
anhydrous, 99.8+%, Alfa Aesar), cis-cyclooctene oxide (99%, Sigma Aldrich), cyclooctanone 
(98%, Sigma Aldrich), 1,3,5-Trimethoxybenzene (TMB, 99 %, Sigma Aldrich), Deuterated 
15 
chloroform (CDCl3, 99.8 atom % D, Sigma Aldrich), Deuterated acetonitrile (CD3CN, 99 atom % 
D, Oakwood Chemical), Deuterium oxide (D2O, 99.9 atom % D, Oakwood Chemical), 
Ferrocene(Fc, 99%, Alfa Aesar), Nitric acid (HNO3, 70% trace metal grade, Fisher Chemical), 
Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 36.5-38%, VWR BDH Chemicals) were purchased and used without 
additional treatment. Argon UHP grade 5.0 gas (Airgas, AR UHP300) was used to dilute the 
20 
propylene stream for the rate-order dependence study.  
 
Olefin substrates  
cis-cyclooctene (cyclooctene, 95%, Alfa Aesar), cycloheptene (95%, Acros organics), 1-hexene 
(99+%, Sigma Aldrich), cis-2-hexene (95%, Sigma Aldrich), 3,3,3-trifluoropropene (99%, 
25 
Oakwood Chemical), 2-cyclohepten-1-one (90%, Thermo Scientific), 2-cyclohexen-1-one (95+%, 
Sigma Aldrich), Propylene (Industrial grade, Airgas), Ethylene (UHP grade 3.0, Airgas) 
 
X-ray absorption spectroscopy reference materials 
Platinum foil (Pt, 0.025 mm thick, 99.99% trace metals basis, Beantown Chemical), Platinum(IV) 
30 
oxide (PtO2, ≥80.0 wt% Pt, Sigma Aldrich),  Palladium foil (Pd, 0.1mm thick, 99.9% trace metals 
basis, Beantown Chemical), and Palladium(II) oxide (PdO, 99.9 % Pd, Strem Chemicals) were 
purchased and mixed with poly(ethylene glycol) (average mol wt 10000, Sigma Aldrich) and 
pressed into pellets for transmission-mode measurements.  
 
35 
Methods 
 
Catalyst preparation 
PdPt/C synthesis 
Pd precursor solution was prepared by adding 0.25 mmol PdCl2 in 5 mL of 0.1 M HCl 
40 
aqueous solution, and the solution was sitted overnight to ensure PdCl2 is completely dissolved. 
Pt precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 0.25 mmol H2PtCl6∙6H2O in 5 mL Milli-Q water. 
When precursor solutions were ready, 4 mmol sodium citrate dihydrate was dissolved into 200 mL 
water in a 500 mL round-bottom flask. Pd and Pt precursor solutions were added to the sodium 
citrate solution while it was vigorously stirred (>1000 rpm) using a magnetic stir bar (egg-shaped, 
45 
38.1mm length x 15.9 mm diameter, PTFE). Then, 113.1 mg of Vulcan XC-72R carbon black 
powder was added to the solution to achieve 40 wt% metal on carbon. The amount of carbon black 

 
18 
 
was adjusted for making catalysts with different metal-to-carbon ratios. The flask was plugged 
with a rubber septum and then sonicated for 30 min. The chunks of carbon black were still observed 
after sonication. Then, the solution mixture was vigorously stirred at 1500 rpm, and freshly 
prepared 50 mL of 0.1 M NaBH4 solution was added dropwise (1 mL/min) into the mixture using 
a syringe pump at room temperature (fig. S22). A needle was placed on the rubber septum to avoid 
5 
pressure build-up inside the flask due to the evolution of H2 from NaBH4. After the suspension 
was stirred for 8 h including the NaBH4 injection time, the black precipitate was vacuum-filtered 
with a copious amount of MilliQ water (>1 L). The filter paper with the washed precipitate cake 
was placed on a glass petri dish, covered with a piece of aluminum foil with holes, and dried 
overnight in a vacuum oven at 40 oC. The dried PdPt/C powder was collected from the filter paper, 
10 
and stored in a borosilicate vial until being used for making catalyst ink. The recipe for alloys with 
other ratios of Pd and Pt are summarized in Table S12.  
 
carbon paper electrode preparation  
Hydrophobic carbon paper electrodes (Toray Carbon Paper 120, Wet-proofed, Fuel Cell 
15 
Store) were punched in 14 mm-diameter disks. When the electrode was assembled into the 
electrochemical cell, only 1 cm2 of the electrode was exposed to the electrolyte. The punched 
hydrophobic electrodes were annealed in a muffle furnace with a temperature ramp rate of 5 
°C/min from room temperature to 600 °C, and dwelled for 1 hour to increase the wettability of the 
electrodes by the catalyst ink. The electrodes were naturally cooled to room temperature after the 
20 
annealing. The resulting hydrophilic carbon paper electrodes were used as a substrate for catalyst 
drop-casting.  
 
catalyst ink and catalyst-fixed electrode preparation 
A known amount of metal-on-carbon catalyst powder was dispersed in a water-ethanol 
25 
solution (water:ethanol=3:1 volumetric ratio) with the help of sonication. The amount of the 
catalyst powder was adjusted for the desired concentration of the ink. 30 μL, 30 μL, and 40 μL of 
the prepared ink were drop-casted on one side of a 14 mm-diameter hydrophilic carbon paper 
electrode in a drying oven at 80°C. The electrode was dried in a closed oven between each drop-
casting. The total volume of drop-casted ink was always fixed to 100 μL, so the ink concentration 
30 
was varied to achieve desired catalyst loading. A typical concentration of the catalyst ink was 10 
mg powder/mL (4 mg metal//mL).  
The electrode was then transferred to a muffle furnace. Ramp rates for a furnace were set 
to be 10 °C/min from room temperature to 400 °C or 500 oC and dwelled for 3 hours under stagnant 
air (kinetic studies and X-ray absorption spectroscopy: 400 °C, Figure 1 data: 500 °C). During the 
35 
annealing process, a significant amount of the carbon support was combusted, resulting in a final 
carbon weight percent of 10.63% and 7.54% for catalysts annealed at 400 °C and 500 °C, 
respectively (table S8). The oxidized metal-on-carbon electrode was naturally cooled to room 
temperature in the furnace and used for electrochemical experiments. The prepared electrodes 
were used within one day after annealing.  
40 
 
For electrodes used in aqueous electrolytes, 50 μL of 2 wt% Nafion solution was drop-
casted onto an electrode after annealing. Subsequently, the electrode was dried in an oven at 80°C 
for 3 hours. The 2 wt% Nafion solution was formulated by diluting a commercially purchased 5 
wt% Nafion solution with water. 
 
45 
 
 
 

 
19 
 
Catalyst characterization 
ICP-OES analysis  
Pd and Pt loadings in the PdPtOx/C catalysts were determined using an inductively coupled 
plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES; Agilent 5100 VDV) coupled with ICP Expert 
software. A few milligrams of the powder catalyst were mixed with 4 mL of 70% HNO3 added to 
5 
1 mL of 37% HCl (inverted acid ratio of aqua regia formula) and digested overnight. The sample 
was then diluted into a 2% HNO3 solution and filtered with a 0.22 μm polypropylene syringe filter 
(ThermoFisher Scientific, CH2213-PP). Pd (1000 ppm, 5% v/v HNO3(aq), RICCA Chemical 
Company) and Pt (1000 ppm, 5% v/v HNO3(aq), Inorganic Ventures) standards were also diluted 
into 2% HNO3 solution to make the final concentrations of 0-100 ppm. Pd and Pt concentrations 
10 
in the samples were quantified using the calibration curves generated from the standards.  
 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 
The electrodes were cut into small pieces and affixed to an XPS sample holder using 
conductive Cu tape. For the post-electrolysis samples, the electrodes were rinsed with acetonitrile 
15 
several times and dried under ambient air overnight before attaching them to the tape. Then, the 
holder with samples was transferred to the XPS sample introduction chamber. XPS spectra were 
collected using a Physical Electronics Versaprobe II X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer and the 
data were analyzed with Casa XPS software. 
 
20 
Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis 
The X-ray diffraction patterns of the synthesized catalysts were obtained using an X-ray 
powder diffractometer (PANalytical X'Pert PRO) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54056 Å). For the 
powder XRD analysis, the synthesized catalysts were annealed in powder form in a ceramic bowl 
using the same annealing method employed for electrodes. The crystallite sizes (L) were 
25 
determined using Scherrer equation: 
 
. 
Scherrer constant (K) of 0.94, full-width-at-half-maximum (B) determined by fitting the diffraction 
pattern peaks to Gaussian function and subtracting instrumental broadening, λ = 1.54056 Å for Cu 
30 
Kα radiation, and Bragg angle (θ) were used for the analysis. L was determined for each peak and 
the average and standard deviation of multiple peaks were reported (table S3). 
 
X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) 
Operando XAS spectra at Pd K-edge and Pt L3-edge were collected in X-ray fluorescence 
35 
mode at beamline 7-BM and 8-ID of the National Synchrotron Light Source II. The same set of 
electrochemical cells used for the kinetic studies was used, except for a backplate with a hole for 
the X-ray entrance. A Kapton polyimide film was placed between the window and electrode to 
prevent electrolyte leakage. Electrode samples were prepared on-site and used within one day after 
annealing. All XAS data were processed using the Athena software for background removal and 
40 
normalization. The EXAFS data were further modeled and analyzed using the Artemis software. 
The amplitude reduction factor (S02) for each metal edge was determined by fitting the reference 
material with known coordination numbers (table S4). The S02 values were used in other 
simulations to estimate the coordination numbers of the samples. 
 
45 
 
 

 
20 
 
TEM analysis 
High-resolution elemental mapping of Pd-Pt alloy catalysts was obtained using energy-
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (fig. S2 and S3) with an aberration-corrected scanning transmission 
electron microscope (Titan Themis Z G3 Cs-corrected S/TEM, Thermo Fisher Scientific). To 
prepare the samples, catalyst particles on carbon paper electrodes were scraped off using a plastic 
5 
spatula and then dispersed in ethanol via sonication. The resulting solution was sufficiently diluted 
such that there was no noticeable color in the ethanol solution. For analysis, 13 μL of this diluted 
solution was drop-casted onto a carbon film-supported copper grid. The sample was then dried in 
an oven set at 80 ℃ overnight. 
 
10 
Electrochemical methods 
Electrochemical cell setup and electrolysis methods 
Electrochemical experiments were conducted with a sandwich-type electrochemical cell 
(fig. S23). Platinum foil (Pt, 0.025 mm thick, 99.99% trace metals basis, BeanTown  Chemical)  
and metal-on-carbon loaded carbon paper were used as the counter and working electrode, 
15 
respectively. An Ag/AgCl electrode (LF-2, 3.4 M KCl leak-free 2.0 mm diameter, Innovative 
Instruments) was used as the pseudo-reference electrode, and aluminum foil or plate was used as 
the current collector. Hydrophobic carbon paper was placed behind the nanoparticle-loaded carbon 
paper to prevent leakage of the solvent. For kinetic rate measurements and operando XAS, 
acetonitrile with 0.4 M TBABF4 was used as the solvent with varying pressures/concentrations of 
20 
propylene and water. The partial pressure of propylene was varied between 0 and 1 atm by diluting 
the propylene stream with argon to make the total gas flow is 10 standard cubic centimeters per 
minute (sccm). The electrolyte solution was pre-saturated with the gas before 3.6 mL of the 
solution was added to the cell for each experiment. For kinetic measurements, propylene gas has 
flowed with 10 sccm during the run as well. Reaction conditions for the substrate scope study is 
25 
described in Table S11.  
The electrochemical measurements were conducted with VMP3 Multi-channel potentiostat 
from BioLogic. The resistance value at open circuit potential (OCP) was measured by 
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy techniques before the start of any electrolysis, and the 
potentials in the following experiments were 100% iR-compensated. In most of the experiments 
30 
for kinetic study, 10 coulombs were passed unless noted otherwise.  
All cell parts including the counter electrode were washed with acetone and MilliQ water 
after every experiment and sonicated for at least 20 minutes in 10-20% nitric acid aqueous solution 
to remove any metal contaminants. The cell parts were washed with MilliQ water again after the 
sonication and dried in 80 °C oven for at least 20 minutes before use.  
35 
 
 
Reference electrode calibration 
All of the anodic potentials reported for the water-acetonitrile electrolyte are referenced to 
the redox potential of ferrocene (Fc/Fc+). There is no physical device that can act as a ferrocene 
40 
redox reference electrode, so a leak-free Ag/AgCl pseudo-reference was used in actual 
experiments, and this pseudo-reference was calibrated against the redox potential of ferrocene. 
The redox potential was found by averaging the potential at the cathodic and anodic peaks shown 
in cyclic voltammetry (CV) scans. Calibration solutions were roughly 5 mM in ferrocene and 
reflected electrolyte conditions other than that. For the reference calibration, glassy carbon was 
45 
used as the anode, and the calibrations were performed in a dedicated set of PEEK cell parts to 
avoid ferrocene contamination in other electrochemical experiments. The CV started from open 
circuit potential and swept to 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl pseudo-reference, followed by three consecutive 

 
21 
 
scans from 0 – 0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl pseudo-reference, and the CV ended after sweeping back to the 
open circuit potential. The second scan from each CV was used for determining the redox peaks. 
The example of ferrocene redox calibration different electrolytes with different water 
concentrations were shown as below (fig. S24). It should be noted that the pseudo-Ag/AgCl 
electrode is meant to be stable at Ag/AgCl potential in saturated KCl, but its actual potential 
5 
showed some discrepancy, usually within 50mV error, when its potential was measured against 
rigorously maintained “master” Ag/AgCl electrode in saturated KCl.    
 
Double-layer capacitance measurement 
We used double-layer capacitance (DLC) measurement to estimate the electrochemically 
10 
active surface area (ECSA) across our electrodes: 
. 
CV scans spanning ±50 mV of the OCP for each DLC measurement were recorded at scan rates 
of 20, 40, 80, and 120mV/s. The resulting capacitive CV traces (fig. S25) were used to calculate 
the capacitive current as the difference of anodic and cathodic currents averaged across ±10mV of 
15 
the OCP. These capacitive currents at each scan rate were plotted versus the scan rate, and the 
slope of the linear regression line was divided by 2 to obtain the DLC of the electrode. Since the 
entire surface of the carbon paper exposed to the electrolyte was covered with the catalysts, we 
assumed that the bare carbon paper did not contribute to the DLC. It is a common practice to 
assume a constant specific capacitance across various metals, which makes DLC directly 
20 
correlated to ECSA. However, it is important to note that the constant specific capacitance used 
for converting DLC to ECSA varies across different reports, ranging from 0.01 to 0.1 mF/cm² (35, 
36). Therefore, we opted to present DLC values along with ECSA-normalized current densities, 
assuming specific capacitance value of 0.04 mF/cm2 (fig. S5). 
 
25 
Product analysis 
Reaction workup and quantification of liquid products 
After the electrolysis, post-electrolysis electrolytes were collected into a 5 mL volumetric 
flask using a glass pipette. The collected electrolyte was often less than 3.6 mL, so ~ 1.8 mL of 
additional acetonitrile was added to the electrolyte chamber, rinsed the chamber, and then added 
30 
to the post-electrolysis electrolyte in the volumetric flask until the total volume of collected 
electrolyte becomes 5 mL. For propylene oxide or ethylene oxide quantification, securing a 
product peak at 1H-NMR without overlapping other electrolyte peaks was possible, so an aliquot 
of 5 mL electrolyte solution was directly used for the NMR study. NMR samples were prepared 
by combining 500 μL of the electrolyte solution with a 200 μL of 5 mM internal standard 1,3,5-
35 
trimethoxybenzene solution in CD3CN. The 1H probe was automatically tuned, the lock was 
achieved on the CD3CN in the sample, and gradient shimming and auto-gain were used. Solvent 
suppression was done for the largest three peaks in the spectra to get a better signal-to-noise ratio 
for the peaks of our interest. 32 scans were collected per sample, and the relaxation delay was set 
to 6 seconds. Products were quantified by comparing the areas of the peaks of interest to those of 
40 
the internal standard, 1,3,5-trimethoxybenzene. Auto phase correction and baseline correction with 
Whittaker Smoother method from the MestReNova software was performed on the spectra before 
the integration of each peak. If the baseline was not achieved by the automatic correction, manual 
correction was used to get a reliable baseline for the peak integration.  

 
22 
 
For other epoxides including cyclooctene oxide, extraction with hexane was required to 
exclude TBABF4 that can overlap with the products on 1H-NMR spectra. We sampled 3 mL out 
of the collected 5 mL electrolyte into a 50 mL polypropylene centrifuge tube. Then, a known 
amount of internal standard 1,3,5-trimethoxybenzene were added to the electrolyte. MilliQ water 
was filled to ~ 20 mL and ~ 5 mL of hexane was added to the electrolyte. Olefin substrate, its 
5 
oxidation products, and the internal standard moved to the hexane layer after extraction with the 
help of centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds. Hexane extraction was performed three more 
times (~ 20 mL of hexane was used in total), and the combined hexane solution was quantified 
using 1H-NMR. The 1H-NMR spectra were measured on a Bruker Avance Neo spectrometer 
operating at 500.34 MHz with solvent suppression of the three largest peaks from hexane. Samples 
10 
were prepared by combining 50 μL of the extracted hexane layer with a 600 μL CDCl3. The 1H 
probe was automatically tuned, the lock was achieved on the CDCl3 in the sample, and gradient 
shimming and auto-gain were used. Solvent suppression was done for the largest three peaks in 
the spectra to get a better signal-to-noise ratio for the peaks of our interest. 32 scans were collected 
per sample, and relaxation delay was set to 6 seconds. Products were quantified by comparing the 
15 
areas of the peaks of interest to those of the internal standard, 1,3,5-trimethoxybenzene. Auto phase 
correction and baseline correction with Whittaker Smoother method from the MestReNova 
software was performed on the spectra before the integration of each peak.  
 
Quantification of gas products 
20 
An on-line gas chromatograph (GC; SRI Instruments, MG #5, Model 8610C) with auto-
sampling capabilities was used to quantify the gaseous anodic side products CO2, O2, and the 
cathodic reaction product H2 evolved during the electrolysis. Only several representative 
experiments were done with on-line gas product quantification to verify closure in Faradaic 
efficiency. After filling the electrolyte, the electrolytic cell was closed and the gas outlet was 
25 
connected to the GC. Propylene was flowed into the cell through the anode for roughly 10 minutes 
before the measurement to allow air to flush out of the gas lines. The GC sample was taken every 
13 minutes (12.5 minutes of sequence + 0.5 minutes of break). A blank sample was taken in the 
beginning, and then the electrolysis started after 4 minutes passed. GC sample was taken every 13 
minutes (12.5 minutes of sequence + 0.5 minutes of break) thereafter. The gas products were 
30 
quantified by averaging data points except for the blank sample.  
After a sample was collected, argon gas was used as the carrier gas and sent onto a 6’ 
HayesepD pre-column. After light gases pass the pre-column, we started backward flowing in the 
pre-column and the eluted forward flow was sent to a 6’ MS-5A column. After hydrogen and 
oxygen are eluted from the MS-5A column, another sample was collected and injected into a 6’ 
35 
HayeSep D column. The eluted gas after the main columns (MS-5A, 6’ HayeSep D) was analyzed 
with both a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and a flame ionization detector (FID). The 
column temperatures were held at 90 ℃ throughout the measurements. The gas-phase ppm 
determined from GC was converted into the partial current for a given product and Faradaic 
efficiencies were calculated from the partial current divided by the average current. 
40 
 
 
Calculation of rate, faradaic efficiency, and selectivity 
Faradaic efficiencies were calculated as following:  
. 
45 

 
23 
 
Q is the amount of passed charge, n is the number of electrons required for the production of a 
molecule of product, and F is Faraday’s constant. n=2 for propylene oxide, propylene glycol, and 
acetone. n=4 for oxygen, and n=6 for CO2.  
The epoxidation rates in current density were calculated by multiplying the total average 
current density by the epoxidation Faradaic efficiency:  
5 
. 
The selectivity for PO was determined by dividing the molar amount of PO by the total molar 
amount of products derived from propylene (PO, propylene glycol, acetone, CO2).  
 
Experimental measurements of water activity 
10 
The activity of water was experimentally measured (fig. S17) using previously reported 
headspace gas sampling protocol (37). In short, 4 mL of electrolyte samples were prepared in 20 
mL headspace sampling vials. The vials were filled with propylene gas streams (0.1 to 1 v/v diluted 
with Ar) and the electrolyte solution was pre-saturated with the gas before the vials were sealed. 
The electrolyte samples in sealed vials were equilibrated at room temperature for at least 12 hours. 
15 
4 mL of pure MilliQ water was used as the reference having activity of unity. Headspace GC-TCD 
was then used to quantify the vapor pressure of water in the various samples. The activity of water 
for any given sample was simply calculated as: 
. 
 
20 
Rate measurements of propylene oxide hydrolysis in aqueous electrolytes 
The reaction rates of PO to PG in aqueous electrolytes with pH 4 to 7 were measured using 
1H-NMR. The 1 M buffer solutions were prepared by dissolving the theoretically determined 
amounts of Na2HPO4 and NaH2PO4 in water and adjusted to the desired pH value with 1 M NaOH 
and 1 M H3PO4 solutions. To prepare the NMR samples for the kinetic measurement, 400 µL of 
25 
the buffer solution, 50 µL of  0.1 M PO in water were combined, resulting in 10 mM of PO in each 
sample. An automation program was set up using IconNMR to collect NMR spectra of the samples 
at the specific time points – 30-min increment for the first 3 hours and 1-hour increment for the 
rest 4 hours. Water suppression was done by excitation sculpting to generate NMR spectra with 
minimal residual water signal and flat baseline, ensuring the accuracy of the quantification. The 
30 
consumption of PO was normalized by taking the ratio between the peak area of the protons 
corresponding to the methyl group in PO and the sum of peak areas of that in PO and PG.  
 
 
Model fitting 
35 
Seven potential mechanistic pathways were hypothesized (Supplementary Text S1; Case 
1, 2a-e, and 3), each represented by a distinct rate equation. Inputs to the rate equation model were 
propylene partial pressure normalized by 1 atm, calculated water molar ratio, and applied voltage 
(V vs. Fc/Fc+). In the model, 0 V for the applied voltage was arbitrarily set to 0.85 V vs Fc/Fc+. 
Although any reference for 0 V could have been adopted, it is judicious to select a value relevant 
40 
to the experimental voltage range (0.9-1.1 V vs. Fc/Fc+) to ensure optimal numerical precision. 
Transfer coefficients were set to 0.5 for all of the elementary electrochemical reactions. Depending 
on the model, 6-8 parameters were estimated by model fitting over 74 sample data. 
Potential-independent rate constants and equilibrium constants of each elementary reaction 
were parameterized, and the parameters were estimated using a least-squares curve fitting function 
45 
(lsqcurvefit) in MATLAB R2023a. The model rate equations were fit to the experimental 
epoxidation current density data in mA/cm2 unit, which is proportional to the epoxidation rate. 

 
24 
 
Since other model inputs are unitless, the estimated rate constants for each elementary step also 
have units of mA/cm2. Initial guesses for the parameters were chosen to ensure that the resulting 
final rate constants across a series of elementary reactions are within the same order of magnitudes 
when integrated with potential-dependent terms. Lower bounds for all parameters were set to zero.  
Root-mean-square error (RMSE) was obtained from the difference between experimental 
5 
and simulated data. Lower RMSE means less deviation of the simulated results from the 
experimental results. When different initial guesses resulted in different fitting results, the best fit 
corresponding to the lowest RMSE was selected and reported.  
  
 
10 
Alkene electrophilicity calculation 
For each alkene, three different types of calculations were performed with different 
numbers of electrons, which are required to calculate the ionization potential and electron 
affinities. First, the N=0 (number of electrons for zero-charge and multiplicity of 1) case was 
considered. In this case, for each alkene, the initial starting geometry was obtained by sampling 
15 
100 conformers using the RDKit library, followed by further optimization using RDKit's 
implementation of the MMFF94s force field. Then using Gaussian 16, a geometry optimization, 
frequency calculation, and population analysis (charge =0, multiplicity=1) were performed at the 
M062X/def2-SVPD level of theory with acetonitrile as the implicit solvent implemented by the 
SMD algorithm. Calculations were distributed across Intel Xeon Platinum 8260 nodes provided 
20 
by the MIT Super Cloud. 
Next, the N+1 case was considered. Here, we use the geometry-optimized structure from 
the N case and perform a single-point energy calculation where the system has one more electron 
than the N case. In other words, charge =-1 and multiplicity =2. Similarly, for the N-1 case, the 
geometry optimized structure from the N case was used to perform a single point energy 
25 
calculation where the system has 1 less electron than the N case (charge =1 and multiplicity =2). 
For each alkene, the electron affinity and ionization potential were calculated using the free 
energies by: 
 
 
30 
These quantities were used to calculate the chemical potential and chemical hardness as follows: 
 
 
From these two values, we were able to calculate the global electrophilicity index 𝜔𝜔 using the 
relation:  
35 
 
Formally, the Fukui functions can be defined as the spatially dependent change in electron density 
as a function of the number of electrons N at a constant potential 
: 

 
25 
 
 
Based on this, the Fukui function for a discrete change in the number of electrons can be defined: 
 
This definition is then typically calculated using a population analysis with the following:  
 
5 
Where 
 is the gross population on atom k. Gross populations were calculated using the cclib 
library using the Lowdin population analysis. Mulliken charge analysis was also performed, but 
we found Lowdin population analysis performed better. Finally, the local electrophilicity index 
was calculated by 
. 
Supplementary Text 
10 
S1. Discussion on the propylene epoxidation mechanism  
 
We enumerated a series of mechanisms invoking OOH* (Case 1), OO*(Case 2a-e), or 
O*(Case 3) as the key epoxidation intermediates: 
 
15 
index 
Key features 
Fitted number 
of parameters 
RMSE 
Case 1 
OOH* catalyzes epoxidation, single site 
mechanism 
6 
5.8864e-01 
 
 
Case 2a 
OO* catalyzes epoxidation, single site 
mechanism 
7 
4.9425e-01 
 
Case 2b 
OO* catalyzes epoxidation 
OOH*+O* → OO*+OH* rearrangement 
included 
8 
5.1518e-01 
 
Case 2c 
OO* catalyzes epoxidation, dual site 
mechanism 
η2-O* and η2-OO* intermediates 
7 
4.9870e-01 
Case 2d 
OO* catalyzes epoxidation  
η2-O* and η1-OO intermediates 
7 
4.8398e-01 
Case 2e 
OO* catalyzes epoxidation 
η1-O* and η2-OO* intermediates 
7 
5.2258e-01 
Case 3 
 
O* catalyzes epoxidation 
single site mechanism 
7 
6.0747e-01 
 
 
RMSE is the root mean square error obtained from the difference between experimental 
and simulated results. Lower RMSE means less deviation of the simulated results from the 
experimental results. Based on the RMSE, mechanisms in which OO* catalyzes epoxidation best 
explain the experimental data, compared to the ones invoking OOH* or O* as the key epoxidation 
20 
intermediate. However, considering the errors within the experimental replicates are mostly in 0.1 

 
26 
 
mA/cm2 range, the difference in RMSE within Case 2a-e may not be significant enough to 
determine which case is most accurate. In our main text, we chose Case 2d as a representative 
mechanism, while Cases 2a-e could also be plausible mechanisms.  
 
We formulated rate expressions based on reactant concentrations, incorporating the activity 
5 
coefficients of reactants and transition states for each elementary step into the rate constants. While 
we successfully measured water activities under various electrolyte conditions using the 
headspace-GC technique (fig. S17), the activity coefficients for other surface reactants, solvated 
propylene, and transition states remain undetermined. Consequently, formulating rate expressions 
based on water activity implies an assumption that other activity coefficients are either unity or 
10 
offset each other, which is a speculative presumption without adequate backing. Instead of 
selectively neglecting some of the activity coefficients, we lumped all of the activity coefficient 
terms as a Gibbs excess energy contribution to the rate constant and performed parameter 
estimation using concentrations as variables.  
 
15 
A series of elementary steps for epoxidation and oxygen evolution were proposed based 
on Eley-Rideal kinetics for each case, and the overall rate equation for epoxidation was formulated 
by invoking a pseudo-steady-state hypothesis (PSSH) on intermediate species. Molar ratio of water 
is expressed as
w
x , unitless propylene pressure normalized by 1 atm is expressed as 
olefin
p
in the rate 
expressions. Irreversible epoxide and O2 desorption steps were assumed, given that the epoxidation 
20 
rate showed no dependency on the concentrations of either the epoxide or O2 (fig. S20). 
 
Case 1: OOH* catalyzes epoxidation, single site mechanism  
A series of elementary steps and rate equations for each step are proposed as below: 
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
3
(1)
*
*
(2) *
*
(3)
*
*
(4)
*
*
(5)
*
*
(6)
*
*
olefin
olefin
H O
H O
OH
H O
e
OH
H O
O
H O
e
O
H O
H O
OOH
H O
e
OOH
olefin
OH
epoxide
OOH
H O
O
H O
e
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
←→
+
+

→
+
+
+

→
+
+
+
+

→
+
+
+

→
+
+

→
+
+
+
      
2
2
3
3
4
*
'
1
*
1
*
*
2
2
''
2
''
2
*
2
2
*
2
*
2
*
2
'
''
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
'
2
‡
‡
4
4
4
4
‡
( 1.1)
( 1.2)
( 1.3)
( 1.4)
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
f
f
w
w
w
w
f
f
w
OH
OH
w
OH
w
w
OH
f
w
O
O
w
O
w
R
K
p
K p
R
r
k
x e
k
x e
k
x
R
r
k
x e
k
x e
k x
R
r
k
x
e
k
x
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
4
6
6
''
2
4
'
5
5
5
5
'
''
6
6
6
‡
6
6
‡
( 1.5)
( 1.6)
f
O
w
olefin
OOH
OOH
olefin
OOH
olefin
f
f
w
OOH
OOH
w
OOH
w
w
OOH
w
e
k
x
R
r
k
p
k
p
R
r
k
x e
k
x e
k x
x
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
θ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
 
25 
Potential-dependent exponential terms and activity coefficients are imbedded into the rate constant 
for simplicity of derivation. Quasi-equilibrium between the vacant site and the propylene-adsorbed 
site was invoked, and PSSH was applied for each water oxidation species.  
 
We apply the PSSH to the various water oxidation intermediates: 
30 
2
3
5
3
4
4
5
6
0,
0,
0
OH
O
OOH
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
dt
dt
dt
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
−
+
=
=
−
=
=
−
−
=  
Further rearrangement after substituting in equations R1.2 - R1.6 yields:  

 
27 
 
''
2
*
''
6
''
''
'
''
2
2
5
6
*
''
3
''
''
'
''
''
2
2
5
6
3
*
''
''
4
4
(
/
)
(
/
)
w
OOH
w
olefin
OH
w
olefin
O
OH
w
w
k x
k
k x
k k
k
p
k
k x
k k
k
p
k
k x
k x
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
+
=
+
=
=
 
Assuming quasi-equilibrium between the vacant site and the propylene-adsorbed site (R1.1), now 
all of the sites can be expressed in terms of the density of vacant sites: 
*
''
''
'
''
''
''
'
''
''
2
2
5
6
2
2
5
6
'
2
*
1
''
''
''
3
4
6
1
(
/
)
(
/
)
1
(1
)
olefin
OH
O
OOH
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
k x
k k
k
p
k x
k k
k
p
k x
K p
k
k x
k
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
 
 
5 
Then, the epoxidation rate can be expressed as below: 
''
'
2
5
''
'
6
5
5
''
''
'
''
''
''
'
''
''
2
2
5
6
2
2
5
6
'
2
1
''
''
''
3
4
6
(
/
)
(
/
)
1
w
olefin
epoxidation
OOH
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
k k
x p
k
r
r
k
p
k x
k k
k
p
k x
k k
k
p
k x
K p
k
k x
k
θ
=
=
= 

+
+
+
+
+
+






 
 
Rate constants were estimated by fitting the experimental data to the rate equation, and the 
coverages of various surface sites at different water concentrations, propylene pressures, and 
10 
applied potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+) are simulated as follows: 
 

 
28 
 
 
Case 2a: OO* catalyzes epoxidation, single site mechanism  
A series of elementary steps and rate equations for each step are proposed as below: 
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
(1)
*
*
(2) *
*
(3)
*
*
(4)
*
*
(5)
*
*
(6)
*
*
(7)
*
*
olefin
olefin
H O
H O
OH
H O
e
OH
H O
O
H O
e
O
H O
H O
OOH
H O
e
OOH
H O
OO
H O
e
OO
olefin
O
epoxide
OO
O
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
←→
+
+
→
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
→
+
→
+
2
2
3
3
4
‡
‡
‡
2
*
'
1
*
1
*
*
2
'
2
''
2
*
2
2
*
2
*
2
*
2
'
''
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
'
4
4
4
4
(R 2 .1)
(R 2 .2)
(R 2 .3)
(R 2 .4)
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
f
f
w
w
w
w
f
f
w
OH
OH
w
OH
w
OH
w
f
w
O
O
w
O
a
K
p
K p
a
r
k
x e
k
x e
k
x
a
r
k
x e
k
x e
k
x
a
r
k
x e
k
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
4
5
5
2
''
2
4
'
''
5
5
5
5
5
'
6
6
6
6
‡
'
7
‡
‡
7
7
7
(R 2 .5)
(R 2 .6)
(R 2 .7)
f
w
O
w
f
f
w
OOH
OOH
w
OOH
w
OOH
w
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
OO
OO
OO
x e
k
x
a
r
k
x e
k
x e
k
x
a
r
k
p
k p
a
r
k
k
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
θ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
 
 
5 
We apply the PSSH to the water oxidation intermediates: 
2
3
3
4
6
4
5
5
6
7
0,
0,
0,
0
OH
O
OOH
OO
d
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
dt
dt
dt
dt
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
−
=
=
−
+
=
=
−
=
=
−
−
=  
 
Further rearrangement after substituting in equations R2a.2-7 yields: 
3
2
2
3
5
4
4
5
5
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
2
2
*
2
*
3
2
3
(
)
3
*
2
*
3
2
2
2
4
5
4
5
4
(
)
‡
4
5
5
5
6
5
6
‡
α
φ
α
φ
α
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
α
φ
α
φ
γ γ
γ γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ γ γ
θ
θ
γ γ
γ γ
γ γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
θ
γ
γ
−
−
=
=
=
=
=
f
f
w
w
OH
w
OH
w
f
w
OH
w
OH
f
f
w
O
w
OOH
O
w
OOH
w
w
O
w
f
OOH
O
OOH
olefin
OO
f
w
OOH
OOH
w
olefi
k
e
x
k
e
x
k
e
x
k
k
e
x
k
e
x
k
x
e
k
k
e
x
k
p
5
4
4
3
7
7
2
2
5
4
5
4
6
7
6
7
6
7
6
7
2
2
7
4
7
4
3
7
3
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
6
‡
‡
‡
‡
7
6
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
γ γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
+
=
=
+
+
=
=
OO
n
OO
OO
f
f
w
OOH
w
O
w
w
OO
OOH
O
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
OO
OO
olefin
olefin
f
OO
w
O
w
f
w
OH
OO
OH
w
OO
olefin
OO
k
k
e
x
k
e
x
k
p
k
k
p
k
k
k
e
x
k
x e
k
k
p
3
4
2
4
7
7
6
7
6
7
6
7
6
7
3
*
2
(
)
2
3
7
4
7
4
7
4
2
*
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
7
‡
‡
4
α
φ
α
α
φ
α
φ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
−
+
+
+
=
=
O
OO
olefin
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
OO
OO
olefin
olefin
f
w
OH
O
OH
f
f
OO
O
OO
w
O
w
k
k
p
k
k
p
k
k
e
k
k
e
k
k
e
x
k
 
10 

 
29 
 
4
5
5
2
4
4
6
7
4
(
)
6
7
4
*
(
)
2
5
5
7
5
5
7
2
*
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
2
‡
7
4
6
‡
7
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
7
4
6
7
‡
‡
‡
α
α
φ
α
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
−
−
+
=
=
=
=
+
olefin
OO
OO
w
O
olefin
w
f
OOH
O
w
w
OOH
f
OOH
OO
f
f
w
O
w
O
w
w
OO
O
olefin
OO
OO
O
OO
olefin
k
p
k
k
x
e
x
k
k
k
e
k
k
e
x
k
e
x
k
k
k
p
k
2
4
2
*
‡
‡
2
2
*
2
2
*
(
)
7
7
2
*
‡
α
φ
α
α
φ
γ γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
−
=
f
w
w
OO
f
k
e
x
k
e
k
 
 
With the assertion of quasi-equilibrium on step 1, all of the sites can be expressed in terms of the 
density of vacant sites. Also, we assume transfer coefficients α2= α3= α4= α5= α. Then, the rate 
equation can be formulated as below: 
5 
 
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
*
*
2
6
7
6
7
2
*
3
*
6
7
6
7
2
*
1
2
2
3
2
7
4
5
7
7
4
2
*
5
2
*
‡
7
‡
1
1
1
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
+
olefin
OH
O
OOH
OO
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
OO
OO
w
olefin
olefin
olefin
w
olefin
w
w
w
OO
O
OOH
OO
olefin
OH
k
p
k
k
p
k
k
k
K
p
x
x
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
2
*
2
7
7
6
6
6
2
*
2
2
2
6
6
7
7
6
7
*
3
*
6
7
2
1
*
3
4
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
2
‡
‡
‡
7
7
‡
1
α φ
α φ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
θ
γ
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ












=
=
=
+
+
+
+
f
w
OO
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
f
w
olefin
OO
olefin
w
OO
olefin
OO
OO
olefin
olefin
w
olefin
w
OO
olefin
OH
e
x
k
r
r
k
p
k
e
k
p
x
k
k
p
k
k
K
p
x
k
k
k
2
2
*
6
7
‡
2
6
7
2
2
2
7
5
7
7
4
2
*
5
7
2
*
''
'
2
2
6
‡
'
'
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
‡
7
'
'
'
'
''
6
7
6
7
'
2
1
''
'
''
'
''
'
''
3
7
4
2
2
‡
5
7
1
/
/
α φ
γ
γ
γ
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
olefin
OO
f
OO
w
olefin
w
w
w
OO
O
OOH
OO
olefin
w
olefin
olefin
olefin
w
w
k
p
k
k
e
x
x
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
p
x
k
k p
k
k p
k
k
k
K p
x
x
k
k k
k
k k
k
''
2
2
'
7
w
x
k
 
In this mechanism, to illustrate the complete rate equation without lumped parameters, all activity 
coefficients terms were displayed up to the final derivation step. Coverages of various surface sites 
at different water concentrations, propylene pressures, and applied potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+) are 
10 
simulated as follows: 

 
30 
 
 
 
 
Case 2b: OO* catalyzes epoxidation, OOH*+O*→OO*+OH* rearrangement included  
A series of elementary steps and rate equations for each step are proposed as below: 
5 
 
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
(1)
*
*
(2) *
*
*
*
(3)
*
*
*
*
(4)
* *
* *
(5)
*
*
*
*
(6)
*
*
*
*
(7)
*
*
*
*
(8)
*
*
olefin
olefin
H O
H O
OH
H O
e
OH
H O
O
H O
e
O
H O
H O
OOH
H O
e
OOH
O
OO
OH
OO
olefin
O
epoxide
OOH
H O
OO
H O
e
OO
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
←→
+ +
+

→
+ +
+
+
+

→
+ +
+
+ +
+

→
+
+
+
+

→
+
+ +

→
+ +
+
+

→
+ +
+
+

→
2
*
*
O + +
  

 
31 
 
2
2
3
3
*
'
1
*
1
*
*
2
2
2
2
'
2
2
''
2
2
*
2
2
*
2
*
2
*
2
'
''
*
3
3
*
3
*
3
*
3
‡
2
*
4
‡
4
‡
4
( 2 .1)
( 2 .2)
( 2 .3)
( 2 .4)
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
f
f
w
w
w
w
f
f
w
OH
OH
w
w
OH
w
OH
w
O
O
R b
K
p
K p
R b
r
k
x e
k x
e
k x
R b
r
k
x e
k x
e
k x
R b
r
k
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
γ θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ γ θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
4
4
7
7
2
'
2
''
2
*
4
*
4
*
'
5
5
5
5
*
'
6
6
*
6
*
6
‡
'
''
*
7
7
*
7
*
7
*
‡
7
‡
( 2 .5)
( 2 .6)
( 2 .7)
( 2
f
f
w
w
O
w
O
O
OOH
OOH
O
OOH
O
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
f
f
w
OOH
OOH
w
w
OOH
w
OOH
x e
k x
e
k x
R b
r
k
k
R b
r
k
p
k p
R b
r
k
x e
k x
e
k x
R b
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
θ
θ θ
θ θ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
γ θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
*
‡
'
*
8
8
*
8
8
.8)
OO
OO
OO
r
k
k
γ
γ θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
=
=
 
 
Quasi-equilibrium between the vacant site and the propylene-adsorbed site was invoked, and PSSH 
was applied for each water oxidation species.  
We apply the PSSH to the various water oxidation intermediates: 
5 
2
3
5
3
4
5
6
4
5
7
5
6
7
8
0,
0,
0,
0
OH
O
OOH
OO
d
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
dt
dt
dt
dt
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
−
+
=
=
−
−
+
=
=
−
−
=
=
−
+
−
=
 
 
Further rearrangement after substituting in equations R2b.2– R2b.8 yields:  
2
''
'
''
2
6
2
'
''
8
'
2
1
*
*
''
''
'
''
''
''
''
3
2
6
4
7
3
2
'
'
8
5
''
'
''
2
2
6
2
'
''
'
''
8
2
6
2
*
''
''
'
''
'
''
'
'
4
4
8
2
5
2
5
6
''
'
4
4
olefin
olefin
OH
w
w
w
O
OOH
k k
k
k
k
K p
x
k
k k
k k
k
k
x
k
k
k k
k
x
k
k k
k
k
k k
k k
k k k
k
k
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ






+






=
=
+






+
+










+






=
+
=




+
''
2
2
*
*
'
''
8
7
'
'
8
OO
w
w
k x
k
k x
k
θ
θ
θ
=


+




 
 
10 
With the assertion of quasi-equilibrium on step 1, all of the sites can be expressed in terms of the 
density of vacant sites. Then, the rate equation can be formulated as below: 
 

 
32 
 
*
2
''
'
''
'
''
''
2
2
6
2
6
2
2
'
'
''
'
''
''
8
8
'
2
6
2
2
*
1
''
''
''
'
''
'
''
''
''
'
''
''
3
4
4
8
2
6
4
7
2
5
2
3
2
'
'
''
8
5
4
1
1
1
olefin
OH
O
OOH
OO
w
olefin
w
w
k k
k k
k
k
x
k
k
k k
k
k
K p
x
k
k
k k
k k
k k
k k
k
k
k
x
k
k
k
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
+
+
+
+
+








+
+












=
+
+
+
+
+
+










+
+
+








''
2
2
'
''
'
'
''
8
5
6
7
''
'
4
8
''
'
'
2
2
2
6
6
6
*
*
'
8
''
'
2
2
6
'
8
2
''
'
''
2
6
2
'
''
'
8
2
1
''
''
'
''
'
''
''
3
2
6
4
7
3
2
'
8
1
w
w
epoxidation
olefin
OO
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
k x
k
k k
k x
k k
k k
r
r
k p
p
x
k
k k p
x
k
k k
k
k
k
K p
k
k k
k k
k
k
k
θ
θ
θ






+






+








=
=
=
=


+




+
+
+
+
+
2
''
'
''
2
2
6
2
'
''
'
''
''
2
8
2
6
2
2
''
''
'
'
'
''
'
''
'
'
''
4
4
8
8
2
5
2
5
6
7
'
''
''
'
5
4
4
8
w
w
w
w
w
k k
k
x
k
k k
k
k
x
x
k
k k
k
k k
k k k
x
k x
k
k
k k










+










+
+
+
+
















+
+
















 
 
Coverages of various surface sites at different water concentrations, propylene pressures, and 
applied potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+) are simulated as follows: 
 
5 

 
33 
 
Case 2c: assuming OO* as the reactive oxygen species for epoxidation, bridged O* and OO* 
A series of elementary steps and rate equations for each step are proposed as below: 
 
2
2
3
2
1/2
3
1/2
2
2
3
2
3
1/2
2
(1)
*
*
(2) *
*
*
*
(3)
*
*
2
*
(4) 2
*
*
*
(5)
*
*
2
*
(6) 2
*
2
*
(7) 2
*
*
*
o
o
o
olefin
olefin
H O
H O
OH
H O
e
OH
H O
O
H O
e
O
H O
H O
OOH
H O
e
OOH
H O
O
H O
e
O
olefin
O
epoxide
O
O
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
−
−
−
+
←→
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
→
+
→
+ +
2
2
3
3
1/2
‡
‡
‡
*
'
1
*
1
*
*
2
2
2
2
'
2
2
''
2
2
*
2
2
*
2
*
2
*
2
'
''
*
3
3
*
3
*
3
*
3
2
2
4
4
4
( 2 .1)
( 2 .2)
( 2 .3)
( 2 .4)
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
f
f
w
w
w
w
f
f
w
OH
OH
w
w
OH
w
OH
w
O
R c
K
p
K p
R c
r
k
x e
k x
e
k x
R c
r
k
x e
k x
e
k x
R c
r
k
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
γ θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
4
4
1/2
1/2
1/2
5
5
2
2
'
2
2
''
2
2
4
4
'
''
*
5
5
*
5
*
5
*
5
2
2
'
2
6
6
6
6
‡
‡
7
‡
2
2
'
7
7
7
( 2 .5)
( 2 .6)
( 2 .7)
O
O
O
O
O
O
f
f
O
w
O
w
O
w
f
f
w
OOH
OOH
w
OOH
w
OOH
w
olefin
O
olefin
O
olefin
O
O
O
O
x e
k
x e
k
x
R c
r
k
x e
k
x e
k
x
R c
r
k
p
k p
R c
r
k
k
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
θ
θ
θ
γ γ
γ θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
−
−
−
−
−
−
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
2
 
5 
 
η2-O* and is η2-OO* are shown as 
1/2 *
O
 and 
*
o
O−
, respectively. Quasi-equilibrium between 
the vacant site and the propylene-adsorbed site was invoked, and PSSH was applied for each 
water oxidation species.  
 
10 
We apply the PSSH to the various water oxidation intermediates: 
2
2
2
3
3
6
4
4
5
5
6
7
0,
2
2
2
0,
0,
2
2
2
0
O
OO
OH
OOH
d
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
dt
dt
dt
dt
η
η
−
−
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
−
=
=
+
−
=
=
−
=
=
−
−
=
 
 
Further rearrangement after substituting in equations R2c.2– R2c.7 yields surface coverages and 
rate equation as below:  
15 
 
1/2
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
'
2
1
*
*
*
''
''
'
3
4
7
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
2
*
*
''
'
'
5
7
7
(
)
(
)
O
olefin
olefin
olefin
OH
w
O
olefin
OOH
w
O
w
k k p
k
k
K p
x
k
k k
k k p
k
k
x
x
k k
k
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
−
+
=
=
=
+
=
=
 

 
34 
 
''
'
'
''
'
'
''
''
2
6
7
2
6
7
'
2
2
*
1
''
''
'
''
'
'
3
4
7
5
7
7
''
'
2
2
6
'
'
2
7
6
6
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
'
2
1
''
''
'
3
4
7
(
)
(
)
1
1
(
)
1
O
olefin
olefin
olefin
w
w
w
olefin
w
epox
olefin
O
olefin
olefin
w
k k p
k
k k p
k
k
k
K p
x
x
x
k
k k
k k
k
k
k
p
x
k
r
r
k p
k k p
k
k
K p
x
k
k k
θ
θ
−


+
+


=
+
+
+
+
+




=
=
=
+
+
+
+
+
2
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
2
''
'
'
5
7
7
(
)
olefin
w
w
k k p
k
k
x
x
k k
k


+


+




 
 
 
With the parameters estimated from data fitting, coverages of various surface sites at different 
water concentrations, propylene pressures, and applied potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+) are simulated as 
5 
follows: 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 

 
35 
 
Case 2d: assuming OO* as the reactive oxygen species for epoxidation, bridged O* 
A series of elementary steps and rate equations for each step are proposed as below: 
 
2
2
3
2
1/2
3
1/2
2
2
3
2
3
1/2
2
(1)
*
*
(2) *
*
*
*
(3)
*
*
2
*
(4) 2
*
*
*
(5)
*
*
*
*
(6)
*
*
2
*
(7)
*
*
*
*
olefin
olefin
H O
H O
OH
H O
e
OH
H O
O
H O
e
O
H O
H O
OOH
H O
e
OOH
H O
OO
H O
e
OO
olefin
O
epoxide
OO
O
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
←→
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
+
+
+
→
+
+
→
+ +
2
3
1/2
4
1/2
1/2
*
'
1
*
1
*
*
2
2
2
2
''
2
2
*
2
2
*
2
*
2
''
*
3
3
*
3
*
3
2
2
2
2
''
2
2
4
4
4
‡
‡
4
‡
5
5
( 2 .1)
( 2 .2)
( 2 .3)
( 2 .4)
( 2 .5)
p
olefin
olefin
olefin
p
f
w
w
w
f
OH
w
OH
w
OH
w
w
O
f
O
w
O
w
R d
K
p
K p
R d
r
k
x e
k
x
R d
r
k
x e
k
x
R d
r
k
x e
k
x
R d
r
k
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
γ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
5
''
*
*
5
*
5
*
'
6
6
*
6
*
6
'
*
7
7
*
7
*
‡
‡
‡
7
( 2 .6)
( 2 .7)
f
OOH
w
OOH
w
OOH
w
OO
p
olefin
OO
olefin
OO
OO
OO
OO
x e
k
x
R d
r
k
p
k p
R d
r
k
k
α
φ
γ γ θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
 
η2-O* is shown as 
1/2 *
O
. Quasi-equilibrium between the vacant site and the propylene-adsorbed 
5 
site was invoked, and PSSH was applied for each water oxidation species.  
 
We apply the PSSH to the various water oxidation intermediates: 
2
2
3
3
6
4
4
5
5
6
7
0,
2
2
2
0,
0,
0
O
OH
OOH
OO
d
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
dt
dt
dt
dt
η −
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
−
=
=
+
−
=
=
−
=
=
−
−
=
 
Further rearrangement after substituting in equations R2d.2– R2d.7 yields surface coverages and 
10 
rate equation as below:  
 
 
1/2
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
'
2
1
*
*
*
''
''
'
3
4
7
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
2
2
*
*
'
''
'
7
5
7
''
'
'
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
2
6
7
'
2
*
1
''
''
'
3
4
7
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
olefin
olefin
olefin
OH
w
O
olefin
OOH
w
OO
w
olefin
olefin
olefin
w
k k p
k
k
K p
x
k
k k
k k p
k
k
x
x
k k
k
k k p
k
k k p
k
k
K p
x
k
k k
k
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
+
=
=
=
+
=
=
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
''
2
2
'
''
'
7
5
7
''
'
2
2
6
'
'
7
6
6
*
2
''
'
'
''
'
'
''
''
2
6
7
2
6
7
'
2
2
2
1
''
''
'
''
'
'
3
4
7
5
7
7
(
)
(
)
1
w
w
olefin
w
epox
olefin
OO
olefin
olefin
olefin
w
w
w
k
x
x
k
k
k
k
p
x
k
r
r
k p
k k p
k
k k p
k
k
k
K p
x
x
x
k
k k
k k
k
θ
θ




+




=
=
=


+
+


+
+
+
+
+



 
 
15 

 
36 
 
With the parameters estimated from data fitting, coverages of various surface sites at different 
water concentrations, propylene pressures, and applied potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+) are simulated as 
follows: 
 
 
5 
 
Case 2e: assuming OO* as the reactive oxygen species for epoxidation, bridged OO* 
A series of elementary steps and rate equations for each step are proposed as below: 
 
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
(1)
*
*
(2) *
*
*
*
(3)
*
*
*
*
(4)
*
*
*
*
(5)
*
*
2
*
(6) 2
*
* *
(7) 2
*
*
*
O
O
O
olefin
olefin
H O
H O
OH
H O
e
OH
H O
O
H O
e
O
H O
H O
OOH
H O
e
OOH
H O
O
H O
e
O
olefin
O
epoxide
O
O
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
−
−
−
+
←→
+
+
+

→
+
+
+
+
+

→
+
+
+
+
+
+

→
+
+
+
+
+

→
+
+
+

→
+ +

→
+ +
 
10 

 
37 
 
2
3
4
*
'
1
*
1
*
*
2
2
2
2
''
2
2
*
2
2
*
2
*
2
''
*
3
3
*
3
*
3
2
2
''
2
*
4
4
*
4
*
4
*
5
‡
5
‡
‡
( 2 .1)
( 2 .2)
( 2 .3)
( 2 .4)
( 2 .5)
p
olefin
olefin
olefin
p
f
w
w
w
f
OH
w
OH
w
OH
w
f
O
w
O
w
O
w
OOH
R e
K
p
K p
R e
r
k
x e
k
x
R e
r
k
x e
k
x
R e
r
k
x e
k
x
R e
r
k
α
φ
α
φ
α
φ
γ γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
γ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ γ θ θ
θ θ
γ
γ
γ γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
5
''
*
5
*
5
2
2
'
2
6
6
6
6
2
2
'
2
7
7
‡
‡
‡
7
7
( 2 .6)
( 2 .7)
O
O
O
O
O
O
f
w
OOH
w
OOH
w
olefin
O
olefin
O
olefin
O
O
O
O
x e
k
x
R e
r
k
p
k p
R e
r
k
k
α
φ
θ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
−
−
−
−
−
−
=
=
=
=
=
 
η2-OO* is shown as 
*
o
O−
. Quasi-equilibrium between the vacant site and the propylene-
adsorbed site was invoked, and PSSH was applied for each water oxidation species.  
 
We apply the PSSH to the various water oxidation intermediates: 
5 
 
2
2
3
3
6
4
4
5
5
6
7
0,
0,
0,
2
2
2
0
OO
OH
O
OOH
d
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
dt
dt
dt
dt
η −
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
−
=
=
+
−
=
=
−
=
=
−
−
=
 
Further rearrangement after substituting in equations R2e.2– R2e.7 yields surface coverages and 
rate equation as below:  
 
10 
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
'
2
1
*
*
*
''
''
'
3
4
7
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
2
*
*
''
'
'
5
7
7
''
'
'
''
'
'
''
2
6
7
2
6
7
'
2
*
1
''
''
'
''
3
4
7
5
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
O
olefin
olefin
olefin
OH
w
O
olefin
OOH
w
O
w
olefin
olefin
olefin
w
k k p
k
k
K p
x
k
k k
k k p
k
k
x
x
k k
k
k k p
k
k k p
k
k
K p
x
k
k k
k
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
−
+
=
=
=
+
=
=
+
+
=
+
+
+
+
''
2
'
'
7
7
''
'
2
2
6
'
'
2
7
6
6
2
''
'
'
''
'
'
''
''
2
6
7
2
6
7
'
2
2
1
''
''
'
''
'
'
3
4
7
5
7
7
(
)
(
)
1
O
w
w
olefin
w
epox
olefin
O
olefin
olefin
olefin
w
w
w
k
x
x
k
k
k
k
p
x
k
r
r
k p
k k p
k
k k p
k
k
k
K p
x
x
x
k
k k
k k
k
θ
−


+






=
=
=


+
+
+
+
+
+
+





 
With the parameters estimated from data fitting, coverages of various surface sites at different 
water concentrations, propylene pressures, and applied potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+) are simulated as 
follows: 

 
38 
 
 
 
Case 3: assuming O* as the reactive oxygen species for epoxidation  
A series of elementary steps and rate equations for each step are proposed as below: 
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
(1)
*
*
(2) *
*
(3)
*
*
(4)
*
*
(5)
*
*
(6)
*
*
(7)
*
*
olefin
olefin
H O
H O
OH
H O
e
OH
H O
O
H O
e
O
olefin
epoxide
O
H O
H O
OOH
H O
e
OOH
H O
OO
H O
e
OO
O
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
+
←→
+
+

→
+
+
+

→
+
+
+

→
+
+
+

→
+
+
+

→
+
+

→
+
2
3
*
'
1
*
1
*
*
2
2
''
2
*
2
2
*
2
*
‡
2
''
3
3
‡
‡
3
3
'
4
4
4
4
2
5
‡
5
5
( 3.1)
( 3.2)
( 3.3)
( 3.4)
( 3.5)
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
olefin
f
w
w
w
f
w
OH
OH
w
OH
w
olefin
O
O
olefin
olefin
O
w
O
O
R
K
p
K p
R
r
k
x e
k
x
R
r
k
x e
k
x
R
r
k
p
k p
R
r
k
x
α
φ
α
φ
γ
γ
θ
θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
θ
γ
γ γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
γ θ
θ
γ
γ γ θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
5
6
2
''
2
5
''
6
6
6
6
'
7
7
7
‡
‡
7
( 3.6)
( 3.7)
f
w
O
w
f
w
OOH
OOH
w
OOH
w
OO
OO
OO
e
k
x
R
r
k
x e
k
x
R
r
k
k
α
φ
α
φ
θ
γ γ
θ
θ
γ
γ
θ
θ
γ
=
=
=
=
=
 
5 
 
We apply the PSSH to the water oxidation intermediates: 
2
3
3
4
5
5
6
6
7
0,
0,
0,
0
OH
O
OOH
OO
d
d
d
d
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
dt
dt
dt
dt
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
=
−
=
=
−
−
=
=
−
=
=
−
=  
 
Further rearrangement after substituting in equations R3.2 –7 yields: 
10 

 
39 
 
2
''
'
2
1
*
*
''
3
''
''
2
3
2
*
'
''
2
'
''
2
4
5
4
5
''
''
''
''
3
5
2
5
6
*
''
'
''
2
6
4
5
''
''
''
'
4
6
2
5
7
'
'
7
4
5
(
/
)
(
/
)
w
olefin
olefin
OH
w
w
O
OH
olefin
w
olefin
w
w
w
OOH
O
olefin
w
w
OO
H O
OOH
olefin
k x
K p
k
k x
k x
k p
k x
k p
k x
k x
k k
k
x
k
k p
k x
k
k k
k
x
a
k
k p
k
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
=
=
=
+
+
=
=
+
=
=
+
*
''
2
w
x
θ
 
With the assertion of quasi-equilibrium on step 1, all of the sites can be expressed in terms of the 
density of vacant sites. Then, the epoxidation rate equation can be formulated as below: 
 
*
''
''
2
''
''
''
3
''
''
'
4
'
2
2
2
5
6
2
5
7
*
1
''
'
''
2
'
''
2
'
''
2
3
4
5
4
5
4
5
''
'
2
2
4
'
4
4
'
4
1
(
/
)
(
/
)
1
olefin
OH
O
OOH
w
w
w
w
olefin
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
O
olef
k x
k x
k k
k
x
k k
k
x
K p
k
k p
k x
k p
k x
k p
k x
k k p
x
r
r
k p
k p
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
+
+
+
+


=
+
+
+
+
+




+
+
+


=
=
=
*
''
2
5
''
'
2
2
4
'
''
2
4
5
''
''
2
''
''
''
3
''
''
'
4
'
2
2
2
5
6
2
5
7
1
''
'
''
2
'
''
2
'
''
2
3
4
5
4
5
4
5
(
/
)
(
/
)
1
in
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
w
w
w
w
olefin
olefin
w
olefin
w
olefin
w
k x
k k p
x
k p
k x
k x
k x
k k
k
x
k k
k
x
K p
k
k p
k x
k p
k x
k p
k x
θ
+
+
= 

+
+
+
+
+




+
+
+


 
5 
 
With the parameters estimated from data fitting, coverages of various surface sites at different 
water concentrations, propylene pressures, and applied potentials (vs. Fc/Fc+) are simulated as 
follows: 
 
10 

 
40 
 
 
 
S2. Alkene electrophilicity as a descriptor for direct electrochemical epoxidation  
 
Epoxidation using the chemical oxidant m-chloroperbenzoic acid and direct ethylene 
epoxidation using molecular oxygen on silver catalysts are categorized as electrophilic 
5 
epoxidation, which is driven by the electrophilic attack of the oxidant on the alkene (27–29). 
However, the role of electrophile and nucleophile can be inverted in certain cases when the oxidant 
has highly nucleophilic oxygens, and when the metal withdraws electron density from the olefin 
(31). Olefins have been shown to be activated as an electrophile by coordinating with an electron-
deficient metal ion. In the context of homogeneous catalysis, it has been reported that a bimolecular 
10 
reaction of a PtOOH species with a Pt-coordinated olefin species can give the epoxide and PtOH 
(32). A heterogenous analog of this reaction could occur on an electrode surface, as applying an 
anodic potential to an electrode makes electron-deficient platinum species, which would facilitate 
the electrophilic activation of light olefins toward attack by a nucleophile.  
As described above, previous studies suggest that either electrophilic or nucleophilic 
15 
epoxidation can be a reasonable reaction pathway for electrochemical propylene epoxidation on 
late-transition metal catalysts. Identification of the nucleophile and electrophile in the reaction 
allows for a better understanding of the reaction and can guide catalyst engineering. To probe this 
question, we invoked the alkene electrophilicity index as a descriptor for direct anodic epoxidation.  
The global electrophilicity index (ω) can be defined as: 
20 
 
The chemical potential and the chemical hardness are defined as 
 , 
, respectively, 
where E is the energy of the system, and N is the number of electrons, meaning ω has a unit of 
energy (33, 34). A higher value of ω means the molecule is more electrophilic. The local reactivity 
at each atom of a molecule can be obtained using the Fukui function, which predicts the 
25 
redistribution of electron density in a molecule upon electrophilic, nucleophilic, and radical 
attacks. Therefore, the global electrophilicity multiplied by the value of the Fukui function for the 
removal of an electron describes the local electrophilicity (ω-) at each atom center. A linear 
correlation between the average ω- of the two carbons in the alkene and the logarithm of 
epoxidation current density was expected as ω- has a unit of energy (Fig. 5). 
30 
 
S3. Extended descriptions on deuterium kinetic isotope effects in water and acetonitrile 
isotopologues 
 
To better understand the role of water and water oxidation intermediates in the epoxidation 
35 
pathway, we compared reaction rates obtained with various isotopologues of water and acetonitrile 
(fig. S15 and table S10). We tested combinations of H2O+CH3CN, D2O+CH3CN, H2O+CD3CN, 
and D2O+CD3CN with fixed water (10 M) and propylene (1 atm) concentrations at 1.1 V vs. 
Fc/Fc+. The kinetic isotope effect (kH/kD) was determined by calculating the ratio of the 
epoxidation rate obtained from H2O+CH3CN to that obtained from deuterated conditions.  
40 
In both CH3CN- and CD3CN-based electrolytes, using D2O instead of H2O resulted in the 
primary kinetic isotope effect, suggesting that kinetically relevant steps involve O-H bond 
cleavage from water. In our proposed mechanism, water oxidation steps involving O-H bond 
cleavages are kinetically relevant steps. When the water identity was fixed as either H2O or D2O, 

 
41 
 
using CD3CN instead of CH3CN yielded epoxidation rates that were statistically indistinguishable, 
indicating that the cleavage of the C-H bond in acetonitrile did not occur or its cleavage product 
did not participate in the reaction.   
 
S4. Investigation on water activity in water-acetonitrile electrolyte and the dependence of 
5 
epoxidation rate on water activity  
 
 
At lower water concentrations (1-5 M), the observed dependence of propylene epoxidation 
rates on water activity exhibited ~4th order behavior, which decreased to ~2nd order at higher 
water concentrations (5-12 M; fig. S12). The 4th order dependence on water activity at lower 
10 
water concentrations may be attributed to disparate non-ideal behaviors of the transition state 
and reactant molecules. From a qualitative perspective, the stabilization of the transition state in 
kinetically relevant steps involving water may be achieved by augmenting the system's water 
content. In the water-acetonitrile electrolyte system, positive deviation from Raoult's law is 
observed, indicating the species engage in self-interactions that are more favorable than 
15 
interactions with the other component of the mixture. 4th-order dependence in water activity with 
2nd-order dependence in water concentration suggests a more prominent positive deviation from 
Raoult's law for the transition state (γ‡ > γwater > 1). This indicates that the transition state has less 
favorable interaction with its solvating environment compared to water. 
 
To demonstrate this mathematically, we could assume that a η2-O* is the dominant species, 
20 
with the epoxidation rate greatly exceeding OER. This is an extreme version of our proposed 
mechanism (Fig. 4D; case 2d in the Supplementary Text S1). Under such extreme circumstances, 
the rate expression is simplified to 
 . The observed rate dependence can be 
logically explained if γ‡ is proportional to the square of γwater. If we consider γO1/2 as a constant 
on the premise that η2-O* is less influenced by solvation compared to water and the transition 
25 
state, the rate equation simplifies to 
 . Here, plotting the rate 
against activity will give higher apparent order dependence than actual since γwater decreases 
(closer to 1) as water activity increases (gets closer to pure water). 
 
In contrast, the 5-12 M region shows ~2nd order dependences on water activity as well as 
on water concentration. This can be rationalized if γ‡ remains relatively unchanged at higher 
30 
water concentrations. This hypothesis aligns with our chemical intuition: once a sufficient 
quantity of water is present around the transition state, adding more water does not significantly 
alter the near-transition-state chemical environment, which makes the γ‡ relatively constant after 
reaching a certain water concentration. Therefore, it is reasonable to think of aqueous electrolyte 
as an extreme case of water-acetonitrile blended electrolyte where water mole ratio approaches 
35 
one.  
 
 
 

 
42 
 
 
Fig. S1. Representative TEM image of images of PdPtOx/C annealed at 400 oC. 

 
43 
 
 
Fig. S2. High-resolution energy dispersive spectroscopy mapping of PdPtOx/C annealed at 
500 oC. 

 
44 
 
 
Fig. S3. High-resolution energy dispersive spectroscopy mapping of Pd1Pt3Ox/C and 
Pd3Pt1Ox/C annealed at 500 oC. 
 
 

 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. S4. Electrochemical cell setup with circulating liquid electrolytes. (A) A schematic of the 
5 
flow cell for PO production. (B) Accumulation of PO in the electrolyte during the process in 0.4 
M TBABF4, 10 M water in acetonitrile electrolyte at a constant current density of 50 mA/cm2. Cell 
performances with (C) water-acetonitrile blended electrolyte and (D) aqueous electrolyte. 
Uncompensated anode and cathode potentials were measured against Ag/AgCl reference electrode 
and later converted to SHE-referenced potentials. The resistive voltages between anode-to-
10 
reference and reference-to-cathode were determined by potentio electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy (PEIS) and combined as electrolyte resistance in the figure. Anode and cathode 
potentials in the figure are iR-compensated values after subtracting the resistive voltages. 1 atm of 
room-temperature propylene was flowed at 10 sccm during the measurements.  
 
15 

 
46 
 
 
Fig. S5. Double-layer capacitance measurement and ECSA-normalized propylene 
epoxidation performance with different compositions of Pd-Pt-on-carbon catalysts. 
Potentials in this figure were 100% iR-compensated (i = current, R= resistance). Specific 
capacitance of 0.04 mF/cm2 was assumed for calculating ECSA. The vertical error bars represent 
5 
standard deviations from the mean of multiple replicates (n≥3) of the same experiment. 
 
 
 
 
10 
 

 
47 
 
 
Fig. S6. XRD patterns of Pd/C, Pt/C, and PdPt/C catalysts 
 
 
 

 
48 
 
 
Fig. S7. Cyclic voltammetry traces of the catalysts. The scans were recorded at 50 mV/sec scan 
rate with 85% automatic iR-compensation (i = current, R= resistance), and the second scan from 
each CV is shown.  
 
5 
 
 
 

 
49 
 
 
300
400
500
600
0
20
40
60
80
100
 FEPO
 FEPG
 iPO+PG
Annealing temperature (oC)
Faradaic efficiency (%)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
 Partial current density [mA/cm2]
constant potential 
at 1.1 V vs. Fc/Fc+
 
Fig. S8. Comparison of annealed PdPt/C catalyst performances at a constant potential of 1.1 
V vs. Fc/Fc+ (100% iR-compensated). The vertical error bars represent standard deviations from 
the mean of multiple replicates (n=3) of the same experiment. 
 
 
5 

 
50 
 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Faradaic efficiency (%)
Metal formula
 Propylene oxide
 Propylene glycol
Pd
Pd3Pt1
Pd1Pt1
Pd1Pt3
Pt
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
 Epoxidation rate 
Epoxidation rate
catalysts annealed at 400 oC
1.1 V vs. Fc/Fc+
(mol product)∙(mol metal∙sec)-1
0.4 M TBABF4, 10 M water in acetonitrile
 
Fig. S9. Direct anodic propylene epoxidation performance with different compositions of Pd-
Pt alloy catalysts annealed at 400 ℃. This plot is analogous to Fig. 1D; note the different 
annealing temperatures and resulting differences in performances. 100% iR-compensated potential 
5 
was applied. The vertical error bars represent standard deviations from the mean of multiple 
replicates (n≥3) of the same experiment. 
 
 
 

 
51 
 
 
Fig. S10. Operando XAS at Pd K-edge. Potentials in this figure were 100% iR-compensated (i 
= current, R= resistance). 
 
 
 
5 

 
52 
 
 
Fig. S11. Operando XAS at Pt L3-edge. Potentials in this figure were 100% iR-compensated (i 
= current, R= resistance). 
 
 
5 

 
53 
 
 
Fig. S12. Water dependences of propylene epoxidation current density. (A) Water 
concentration dependence of propylene epoxidation current density at different propylene partial 
pressures. The data set is same as that of Fig. 4B, but linear water concentration dependences were 
assumed in this plot. (B) Water activity dependence of propylene epoxidation current density. 
5 
Different order dependences were assumed in high and low water contents. (C) Water molar 
concentration dependences of propylene epoxidation current density at different potentials. Water 
molar ratio of 1 was assumed for aqueous electrolytes (0.25 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6), 
0.9 M NaClO4 in water). Solid lines represent best-fit from kinetic model of proposed mechanism 
in Fig. 4D. Model fits for aqueous electrolytes assumed 1.65 V and 1.6 V vs. SHE as 1.09 V and 
10 
1.04 V vs. Fc/Fc+, respectively, reflecting the absolute potential values applied with respect to 
pseudo-reference Ag/AgCl electrode. (D) Phosphate concentration dependence of propylene 
epoxidation current density in aqueous electrolytes. The ratio of Na2HPO4 and NaH2PO4 was fixed 
to 1:9 for making pH 6 solution, and the ionic strength was fixed to 1.2 M using NaClO4 as the 
balancing salt. The vertical error bars represent standard deviations from the mean of multiple 
15 
replicates (n≥3) of the same experiment. 
 

 
54 
 
0.1
1
5
50
ipo+pg / an
water  (mA/cm2)
apropene 
10 M water, 0.4 M TBABF4, gas sat'd ACN
1.1 V vs. Fc/Fc+
propylene partial pressure 
0.8 - 1.0 atm:  n=3.8
0.3 - 0.6 atm:  n=3.2
0.1 - 0.2 atm:  n=2.6
 
Fig. S13. Propylene dependence on propylene epoxidation current density. Adjustments 
were made to the current density to account for variations in water activity (fig. S17) and water 
activity dependences at different propylene pressures.   
 
5 

 
55 
 
 
 
Fig. S14. Product distributions with different catalysts annealed at 400 ℃, constant current 
at 40 mA/cm2. 10 sccm of propylene was introduced to the electrolyte containing 0.4 M 
TBABF4 and 10 M water in acetonitrile. The vertical error bars represent standard deviations 
5 
from the mean of multiple replicates (n=3) of the same experiment. For PtOx/C, both of duplicate 
data (PtOx/C -1 and PtOx/C -2) are presented.  

 
56 
 
 
Fig. S15. Deuterium kinetic isotope effects on epoxidation rate catalyzed by PdPtOx/C. 100% 
iR-compensated (i = current, R= resistance) potentials were applied. The vertical error bars 
represent standard deviations from the mean of multiple replicates (n=4) of the same experiment. 
See Supplementary Text S3 for extended descriptions.   
5 
 
 

 
57 
 
 
 
 
O
M
M
O
O
O
O
O
M
M
O
O
O
M
M
O
M
M
O
O
 
Fig. S16. Comparison of concerted and stepwise pathways for stilbene epoxidation and a 
5 
proposed stepwise epoxidation pathway involving radical OO* intermediate. 
 
 
 
 
10 

 
58 
 
 
Fig. S17. Activity measurements using headspace-gas chromatography-TCD. The vertical 
error bars represent standard deviations from the mean of multiple replicates (n≥3) of the same 
experiment. 
 
5 
 
 

 
59 
 
 
 
Fig. S18. Conversion of propylene oxide (PO) to propylene glycol (PG) in aqueous 
electrolytes with varying pHs. PO consumption and PG formation were monitored and quantified 
by 1H-NMR. 
5 

 
60 
 
70
75
80
 Pt0
 Pt2+
Intensity (a.u.)
Binding Energy (eV)
PdPtOx/C (500 oC)
post-electrolysis
pre-electrolysis
Pt 4f7/2
Pt 4f5/2
 
Fig. S19. High-resolution Pt 4f XPS spectra of PdPtOx/C sample before and after 
electrolysis. 
 
 
 
5 

 
61 
 
 
Fig. S20. Effects of epoxide and oxygen concentrations on propylene epoxidation rate. (A) 
Cyclooctene oxide dependence on propylene epoxidation rate. Cyclooctene oxide was utilized as 
a substitute for PO to differentiate between the epoxide produced from the reaction (PO) and the 
epoxide added at the star of the experiment (cyclooctene oxide). (B) Oxygen partial pressure 
5 
dependence on propylene epoxidation rate. The oxygen partial pressure was adjusted by diluting 
it with propylene, ensuring the total flow rate remained at 10 sccm under a total gas pressure of 1 
atm. This range for oxygen partial pressure was selected to prevent a reduction in rate caused by a 
decrease in propylene partial pressure. 100% iR-compensated potential was applied. The vertical 
error bars represent standard deviations from the mean of multiple replicates (n=3) of the same 
10 
experiment. 
 

 
62 
 
 
Fig. S21. Epoxidation Faradaic efficiencies and rates at different potentials (100% iR-
compensated). This plot shares the data used for the Tafel plot (Fig. 4A). The vertical error bars 
represent standard deviations from the mean of multiple replicates (n≥3) of the same experiment  
 
5 
 
 

 
63 
 
 
Fig. S22. A setup of a syringe pump adding NaBH4 solution to the flask. 
 
 

 
64 
 
 
Fig. S23. Assembly and setup of the electrochemical cell used for the kinetic rate 
measurements. When liquid substrates were used, a backplate was used instead of a gas chamber. 
For operando XAS, a backplate with a hole covered with a Kapton polyimide film for the X-ray 
entrance was used instead. 
5 
 
 

 
65 
 
 
Fig. S24. Ferrocene redox calibration in water-acetonitrile electrolyte. 
 
 

 
66 
 
 
Fig. S25. A representative double-layer capacitance measurement. (A) CV curves at various 
scan rates over PdPtOx/C catalyst in aqueous electrolyte. (B) Capacitive current densities at 
different scan rates. DLCs and errors reported from these measurements (fig. S5) are the average 
and standard deviation of multiple replicates (n=3-18). 
5 
 
 
 

 
67 
 
Table S1. Compilation of previous reports on direct propylene epoxidation using water as 
the oxygen source at ambient temperature and pressure.  
Entry 
Anode material 
electrolyte 
Conditions* 
Highest epoxide 
production rate 
(μmol/cm2/hr) † 
Epoxidatio
n FE at the 
highest rate 
Reference  
1 
Pt black 
(calcined at 
400 ℃ air) 
Aqueous 1 M 
H3PO4 
between the 
electrodes, 
CH2Cl2 
solvent at the 
anode  
30 ℃ 
84 (23%, 1.32V 
applied) 
 
95 (13.7%, 
1.38V vs. NHE 
applied) 
~23% 
(13) 
2 
Ag3PO4 cube 
0.1 M 
phosphate 
(pH 7) buffer 
2.4 V vs. 
RHE 
9.2 
18.7% 
(17) 
 
3 
Ag 
8.7 mM 
NaOH  
 
<0.02 
> 0 
(16) 
 
4 
PtOx  
Nafion 
membrane-
electrode 
assembly 
(0.5M 
H2SO4), 
CH2Cl2 
solvent at the 
anode 
1.6 V vs. 
SHE 
37 
7.4 % 
(14) 
 
5 
PtOx (N2H4) 
4.7 
40 % 
6 
PtO2 + graphite 
1 M H3PO4 
 
30 ℃, 
ambient 
pressure 
19 
17 % 
(15) 
7 
Electrodeposited 
Pd on glassy 
carbon 
0.1 M HClO4  1.2 V vs. 
RHE 
<0.5 
 
0.0037 
μmol/cm2(ECS
A)/hr 
22 % 
(propylene 
glycol) 
(10) 
8 
Pd 
functionalized 
titanium hollow 
fiber 
0.1 M  
HClO4 
1.2 V vs. 
RHE 
 
0.061  
μmol/cm2(ECS
A)/hr 
19 % 
(prop1ylen
e glycol) 
(11) 
9 
Pd/C 
0.1 M  
HClO4 
1.4 V vs. 
RHE 
11.2 
23.2 % 
(propylene 
glycol) 
(9) 
10 
PdO/C 
23.3 
46.7 % 
(propylene 
glycol)  
11 
Stainless steel 
screen 
pH 13.8 
KOH (0.63 
M) 
40 oC,  
Constant 
cell current 
at 24 
mA/cm2 
353 
79 % 
(38) 

 
68 
 
12 
PdPtOx/C 
0.4 M 
TBABF4, 10 
M water in 
acetonitrile 
Constant 
cell current 
at 50 
mA/cm2, 1 
h 
695 
74.5 %  
This work 
(fig. S4C) 
13 
1.1V vs. 
Fc/Fc+ 
473 
66.0±0.8 % 
This work 
(Fig. 1D) 
14 
0.25 M 
sodium 
phosphate 
buffer (pH 
6), 0.9 M 
NaClO4 
1.65 V vs. 
SHE 
411 
57±5 % 
This work 
(Fig. 1E) 
15 
0.1 M HClO4 
Constant 
cell current 
at 24 
mA/cm2 
539 
68.7% 
(propylene 
glycol) 
This work 
(comparis
on to 
Entry 7-
10) 
16 
0.1 M 
sodium 
phosphate 
(pH 7) buffer  
2.4 V vs. 
RHE 
308 
38.4% 
This work 
(comparis
on to 
Entry 2) 
 
*Experiments were done at room temperatures and ambient pressures if not otherwise noted. 
†Propylene epoxidation rate was compared in the unit of μmol/cm2/hr, whereas the area indicates 
the geometric surface area of the electrode. Relevant information needed for the rate conversions 
was found in each paper’s methods and supplementary material:  
5 
Entry 1 – FE(oxidation efficiency in the paper) and production rate are estimated from data points 
in Figure 2. Anodic potentials are estimated from Figure 10. 
Entry 2 – Production rate is from Supplementary Table 2.  
Entry 7 – Production rate is estimated from Figure 4d and Figure S3. 
Entry 8- Production rate and FE are from Figure 8 and 9, respectively. 
10 
Entry 9,10 – Production rate is from Figure 1E, FE is calculated from the combination of Figure 
1E and F.  
Entry 11 – Although we only compared catalysts tested in ambient temperature and pressures, it 
is still worth mentioning this paper for reference, since the reported catalytic performance in 
elevated temperatures is notable. Previously studied catalysts can be clustered into Pd-, Pt-, and 
15 
Ag- derived groups, with this single report using a stainless-steel electrode as an outlier. We 
attempted to reproduce this result, using the layers of stainless-steel cloth as the anode with the 
pretreatment and the electrolyte conditions described in the paper. However, no trace of propylene 
oxide or propylene glycol peak was shown in the 1H-NMR spectrum of the post-electrolysis 
electrolyte.  
20 
 
 
 

 
69 
 
Table S2. Comparison of catalyst performances for direct electrocatalytic cyclooctene 
epoxidation using water as the oxygen source.  
 
Anode 
material 
electrolyte 
conditions 
Highest epoxide 
production rate 
(mA/cm2) 
Epoxidation 
FE at 
highest rate 
Reference 
1 
MnOx 
0.1 M 
TBABF4, 5-
10 M H2O, 
and 200 mM 
cyclooctene in 
acetonitrile 
1.45V vs. 
Fc/Fc+ 
~2.5 
~30 % 
(8) 
2 Irsingle-MnOx 
0.11 M 
TBABF4, 10 
M water in 
acetonitrile 
1.45V vs. 
Fc/Fc+ 
10.5±2.8 
46±4 % 
(7) 
3 RuO2/N0.12C 
0.025 M 
cyclooctene, 
0.05 M 
LiClO4, Ar-
saturated  
ethanol/water 
(1:3) 
1.2 V vs. 
Ag/AgCl 
~3.2 
~80 % 
(39) 
4 
PdPtOx/C 
(annealed at 
400 oC) 
0.11 M 
TBABF4, 10 
M water in 
acetonitrile 
1.05 V vs. 
Fc/Fc+ 
15.8±0.5 
92±4 % 
This work 
5 
Constant 
cell current 
at 40 
mA/cm2 
34.1 
85.2 % 
 
 
 
 
5 

 
70 
 
Table S3. XRD-determined crystallite sizes in Pd/C, Pt/C, and PdPt/C catalysts  
(unit: nm) 
Pd/C 
Pt/C 
PdPt/C 
metal 
oxide 
metal 
oxide 
metal 
oxide 
non-annealed 
3.4±1.1 
- 
3.2±1.3 
- 
3.2±0.6 
- 
300 ℃ 
7.9±1.1 
4.5±0.5 
2.7±0.3 
- 
3.007±0.004 2.60±0.03 
400 ℃ 
- 
8.7±0.4 
23.9±2.9 
- 
5.7±0.7 
4.0±1.1 
500 ℃ 
- 
12.2±1.0 29.1±3.9 
- 
16.9±4.2 
14.1±4.9 
 
 

 
71 
 
 
Table S4. EXAFS fitting of Pd and Pt foil standards.  
 
Bond 
type 
N 
So2 
σ2 
ΔE0 (eV) Reff (Å) 
ΔR (Å) 
R-factor 
Pd foil 
standard 
Pd-Pd 
12 0.74(3) 0.0053(3) 
-5.6(4) 
2.7505 
-0.009(2) 
0.004 
Pt foil 
standard 
Pt-Pt 
12 0.79(6) 0.0041(5) 
7.7(6) 
2.7689 
-0.007(4) 
0.008 
 
 
 

 
72 
 
Table S5. EXAFS fitting of catalysts at Pd K-edge. 
 
Bond type 
N 
So2 
σ2 
ΔE0 (eV)* 
R (Å) R-factor 
PdOx/C 
(open-circuit) 
Pd-O 
3.7(4) 
 
0.0001(10) 
 
2.014(9) 
0.01 
Pd-(di-μ-O-)Pd 
4.5(18) 0.74 0.004(2) 
0.7(16) 
3.063(2) 
Pd-(mono-μ-O-)Pd 5.4(21) 
 
0.003(2) 
 
3.44(1) 
PdOx/C 
(1.15 V vs. 
Fc/Fc+) 
Pd-O 
3.7(4) 
 
0.0004(10) 
1.9(14) 
2.017(8) 
 
Pd-(di-μ-O-)Pd 
5.0(16) 0.74 0.004(2) 
3.06(1) 
0.01 
Pd-(mono-μ-O-)Pd 5.4(21) 
 
0.004(2) 
3.45(1) 
 
PdPtOx/C 
(open-circuit) 
Fit 1 
Pd-O 
3.1(5) 
0.74 -0.002(2) 
-2.4(25) 
1.98(1) 
0.02 
Pd-Pd 
0.62(55) 
2.83(4) 
Pd-Pt 
1.2(10) 
2.92(8) 
Pd-(di-μ-O-)Pd 
1.2(11) 
3.03(5) 
Pd-(mono-μ-O-)Pd 1.7(6) 
3.45(2) 
PdPtOx/C 
(open-circuit) 
Fit2 
Pd-O 
3.2(5) 
0.74 -0.002(1) 
0.0 (22) 
2.00(1) 
0.04 
Pd-(di-μ-O-)Pd 
1.7(5) 
3.06(1) 
Pd-(mono-μ-O-)Pd 1.4(5) 
3.46(2) 
PdPtOx/C 
(1.15 V vs. 
Fc/Fc+) 
Fit 1 
Pd-O 
3.3(7) 
0.74 -0.001(2) 
-1.7(28) 
1.99(2) 
 
Pd-Pd 
0.39(62) 
2.85(8) 
 
Pd-Pt 
0.7(11) 
2.9(2) 
0.02 
Pd-(di-μ-O-)Pd 
1.5(12) 
3.04(5) 
 
Pd-(mono-μ-O-)Pd 1.9(8) 
3.45(3) 
 
PdPtOx/C 
(1.15 V vs. 
Fc/Fc+) 
Fit 2 
Pd-O 
3.5(4) 
0.74 -0.001(1) 
-0.6(18) 
2.00(1) 
0.03 
Pd-(di-μ-O-)Pd 
1.7(4) 
3.05(1) 
Pd-(mono-μ-O-)Pd 1.8(5) 
3.45(2) 
 
*Assigning incorrect atomic species for backscatter might have caused negative Debye-Waller 
factors for PdPtOx/C samples. 
 
 
5 

 
73 
 
Table S6. EXAFS fitting of catalysts at Pt L3-edge. 
 
 
Bond type 
N 
So2 
σ2 
ΔE0 (eV) R (Å) 
R-factor 
PtOx/C 
(open-circuit) 
Pt-Pt 
9.5(8) 0.79 0.0049(7) 6.5(7) 
2.752(5) 
0.006 
PtOx/C 
(1.15 V vs. Fc/Fc+) 
Pt-Pt 
9.8(16) 0.79 0.006(1) 6.0(13) 2.751(9) 
0.02 
PdPtOx/C 
(open-circuit) 
Pt-O 
2.8(6) 
0.79 0.004(3) 
11(3) 
2.01(2) 
0.01 
Pt-Pt 
2.2(12) 
2.78(4) 
Pt-Pd 
0.94(78) 
2.82(5) 
PdPtOx/C 
(1.15 V vs. Fc/Fc+) 
Pt-O 
2.8(5) 
0.79 0.005(3) 
11(2) 
2.01(2) 
0.007 
Pt-Pt 
2.5(11) 
2.79(3) 
Pt-Pd 
1.3(7) 
2.83(4) 
 
 
 
 
5 

 
74 
 
Table S7. Near-surface compositions of PdPt/C catalysts derived from XPS survey spectra 
 
C 
O 
Pd 
Pt 
 
weight % 
PdPt/C 
52.47 
7.42 
12.84 
27.28 
PdPtOx/C 
(400 ℃) 
10.63 
19.61 
25.94 
42.37 
PdPtOx/C 
(500 ℃) 
7.54 
20.79 
25.5 
46.16 
atomic % 
PdPt/C 
85.78 
9.1 
2.37 
2.75 
PdPtOx/C 
(400 ℃) 
32.55 
47.50 
9.48 
8.65 
PdPtOx/C 
(500 ℃) 
26.11 
54.07 
9.97 
9.84 
 
 
 

 
75 
 
Table S8. Quantification of catalyst compositions using ICP-OES 
 
metal weight 
percent 
Pt molar composition in 
metal 
Pt/C 
44.0% 
1.00 
Pd1Pt3/C 
48.6% 
0.75 
Pd1Pt1/C 
34.8% 
0.49 
Pd3Pt1/C 
37.8% 
0.24 
Pd/C 
35.7% 
0.00 
 
 
 

 
76 
 
Table S9. Surface concentrations of metal species evaluated by XPS analysis 
  
 
Pt(0) 
Pt(II) 
Pd(0) 
Pd(II) 
PdPtOx/C 
(400 ℃) 
surface concentration (%) 
surface concentration (%) 
49.28 
50.72 
16.09 
83.91 
4f7/2 peak position (eV) 
3d5/2 peak position (eV) 
70.9 
72.1 
335.5 
337.2 
PdPtOx/C 
(500 ℃) 
surface concentration (%) 
surface concentration (%) 
13.5 
86.5 
0 
100 
4f7/2 peak position (eV) 
3d5/2 peak position (eV) 
71.1 
72.3 
- 
337.2 
PdPtOx/C 
(500 ℃) 
Post-electrolysis 
(fig. S19) 
 
surface concentration (%) 
surface concentration (%) 
10.27 
89.73 
0 
100 
4f7/2 peak position (eV) 
3d5/2 peak position (eV) 
71.1 
72.3 
- 
337.1 
PdOx/C 
(500 ℃) 
 
surface concentration (%) 
0 
100 
3d5/2 peak position (eV) 
- 
337.2 
PtOx/C* 
(500 ℃) 
surface concentration (%) 
 
100 
0 
4f7/2 peak position (eV) 
71.0 
- 
 
*We tried to fit the PtOx spectrum with both Pt(0) and Pt(II) species, but the best fit was achieved 
with the 4f7/2 peaks at 71.0 eV and 71.4 eV. However, since 71.4 eV does not align with the 
5 
expected Pt(II) position, we opted to only fit the spectrum with the Pt(0) 4f7/2 and 4f5/2 peaks. When 
we attempted to fit the spectrum with a fixed Pt(II) 4f7/2 peak position between 71.1-71.3 eV,  the 
4f7/2 peak became smaller compared to the 4f5/2 peak, so we discarded that fit.  
 
 
10 
 
 

 
77 
 
Table S10. Deuterium kinetic isotope effects on epoxidation rate catalyzed by PdPtOx/C*  
 
 
FEPO 
iPO (mA/cm2) 
kH / kD 
10 M H2O, CH3CN 
58.5±3.4 % 
13.2±2.1 
 
10 M D2O, CH3CN 
52.9±3.0 % 
7.4±1.7 
1.8±0.5 
10 M H2O, CD3CN 
54.1±7.9 % 
11.0±4.6 
1.2±0.5 
10 M D2O, CD3CN 
49.2±0.8 % 
5.1±0.2 
2.6±0.4 
 
*This table shares data with fig. S15.  
 

 
78 
 
Table S11. Reaction conditions for studying correlation between alkene electrophilicity 
index and the direct anodic epoxidation rate 
 
Substrate 
Deviation from 
standard condition * 
Faradaic efficiency (%) 
ω- 
average 
(kJ/mol) 
Epoxidation 
current 
density 
(mA/cm2) 
epoxide 
diol 
ketone 
2-methyl-2-
butene 
1.02 V vs. Fc/Fc+ † 
41.7 
36.5 
- 
12.11 
11.67 
 
2-hexene 
- 
79.1 
 
- 
- 
18.08 
11.08 
 
cyclooctene 
- 
92.4 
 
- 
- 
19.15 
15.80 
 
cycloheptene 
- 
71.9 
- 
- 
19.16 
5.68 
 
norbornene 
 
15.9 
 
 
19.93 
0.64 
1-hexene 
- 
53.0 
 
- 
- 
25.70 
1.73 
 
1-octene 
0.16 M substrate ‡ 
43.9 
- 
28.5 
25.81 
1.19 
 
propylene 
Saturated electrolyte 
with 1atm substrate 
flowing at 10 sccm 
54.4 
- 
- 
25.97 
5.12 
 
allyl chloride 
- 
19.7 
4.63 
- 
35.52 
0.97 
 
ethylene 
Saturated electrolyte 
with 1atm substrate 
flowing at 10 sccm 
24.5 
 
- 
- 
36.40 
0.76 
 
3,3,3-
trifluoropropene 
Saturated electrolyte 
with 1atm substrate 
flowing at 10 sccm 
1.96 
 
- 
- 
43.30 
0.033 
 
*Standard condition: 0.11 M TBABF4, 0.2 M substrate, 10 M water in acetonitrile, annealed 
5 
PdPt/C on carbon paper (at 400 ℃) as an anode, Pt foil as a cathode, no separator, stirred using a 
magnetic bar, 1.05 V vs. Fc/Fc+ applied to the anode 
†Slightly lowered the potential to due to instrumental current overload at 1.05 V vs. Fc/Fc+.  
‡Lowered substrate concentration to avoid phase separation.  
 
 
10 

 
79 
 
Table S12. Recipe for Pd-Pt alloys on carbon. 
  
PdCl2 
(mmol) 
0.1 M HCl(aq) 
(mL) 
H2PtCl6∙6H2O 
(mmol) 
milliQ water 
(mL) 
Vulcan XC-72R 
(mg) 
Pd/C 
0.5 
10 
79.8 
Pd3Pt1/C 
0.375 
7.5 
0.125 
2.5 
96.4 
PdPt/C 
0.25 
5 
0.25 
5 
113.1 
Pd1Pt3/C 
0.125 
2.5 
0.375 
7.5 
129.7 
Pt/C 
0.5 
10 
146.3