1 
 
 
In Situ UV-VIS-NIR Absorption Spectroscopy 
and Catalysis 
Authors:  
Max Bolsa, Jing Maa, Fatima Rammal, Dieter Plessers, Xuejiao Wu, Sara Navarro-Jaén, 
Alexander J. Heyer, Bert Sels*, Edward Solomon*, Robert Schoonheydt* 
Contact corresponding authors at: Bert.sels@kuleuven.be, Edward.solomon@stanford.edu, 
Robert.schoonheydt@kuleuven.be 
a These authors contributed equally 
Abstract: This review highlights in situ UV-VIS-NIR range absorption spectroscopy in 
catalysis. A variety of experimental techniques identifying reaction mechanisms, kinetics, and 
structural properties is discussed. Stopped flow techniques, use of laser pulses, and use of 
experimental perturbations are demonstrated for in situ studies of enzymatic, homogeneous, 
heterogeneous, and photocatalysis. They access different time scales and are applicable to 
different reaction systems and catalyst types. In photocatalysis, femto- and nanosecond 
resolved measurements through transient absorption are discussed for tracking excited states. 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopies for structural characterization are demonstrated 
especially for Cu and Fe exchanged zeolites and metalloenzymes. This requires combining 
different spectroscopies. Combining magnetic circular dichroism and resonance Raman 
spectroscopy is especially powerful. A multitude of phenomena can be tracked on transition 
metal catalysts on various supports, including changes in oxidation state, adsorptions, 
reactions, support interactions, surface plasmon resonances, and band gaps. Measurements of 
oxidation states, oxygen vacancies, and band gaps are shown on heterogeneous catalysts, 
especially for electrocatalysis. UV-VIS-NIR absorption is burdened by broad absorption bands. 
Advanced analysis techniques enable the tracking of coking reactions on acid zeolites despite 
convoluted spectra. The value of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy to catalyst 
characterization and mechanistic investigation is clear, but could be expanded. 
Table of contents 
1. 
Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 3 
2. 
The role of in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopies ............................................... 4 
2.1 
Characteristics of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra in catalysis ................................. 5 
2.2 
Collection and processing of in situ absorption spectra .............................................. 9 
2.2.1 
Modes of irradiation and light collection ............................................................. 9 
2.2.1.1 
Transmission and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy ................................... 10 
2.2.1.2 
Fiber optics ................................................................................................. 11 
2.2.1.3 
Improving time and spatial resolution ........................................................ 12 
2.2.2 
Conditions- and time-dependent measurements ................................................ 13 
2.2.2.1 
Varying temperature and magnetic field .................................................... 13 
2.2.2.2 
Time dependent measurements .................................................................. 15 

2 
 
 
2.2.3 
Processing of spectroscopic data ....................................................................... 18 
2.2.3.1 
The Lambert-Beer and Kubelka-Munk functions ...................................... 18 
2.2.3.2 
Band gap energies ....................................................................................... 20 
2.3 
Coupling to complementary techniques .................................................................... 23 
3. 
Research in catalysis with in situ UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy ......................................... 25 
3.1 
Heterogeneous thermal catalysis ............................................................................... 25 
3.1.1 
Tracking metal and metal oxide bulk and surface properties ............................ 25 
3.1.1.1 
Supported noble metal nanoparticles .......................................................... 25 
3.1.1.2 
Transition metal oxide catalysts ................................................................. 31 
3.1.2 
Identification and tracking of dispersed catalytic molecular clusters ................ 34 
3.1.2.1 
UV-VIS-NIR fingerprinting on Cu and Fe exchanged zeolites ................. 35 
3.1.2.2 
Partial oxidation of methane to methanol with Cu-zeolites ....................... 37 
3.1.2.3 
Selective catalytic reduction of NO by NH3 with Cu zeolites .................... 42 
3.1.2.4 
Selective catalytic reduction of NO by NH3 with Fe zeolites .................... 46 
3.1.2.5 
N2O decomposition with Fe zeolites .......................................................... 48 
3.1.2.6 
C-H bond activation with α-O on Fe-zeolites ............................................. 50 
3.1.2.7 
Non-zeolitic single atom catalysts .............................................................. 51 
3.1.3 
Tracking chromophoric products ....................................................................... 51 
3.1.3.1 
zeolite catalyzed methanol to hydrocarbons ............................................... 51 
3.2 
Homogeneous thermal catalysis ................................................................................ 59 
3.2.1 
Organometallic catalysts .................................................................................... 60 
3.2.1.1 
Selected applications of stopped flow absorption ...................................... 60 
3.2.1.2 
Applications of C-term MCD ..................................................................... 62 
3.2.1.3 
Applications of CD ..................................................................................... 64 
3.2.1.4 
Further reactions ......................................................................................... 65 
3.2.2 
Non-organometallic transformation ................................................................... 71 
3.2.2.1 
Imide reduction ........................................................................................... 71 
3.2.2.2 
Cycloaddition.............................................................................................. 72 
3.3 
Enzymes .................................................................................................................... 73 
3.3.1 
Kinetics: stopped-flow absorption and rapid freeze quench trapping ............... 74 
3.3.2 
Resonance Raman profiling of absorption bands .............................................. 75 
3.3.3 
The application of magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy .......................... 77 
3.3.4 
Correlation of enzyme active site intermediates to metallozeolite catalysts ..... 81 
3.4 
Electrocatalysis.......................................................................................................... 82 
3.5 
Photocatalysis ............................................................................................................ 86 
3.5.1 
Transient absorption to monitor ultrafast processes (fs-to-s time scale) ........... 87 

3 
 
 
3.5.2 
Time-course spectra to monitor reaction changes (s-to-day time scale) ............ 91 
4. 
Outlook and Conclusions.................................................................................................. 94 
5. 
References ........................................................................................................................ 95 
6. 
Acknowledgements ........................................................................................................ 118 
7. 
List of abbreviations ....................................................................................................... 118 
8. 
Biographies ..................................................................................................................... 120 
9. 
Abstract figure ................................................................................................................ 123 
 
1. Introduction  
The Ultraviolet-Visible-Near Infrared (UV-VIS-NIR) range of photon energies encompasses 
wavenumbers between 4 000 - 50 000 cm−1, or wavelengths between 200 – 2 500 nm. It 
corresponds to the energies of several chemically relevant electronic excitations, but excludes 
ionizations that require vacuum UV energies or above. The electronic excitations most notably 
include n → π* and π → π* transitions in organic molecules, the d-d, ligand-to-metal charge 
transfer (LMCT) and metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT) transitions in transition metal 
ions (TMI) complexes, various transitions in the electronic shells of rare earth metals, and band 
gaps of semiconductors. Also structural defects in materials can be effectively probed through 
their effect on electronic transition energies. In the NIR region overtones and combinations 
bands of O-H, C-H and N-H vibrations are observed. This plethora of possibilities to study 
atoms, molecules and solids has moved researchers to use UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy in the 
study of catalysts and catalytic reactions, especially those involving 3d TMIs. Their d-d 
transitions are observed in the VIS-NIR region and their MLCT absorption bands lie mainly in 
the UV-VIS. For centrosymmetric complexes, d-d transitions are symmetry (Laporte) 
forbidden, and often they are also spin forbidden. Therefore they are often weak. LMCT and 
MLCT transitions on the other hand are usually symmetry and spin allowed and therefore 
intense (e.g. Figure 1). Two standard reference works on ligand field theory are the books by 
Lever and Solomon covering the fundamentals and interpretation of d-d and charge transfer 
transitions.1, 2 Further selection rules can be exploited to derive structural and electronic insight 
on molecules using circular dichroism (CD) and magnetic circular dichroism (MCD). 
Spectroscopic investigation of a catalyst under reaction conditions is called in situ spectroscopy. 
If the reaction products are simultaneously measured - for instance by gas chromatography 
(GC), liquid chromatography (LC), or mass spectrometry (MS) - at the outlet of the reactor, 
the term operando spectroscopy is used. In this review the umbrella term in situ spectroscopy 
is preferably used whether or not the reaction products are analyzed, unless the measurement 
of reaction products is of particular relevance. For photon absorption spectroscopy, commonly 
used measurements are transmission mode, specular reflection, and diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy (DRS). In situ spectroscopy requires spectroscopic reaction cells. For solid or 
powdered catalysts fibre optic spectroscopy is used. An overview of such setups is given in 
Weckhuysen’s recent book chapters,3, 4 and the reaction cells have been discussed by Bravo-
Suarez and Srinivasan.5 Whether these reaction cells deliver relevant kinetic data was discussed 
by Valecillos et al.6 Given the ample attention the topic has received in excellent recent reviews, 
we will not focus on this aspect. 

4 
 
 
The review starts with some fundamentals of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy. The 
selection rules for the absorption of non-polarized and circularly polarized light are mentioned. 
Subsequently different techniques and analysis methods to extract valuable information on 
catalysis are discussed. UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy has been applied in all areas of 
catalysis: 
heterogeneous, 
homogeneous, 
enzymatic 
catalysis, 
photocatalysis 
and 
electrocatalysis, and will be discussed per subfield in separate sections. Techniques and 
spectroscopies that are specific for one area will be highlighted by state-of-the-art examples in 
that section. In the area of heterogeneous catalysis zeolites with TMIs are given ample attention. 
In zeolites TMIs can occupy well-defined crystallographic sites enabling the measurement of 
site-specific or fingerprint spectra of the active sites. Such spectra, or specific bands in these 
spectra, can be used for kinetic measurements and they serve as guides to identify these sites 
in other catalysts. Other types of heterogeneous catalysts, including supported nanoparticles, 
metal oxide surfaces, and single atom catalysts are then explored. For homogeneous and 
enzymatic catalysis the focus lies on metal-organic transition metal complexes. The use of 
various techniques to measure kinetics is highlighted, as well as the use of (magnetic) circular 
dichroism in the UV-VIS-NIR range. Coupled amperometry and other electrochemical 
analytics, and UV-VIS-NIR absorption under different applied potentials are central in the 
examples given in the electrocatalysis section. In the photocatalysis section, attention is given 
to ultrafast measurements through transient absorption (TA). 
The contents of this review provide an integrated update of several related publications, with a 
widened scope and a deeper focus on experimental methods with recent literature examples. 
The starting points are the reviews and chapters by Jentoft, Weckhuysen and Schoonheydt.4, 7, 
8 Related topics were also recently reviewed specifically for photocatalysis,9 and 
electrocatalysis.10 Further elements are treated on (magnetic) circular dichroism, modelling of 
the absorption spectra, and the use of time- and conditions dependent measurements. While 
theoretical backgrounds are provided in brief, a selection of handbooks is referred to for further 
reading. At the end critical conclusions and an outlook on the further potential of in situ UV-
VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy for catalysis are given. 
2. The role of in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopies 
Spectroscopies in the UV-VIS-NIR range enable access to structural and electronic information 
for several categories of materials in both gas phase and condensed phase. It can do so using 
relatively low cost equipment and for a range of physical conditions. Several experimental and 
data analysis methodologies that include UV-VIS-NIR range spectroscopy can be employed 
for different purposes. 
Table 1 gives an overview of the topics included in this review. The application of in situ UV-
VIS-NIR spectroscopy in each of these catalysis types will be presented and the findings of the 
studies will be discussed. 
Table 1. Overview of the catalysis studies using in situ UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy discussed in this review. 
Catalysis type 
Reactions 
Coupled spectroscopies a 

5 
 
 
Heterogeneous catalysis 
Partial oxidation of methane to methanol with Cu-zeolites 
NH3-SCR with Cu- and Fe- zeolites 
N2O decomposition and C-H activation with Fe-zeolites 
Methanol to hydrocarbons with zeolite 
Oxidation reactions (e.g. CO oxidation and water-gas shift 
reaction) with supported Au catalysts 
Hydrogenation reactions (e.g. hydrogenation of CO and 
CO2 to methanol and reverse water-gas shift reaction) with 
supported Au catalysts 
Dehydrogenation of isobutane with supported CrOx 
catalysts 
NH3-SCR and oxidative dehydrogenation of propane with 
supported VOx catalysts 
Reverse water-gas shift reaction with cubic In2O3 
XAS, Mössbauer, rR, Raman, MCD, IR, 
NMR, EPR 
Homogenous catalysis 
Metathesis reactions, ligand substitution and catalytic 
oxidation of H2O to O2 with Grubbs catalysts 
Synthesis of organometallic complexes 
Oxidative addition of organometallic complexes 
C-C coupling reactions with high-valent Ni complexes 
catalysts 
C-C cross-coupling reactions with Fe-SciOPP catalysts 
Michael addition of malonate to nitrostyrenes with 
asymmetric copper catalyst 
Ethylene oligomerization, alcohol oxidation, asymmetric 
hydrogenation, 
dehydroperoxidation 
of 
cyclohexyl 
hydroperoxide and formic acid dehydrogenation with 
organometallic catalysts 
IR, Raman, NMR, EPR 
 
Non-organometallic transformation (e.g. Imide reduction 
and cycloaddition) 
 
Enzymatic catalysis  
Methane 
to 
methanol 
with 
soluble 
methane 
monooxygenase 
Monooxygenation by the enzyme tyrosinase 
Selective substrate halogenation by the α-ketoglutarate 
dependent Fe enzyme SyrB2 
IR, rR, MCD, EPR 
Electrocatalysis  
Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution with Co-based MOF  
CO2 reduction in water with Co-based COF 
Electrocatalytic oxygen evolution with Ir-based and Ni-
based catalysts 
XPS, IR 
Photocatalysis  
H2 generation with CdSe/CdS-Pt and CdS-Pt NRs 
CO2 reduction with NiII complex, Cu/TiO2 and Re-COF 
cataysts 
Lignin conversion with cadmium sulfide quantum dots 
Degradation of the intelligent ink with TiO2 
IR, NMR, EPR 
a Refers to coupled spectroscopies in the studies discussed in this review, not to the spectroscopies used in the field in general 
2.1 Characteristics of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra in catalysis 
This section briefly runs through a few fundamentals on absorption spectroscopy in the UV-
VIS-NIR range. To find a more rigorous and extensive treatment of the topic, the handbook by 
Lever et al.1 is advised. It explains the theory behind electronic spectroscopy in general, and 
also includes chapters on symmetry and group theory. An updated version focusing more on 
inorganic compounds was published in 2000 by Lever and Solomon.2 A recent counterpart on 
organic molecules is more difficult to find. There are the publications on solvatochromisms by 
P. Suppan and the handbook by Mataga and Kubota, as well as the spectrum database by 
Hirayama and Kenzo.11-13 For a fundamental treatment of the physical chemistry the handbook 
by Atkins and Friedman is advised.14 

6 
 
 
The UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectrum is visualized as photon intensity that remains after 
irradiation of the sample, plotted against photon energy. Usually this is displayed relative to a 
reference measurement. The photon energy can be plotted in several units. The use of 
frequency (commonly as wavenumbers in cm−1) is popular, as well as wave period (commonly 
as wavelength in nm). The latter is however inversely proportional to energy and therefore not 
recommended. Another common unit is electronvolts (eV) popular in band gap analysis. 
An electronic absorption spectrum of a catalytic system is generally challenging to interpret 
due to the multitude of possible excitations and their limited spectral resolution under relevant 
conditions. Each absorption event has its particular excitation energy and intensity. The 
excitation energy associated with a single electronic excitation event is spread over an energy 
range mainly through vibronic coupling due to excited state distortion. This results in  a Poisson 
distribution that becomes Gaussian at large distortion. Other contributions to absorption band 
broadening are temperature dependent doppler broadening (Gaussian profile), and subtle 
inhomogeneities in the coordination sphere. This broadening leads to overlapping absorption 
bands that can be difficult to resolve. In solutions, dynamic solvent interactions additionally 
contribute to broadening. Absorption bands may also become asymmetrical depending on the 
predominant broadening phenomena. To deconvolute spectra, single absorption bands are most 
regularly approximated by Gaussian or more general Voight distributions which are then 
superimposed to approach the experimental spectrum (example in Figure 1).15, 16 Especially in 
condensed matter with conjugated systems or in composites, macromolecules, and in solutions, 
discerning individual bands becomes difficult (e.g. Figures 32-34,44,45,57), but also for nearly 
single site supported TMI complexes this can be the case (e.g. the low energy d-d bands in 
Figure 1). Increasing density of energy levels eventually culminates in continuous energy 
bands, leading to a bandgap spectrum (e.g. Figures 10,11). As a consequence, while electronic 
absorption energies are highly sensitive to structure, they are difficult to use as unique 
identifiers absent a good preliminary understanding of the material structure and composition. 
 
Figure 1. Room temperature diffuse reflectance spectrum of a calcined *BEA zeolite (Si/Al=12.5) loaded with 
0.3 wt. % Fe (black curve) to contain nearly single site square planar coordinated Fe2+.17 The spectrum is 
deconvoluted with five gaussian band shapes (blue), the sum of the gaussian bands is given by the red curve. The 
insert gives the parameters of the gaussian bands; obtained from experiment. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. 
Traditionally, the analysis of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra has been based on databases of 
well identified complexes, looking for structural similarities. The book by Lever remains an 

7 
 
 
important reference work for transition metal complexes, and the collection by Hirayama and 
Kenzo for organic molecules.1, 12 Simple spectra can, at least qualitatively, be explained with 
crystal field theory or ligand field theory. Important parameters are the coordination 
environment (symmetry and composition) and orbital energies determining band energy and 
absorption coefficients. Band interpretation is also aided by the band shape, and vibronic 
structure. Various selection rules arise from theory resulting in widely varying absorption 
probabilities that dictate the absorption intensity for individual electronic excitations.1 For the 
UV-VIS-NIR range of electronic excitations the most important selection rules are eq 1 and eq 
2. 
 
The spin selection rule: ΔS = 0 
(1) 
 
The orbital (‘Laporte’) selection rule: Δl = +1 or –1 
(2) 
Both arise from the predominant excitation mechanism which occurs through the interaction 
of the photon and electronic transition electric dipole moments, together with the assumption 
that the spin (𝜃𝑠) and orbital (𝜑) parts of the electronic wavefunctions can be considered 
independently. Formally, the absorption probability is proportional to the square of the 
transition moment integral 𝑃̅ (eq 3). 
 
𝑃̅ = 〈𝜑2|𝑟̅|𝜑1〉〈𝜃1,𝑠|𝜃2,𝑠〉 
(3) 
Where the ground and excited state wavefunctions are denoted with respective subscripts 1 and 
2, and with 𝑟̅ the electric dipole operator. 
The orbital selection rule is dependent on the symmetry of the involved orbitals, but also of the 
polarization of the incident light. Linear polarization can reveal the transition’s electric dipole 
orientation, but requires an oriented sample and is not useful for the randomly oriented samples 
(powders, solutions, …) generally encountered in in situ spectroscopy for catalysis. Circular 
polarization is sensitive to enantiomers, but is scarcely applied to the in situ study of catalysts. 
The differential absorption of differently polarized light can be measured, resulting in linear or 
circular dichroism spectroscopy.. CD intensity is determined by the projection of the electric 
dipole transition moment into the magnetic dipole moment. Evaluating circular dichroism in a 
longitudinal magnetic field under varying temperatures and magnetic field strengths results in 
variable-temperature-variable-field (VTVH) magnetic circular dichroism (MCD), which has 
been applied to TMI catalysts (vide infra). In this case the magnetic field is used to lift the 
degeneracy of ground and/or excited electronic states, resulting in different transition moments 
and enabling circular dichroism for non-chiral absorption centra.18, 19 
For ligand field transitions the selection rules are generally relaxed, and the degree to which 
they are relaxed determines the absorption probability. Typical ranges for absorption 
coefficients are given in Table 2. Foremost, the classification of TMI complexes’ electronic 
transitions into d-d and charge transfer (CT) transitions is an approximation. Molecular orbitals 
of TMI complexes have a mixed metal and ligand character and the electronic transitions have 
varying degrees of CT and d-d (or f-f) character. Symmetry imposed selection rules are relaxed 
through non-centrosymmetric distortion of the ligand field and through vibronic coupling to 
odd parity vibrations. The spin selection rule is relaxed through spin-orbit coupling.14 
Table 2. Typical ranges for molar absorption coefficients for UV-VIS-NIR electronic transitions depending on 
the relaxation of the selection rules.1 
Type of Transition 
Molar absorption coefficient range, ε 
(cm−1 M−1) 

8 
 
 
Spin & Laporte forbidden 
10–3 - 102 
Spin allowed & Laporte 
forbidden 
100 - 104 
Spin & Laporte allowed 
102 – 106 
 
The previous points indicate that the assignment and interpretation of individual absorption 
bands, let alone of the full spectra, is difficult. Both the excitation energies and the absorption 
probabilities depend on a large number of factors, and it is generally not feasible to obtain 
accurate orbital energies and absorption probabilities without computational aids. Several 
computationally implemented molecular modelling methods to simulate absorption spectra 
(including CD and MCD) from an optimized geometry are available.20 The most popular is 
time-dependent density-functional theory (TD-DFT) which offers an appropriate balance 
between accuracy and speed to model systems of a size relevant in catalysis research. It is 
important that the chosen TD-DFT method is benchmarked for the type of system for which 
the spectrum is simulated, but also that the fundamental shortcomings of the method are 
carefully considered.21, 22 More advanced methods (e.g. multireference and coupled cluster) 
can yield more accurate results, but they are computationally heavy. Therefore their application 
is limited to small structures, or small parts of larger structures.20 Also here lies a risk for 
accuracy as long range charge transfer character may be missed, besides other 
misspecifications that can be made in setting up the calculation. Also for species in solution 
further extensions of the models are needed to accurately simulate the spectroscopy, 
introducing quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approaches.23 In addition, 
further information on individual absorption bands can be obtained by coupling other analytic 
techniques, site selective spectroscopies, or exploiting synthesis-spectroscopy relations. In turn 
these can guide the computational modelling. 
Unlike many other characterization techniques, UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy probes 
events and characteristics that are directly catalytically relevant. This is true especially for 
photocatalysis (Figure 2 B), but electronic ground and excited states are generally relevant to 
catalytic reactions as interpreted through frontier molecular orbitals (FMO) (Figure 2 A). The 
highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied orbitals (LUMO) play 
central roles in catalysis and in reactivity in general. The HOMO-LUMO gap often falls in the 
UV-VIS-NIR range. In many cases the LUMO functions as an electron acceptor in catalytic 
mechanisms (e.g. Figure 2 A, C). However, depending on the type of catalysis the electronic 
excitation may be induced via different mechanisms following different selection rules. 
Especially the possibility to study these electronic states in situ enables unique insights into 
catalysis. 

9 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. (A) The HOMO and LUMO and HOMO-LUMO gap of a homogeneous aryl-NiIV complex and the role 
of its LUMO in C-H bond activation. (B) A CdS nanorod photocatalyst with a bulge along its z-axis, with band 
gaps in the UV-VIS-NIR range. The band gap is affected along the z-axis by the presence of the bulge. (C) The 
SyrB2 non-heme FeIV-oxo active site, similar to other non-heme FeIV-oxo sites in homogeneous, enzymatic and 
heterogeneous catalysis, with its NIR-accessible excited state playing a key role in H atom abstraction. Adapted 
from refs. 24-26. Copyrights 2019 Springer nature, 2014 and 2022 American chemical society.  
2.2 Collection and processing of in situ absorption spectra 
Before quantitative analysis is possible, also the irradiance, photon collection, and detection 
processes must be considered. In the calculation of extinction coefficients it is assumed that all 
photons get the chance to excite the electron, and that all not-absorbed photons are measured. 
This is not always the case, and depends on the measurement mode and interfering processes. 
Therefore processing of raw experimental spectra is required. Moreover, measurement 
conditions as well as the light absorption itself can significantly influence the state of the 
absorption centra and thereby influence further absorption. Such phenomena can be exploited 
to gain insight in specific catalyst properties through data collection and processing techniques. 
2.2.1 Modes of irradiation and light collection 
Several spectroscopic methodologies have been developed for the UV-VIS-NIR range to study 
different reaction systems and answer different questions on catalyst structure and catalytic 
mechanisms. In lab scale heterogeneous catalysis, also including electrocatalysis and some 
photocatalysis, the catalyst is usually a powdered solid with a high surface area. DRS is then 
commonly used, in combination with reaction setups that enable the collection of spectra at 
high temperature, and under a flow of reagent and product molecules. Alternatively mulls can 
be prepared enabling transmission spectroscopy, but this is less common. UV-VIS-NIR spectra 
on homogeneous and enzymatic catalysis are typically collected in transmission mode as the 
reactions generally occur in a translucent solvent. With the addition of inert particles or for 
suspensions and colloids in general, DRS can also be used (Figure 3 B).27-30 For both 
transmission and DR modes cells for in situ characterization are technically feasible and 
commercially available.4 

10 
 
 
2.2.1.1 Transmission and diffuse reflectance spectroscopy 
For sufficiently translucent samples, the absorption spectrum can be easily obtained by 
measuring the portion of light that remains of an incident light beam after passing through the 
sample, i.e. the transmission. This approach is applicable to translucent liquid solutions and 
very thin solid wafers, and other translucent samples. For opaque samples other approaches are 
needed. When samples are opaque due to strong absorption, dilution is an option. When they 
are opaque due to scattering, diffuse reflectance is used. The latter is relevant for the study of 
solid phase catalysts, which are mostly studies in powdered form, or as deposits forming a 
rough surface. This allows a better approximation of the intended use of catalysts in packed 
beds, fluidised beds or on electrodes, and yields more representative in situ measurements. 
For powders or rough surfaces with particle sizes of the order of the wavelength the incident 
light is partially scattered and partially absorbed, as schematically shown in Figure 3 A. The 
particles in the bed are illuminated from all possible directions by the scattered light. 
Consequently the scattered light escapes the particle bed in all possible directions. In the ideal 
case all angles of incidence are equally probable and the same holds for the scattered light 
leaving the bed of particles. If there is no transmission through the bed of particles (infinitely 
thick bed) the light is either absorbed or scattered, and the scattered beam escaping from the 
surface can be detected. This is diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS). 
 
 
  
Figure 3. (A) Visualization of the interaction between the incident light and the rough surface. (B) The suspension 
of α-Al2O3 in a stirred liquid medium to enable diffuse reflectance mode measurement.30 Copyright 2022 Royal 
society of chemistry. 
When using DRS quantitatively, a particular challenge is the determination of the pathlength 
of the light ‘through’ the sample (Figure 3 A). In DRS, the (average) pathlength is affected by 

11 
 
 
the scattering events, and by the absorption itself. With more scattering, photons ‘bounce 
around’ in the surface layer longer giving a higher probability of absorption. With higher 
absorption, the observed diffuse reflected photons are more likely to have spent less time in the 
surface layer, and their average pathlength is decreased. The result is a complex non-linear 
problem that depends on material properties. The Beer-Lambert law for processing 
transmission measurements and equations for processing DRS absorption data will be 
discussed further in section 2.2.3.1. 
2.2.1.2 Fiber optics 
Spectroscopic investigation of a working catalyst requires a spectroscopic cell that also 
functions as a reactor, best designed to accurately measure kinetics. The light must be guided 
to and from the catalyst at high temperatures and pressures. On heterogeneous catalysts this is 
best achieved using glass fibre optics bundles in heat resistant UV-VIS-NIR probes. These 
irradiate the sample and collect reflected and scattered light. 
For a gas phase reaction, a homogeneous flow of reagent molecules over the catalyst bed is 
required. For a powdered catalysts, the powder should be loaded as pellets smaller than 10% 
of the inner diameter of the reactor tube. The dead volume must be kept as small as possible, 
and the conversion should be small to avoid temperature and pressure gradients.31-35 
Measurements at the top and bottom are not representative of the catalyst bed. Thus, the high 
temperature probe of the spectrometer is placed outside the reactor against a quartz tube 
containing the catalyst to probe the middle of the catalyst bed and achieve proper kinetic data. 
Multiple measurements at different locations on the bed can also provide information on the 
spatial evolution (e.g. see Figure 34). If the NIR region is probed together with the VIS region 
the quartz must be high grade quartz with a low amount of OH groups. A schematic 
representation is shown in Figure 4. More generally, the design of kinetically appropriate 
spectroscopic cells has been discussed by Meunier.31 
 
Figure 4. Scheme of an in situ/operando spectroscopy set up. Reproduced from ref. 31. Copyright 2010 Royal 
Society of Chemistry. 
As an illustration (Figure 4), a fiber optic reflection probe could contain five fibers: one central 
irradiation or emission fiber and four read or collection fibers. Depending on the distance to 
the sample, such fibers analyze a smaller or larger area of the sample, but usually this is below 
1 mm2. This is an extremely small fraction of the surface of the catalyst bed, and a 
supplementary reason to repeat the spectroscopic measurements at different heights of the bed. 
This simultaneously verifies that a uniform distribution of the absorption centers in the catalyst 
bed is present. 

12 
 
 
With the optical fiber probe as shown in Figure 4, the catalyst is illuminated perpendicularly 
to the catalyst bed and the scattered light is collected under the same angle. This means that 
diffuse reflection and specular reflection are measured together at every wavelength. In 
situ/operando cells that irradiate the sample at 45° and collect the light either at 90° (diffuse 
reflectance only) or at –45° (specular reflectance only) also exist,36 but they give other practical 
difficulties. 
2.2.1.3 Improving time and spatial resolution 
Time-dependent processes are of interest in catalysis research and high measurement 
frequencies are needed to resolve them. On stable analytes, high quality UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption spectra can be obtained using a light source that is passed through a monochromator. 
Such measurement can take several minutes, too long for many experiments. The required and 
desired measurement time depend respectively on the system studied and on the phenomenon 
of interest (Figure 9). The timescale of the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy measurement 
itself lies in the attosecond range (10−18 s). A single photon absorption, the transformation to 
an electronic excited state, and the thermalization of ‘hot’ electrons all occur on the attosecond 
(10−18 s) scale. Such measurements are of value in characterizing excited states and are relevant 
for understanding photocatalysis in particular. 
In most cases one wants to experimentally track the statistical conversion of many particles 
through activated processes, adding a probabilistic component (e.g. looking at half lives). This 
brings the photon absorption and electronic excitation time scale to the femtosecond (10−15 s) 
range. The decay of electronic excited states can occur with half-lives ranging from 
femtoseconds to hours. Similarly, the time scales of activated chemical reactions can vary 
strongly. A selection was tabulated in a review by Shi, Lercher and Yu.14, 37 
With commercially available UV-VIS-NIR spectrophotometers, sufficient signal-to-noise is 
generally obtained for sub-second resolution, enabling relevant operando UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption measurements. In this case, the time resolution limit is set by the method of 
irradiation since, on the collection side, array charge coupled device (CCD) detectors allow 
collection over the full UV-VIS-NIR range in milliseconds.38 This is still insufficient to track 
the short lived excited states exploited in photocatalysis. 
Nanosecond and femtosecond range experiments can be achieved using laser pulses and 
transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS).39 For easily repeated experiments (e.g. repeated 
excitation with laser pulses) step-scan measurements can be used. Independent single 
measurements are aggregated into a time series of spectra with good signal-to-noise.39 A good 
overview of irradiation methods and detectors is given in a book chapter by Skoog et al.40 A 
diagram of the femtosecond and nanosecond resolution setups and experiments is shown in 
Figure 9. 
Choosing the spatial resolution is a trade-off between analyzing a sufficient catalyst portion to 
be relevant for the full catalyst bed and capturing the heterogeneities that exist in the bed. The 
best spatial resolution therefore depends on the research question. Generally high spatial 
resolution is targeted and the results are then validated for larger areas, or with repeatedly 
displaced high resolution measurements. A lot of advances have been made in the latest decade 
using microspectroscopy, achieving resolutions on micrometer scales.3, 4 UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption microspectroscopy studies remain so far limited to the study of surface bound 
aromatics and coke formation involving molecules with high absorption coefficients.3, 41-43 

13 
 
 
2.2.2 Conditions- and time-dependent measurements 
In situ spectroscopic setups enable the collection of spectroscopic data at selected conditions. 
One can choose to simulate the conditions relevant to the intended catalytic process, or to vary 
conditions for analytical purposes. The former generally implies elevated temperatures and 
reactant feeding, and is often used in combination with catalytic measurements resulting in 
operando spectroscopy. The latter approach involves the addition of probe molecules or redox 
conditions, the application of external magnetic fields, temperature conditions, and/or electric 
potential, the trapping of intermediates, and the monitoring of responses to pulses and step 
changes in various conditions. Numerous reviews have addressed setups and applications of in 
situ/operando setups.4, 7, 8, 39 In this section we will give an overview of some experimental 
spectroscopy techniques to gain further electronic and structural information. 
2.2.2.1 Varying temperature and magnetic field 
The population of excited states depends on temperature through the Boltzmann distribution, 
eq 4. 
 
𝑁𝑒𝑥
𝑁𝑔=
𝑔𝑒𝑥
𝑔𝑔𝑒−(𝐸𝑒𝑥−𝐸𝑔)/𝑘𝐵𝑇 
(4) 
with Nex and Ng the populations in the excited and ground states, gex and gg the degeneracies of 
the excited and ground states, Eex and Eg the energies of the excited and ground states, kB the 
Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. 
For energy levels separated by photon energies in the UV-VIS-NIR range (Eex – Eg > 4000 
cm−1), the population of the electronic excited states is very limited (e.g. still < 1% at 1250 K), 
but for close lying electronic states the relative populations can be drastically adjusted with 
large changes in the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectrum. A recent example is the in situ 
variable-temperature measurement of S=0 to S=2 spin crossover in pseudo-tetrahedral 
[BP3]FeII-X complexes from 188 K to 373 K (Figure 5).44 Additionally, smaller separations are 
achieved by splitting (near) degenerate electronic states energy levels according to their spin 
and orbital angular momenta by applying an external magnetic field. The relative population 
of these levels depends on the strength of the applied field and temperature. Such experiments 
are called ‘variable temperature variable field’ (VTVH) spectroscopy, and are applied in 
various spectroscopies (Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), Mössbauer, X-ray absorption 
spectroscopy (XAS), …). Applying an external magnetic field is particularly interesting in UV-
VIS-NIR range circular dichroism measurements, resulting in magnetic circular dichroism 
(MCD). 
 

14 
 
 
Figure 5. Variable temperature UV-VIS-NIR absorption of [PhBPPh3]Fe(NPPh3) showing its temperature 
dependent transition from a low spin state to a high spin state. Adapted from ref. 44 Copyright 2016 American 
chemical society. 
MCD observes the differential absorption of left and right circularly polarized light by a sample 
in a large magnetic field parallel to the propagation direction of the circularly polarized light. 
There are three different intensity mechanisms (A-term, B-term and C-term), but the richest 
information is gained from bands with C-term intensity. Its analysis has been particularly useful 
to probe the coordination geometry of non-heme iron catalysts, and examples of this are found 
for Fe-zeolites, homogeneous catalysts, and enzymes in sections 3.1.2., 3.2.1.2 and 3.3.3. C-
term intensity originates from degenerate ground states that are Zeeman split in a magnetic 
field. At low temperatures, this splitting results in a different Boltzmann population of the spin 
sublevels. From the selection rules (LCP: ΔL = +1; RCP: ΔL = –1), different sublevels absorb 
light selectively depending on the circular polarization. The difference in absorption of left vs 
right circular polarized light is detected in MCD using modulation methods to enhance signal 
to noise (Figure 6).18 
 
Figure 6. Magnetic circular dichroism C-term intensity with increasing field at low temperature. Absorption of 
left circularly polarized (lcp) light (green), absorption of right circularly polarized (rcp) light (purple), and the 
differential absorption (solid black) due to the differences in Boltzmann population of the m = +1 and m = –1 
levels as the Zeeman splitting increases towards the right. 
The selection rule for C-term intensity requires two perpendicular electric dipole transition 
moments. Low symmetry metal sites, like those in metalloenzymes, have nondegenerate 
electronic states, thus electronic transition dipoles to an excited state are in one direction. Thus, 
to have the two perpendicular transition dipole moments in one transition, there must be spin 
orbit coupling (SOC) between states. Metal atoms have much larger SOC constants compared 
to the atoms on the ligands. Thus, the greater the metal character of a transition, the greater the 
SOC, and the greater the MCD C-term intensity relative to absorption intensity (referred to as 
a C0/D0 ratio, see also Figure 50 for an example). This is important in observing and assigning 
bands. Ligand field transitions have large C0/D0 ratios due to the transitions being largely 
localized on the metal center. This allows these bands to be observed in MCD at low 
temperature. LMCT transitions have small C0/D0 ratios due to the transition being more 
centered on ligands, with smaller SOC constants. VTVH-MCD experiments on C-terms are 
typically conducted over a domain of 0 - 7 T and 2 - 50 K. Saturation magnetization isotherms 
and isofields are derived for individual absorption bands that give information on the spin state, 
zero-field splitting, and magnetization of both the ground and excited state (see also Figure 51 
for an example). MCD on C-terms is thus always measured at cryogenic temperatures and is 

15 
 
 
not useful for operando spectroscopy in catalysis. A- and B-terms on the other hand are 
accessible at room temperature, but they lack the rich information content of C-terms.19, 45 
In conventional UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy the shifts obtained in practically 
feasible magnetic fields are small and difficult to resolve, so VTVH perturbations are not used. 
In situ cells are, however, used to measure spectra in controlled atmospheres and temperatures. 
The example of spin crossover of Fe complexes was already given.44 Different roto-vibrational 
levels are also easily populated at achievable temperatures, vibronic coupling can be resolved 
at cryogenic measurements, and different coordination numbers, adsorption modes, other 
equilibrium distributions, and geometric isomers may be obtained depending on the 
atmosphere composition, pressure, and temperature. Recent examples are the cryogenic 
observation of vibronic coupling on RuII complexes of tridentate bisphosphino-
oligothiopentene (Figure 7), and cycloreversion of dithienylethene compounds.44, 46-49 These 
types of variable-temperature measurements are currently mostly limited to homogeneous 
complexes and enzymes. Cryogenic measurements in diffuse reflectance mode (vide infra) are 
scarce, but it has been successfully applied to study thermochromism in Salicylideneanilines.47 
In general the application of both VTVH-MCD and VT UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy 
to extract information on electronic structure and adsorption behavior remains scarce on 
heterogeneous catalysts, despite its potential. 
 
Figure 7. UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of the RuII(DMSO)4Cl2 complex recorded at 293 K and 85 K. The low 
temperature spectrum resolves the vibronic coupling in the 390 nm absorption band. Adapted from ref. 48. 
Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2.2.2 Time dependent measurements 
While the measurement of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra on systems in equilibrium or steady 
state can contain features of reaction intermediates, more mechanistic insight can be derived 
from time-dependent spectroscopic tracking. Several types of experiments have been 
developed to enable the tracking of different types of processes with absorption spectroscopy. 
Both UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy and circular dichroism are used as the analytical 
methods, although the former is much more common, especially in catalysis. Some examples 
of CD used in stopped-flow and ultrafast transient-response experiments exist in literature, and 
a very limited number of time-resolved MCD spectroscopy can be found, both applied mostly 
to protein analysis.50-57 
Depending on the rate of the process under investigation, different methods are employed. To 
track slow transformations, simple spectroscopic tracking of an ongoing reagent limited 
reaction is sufficient, e.g. with a setup as shown in Figure 4. From the temperature and 
concentration or pressure dependence of the transformations kinetic information can be 

16 
 
 
obtained. Arrhenius plots can be constructed to derive activation energies, Eyring plots for 
transition state (TS) entropy and enthalpy, and concentration dependence plots for reaction 
orders. Some examples in section 3 are the tracking of methane oxidation to methanol with Cu-
zeolites, N2O reduction with Fe zeolites, and coking on solid acids. 
For reactions in liquid phase with millisecond-range kinetics, and to observe short-lived 
intermediates, a stopped-flow setup can be used (e.g. Figure 35). This is especially popular in 
the study of enzymatic catalytic cycles. Often these progress through a series of multiple key 
intermediates which would not be observed under steady state conditions where only the rate 
determining step is revealed. Stopped-flow experiments can be designed so that only a single 
turnover is performed and the formation and decay of intermediates can be observed and 
measured (example in Figure 8).58 Separate solutions of catalyst and substrate are rapidly 
driven into a mixing chamber, and UV-VIS absorption spectra are rapidly collected with an 
array detector.59, 60 Measuring the decay of an intermediate at various temperatures allows 
derivation of an Eyring plot to extract out the enthalpic and entropic contributions to reactivity. 
Additionally, by isotopically labeling substrates, the appearance of (or lack of) kinetic isotope 
effects provides insight in the reaction mechanism. 
 
Figure 8. (A) Stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption spectra of FeII-tryptophan hydroxylase with O2. From 0 - 175 ms 
(top) and 0.175 - 2 s (bottom). (B) Speciation curve for formation and decay of intermediates. Adapted from ref. 
58. Copyright 2021 National Academy of Sciences. 
For still faster reactions, where the system reaches equilibrium too quickly for the measurement 
of enough absorption spectra, the equilibrium can be disturbed in various ways (Table 3 and 
Figure 9, bottom) after which the response can be tracked spectroscopically. The fastest 
response technique, achieving femtosecond resolutions, is transient absorption spectroscopy 
(TAS) tracking the relaxation of electronic excited states after ultrafast laser pulses for 
photocatalyst characterization (Figure 9 top and middle).39, 61, 62 Another class is modulation 
excitation spectroscopy (MES) producing periodic disturbances that can be of various types, 
and chemical composition perturbation methods such as transient analysis of products (TAP) 
and steady state isotope transient kinetic analysis (SSITKA), using for example a setup as show 
at the bottom of Figure 9.63-65 These techniques can detect and temporarily concentrate short 
lived intermediates, map reaction networks, quantify adsorbed species, and access kinetic 
parameters. While they are combined most commonly with in situ infrared (IR), Raman, XAS 
and X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectroscopies, they can be particularly helpful tools in 

17 
 
 
understanding complex UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra as well, especially for heterogeneous 
catalysts. They were recently reviewed in separate chapters in a book edited by Wachs and 
Bañares.66 
Table 3. Overview of techniques that enable tracking the response to equilibrium disturbances  
Transient / step response techniques 
Methodology  
Transient absorption spectroscopy 
Pump-probe technique  
Modulation Excitation Spectroscopy 
Periodic 
application 
of 
stimulus 
(e.g. 
reactant 
concentration, temperature, pH, light flux, and electric 
field.)  
Transient analysis of products 
Introduction of short pulse reactant with low 
concentration  
Steady state isotope transient kinetic analysis 
An abrupt switch to the corresponding isotopically 
labelled feed stream with identical flow and pressure 
under steady state 
After re-stabilization, the disturbance can be repeated to collect more data and reduce further 
the signal-to-noise through step-scan measurements. The time scales depend strongly on the 
setup and on the system under study. Kinetic models are needed to analyze the transient 
response in the reaction. The analysis of the absorption spectra time series can be aided by 
statistical methods including regression models and data reduction tools such as factor analysis, 
principal components analysis (PCA), non-negative matrix factorization (NNMF) and 
multivariate curve resolution (MCR).67 
For further analysis with different ex-situ techniques, or to enable longer measurement times, 
rapid freeze quenching techniques, or less involved quench procedures depending on the 
sample stability, can be used to trap intermediate samples from any of the methods described 
above.68
 

18 
 
 
Figure 9. Timescales of some different processes related to in-situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy, and 
specialized techniques used to access these time scales. Fs-TA = femtosecond transient absorption, OPA = optical 
parametric amplifier, BBO = beta barium borate, CCD = charge-coupled device, ns-TA = nanosecond transient 
absorption, YAG = Yttrium Aluminum Garnet, PMT = photomultiplier module, MFC = mass flow controller, 
4WV = four-way valve, MS = mass spectrometer, GC = gas chromatographer. Adapter from refs. 61, 63. Copyrights 
2023 and 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2.3 Processing of spectroscopic data 
The primary data obtained from an absorption experiment gives the ratio of detected light 
intensity vs incident light intensity versus photon energy, usually relative to a reference. It is 
commonly preferred to transform the measure of absorption into a form that correlates linearly 
with the concentration of the analyte. For transmission mode absorption spectroscopy the Beer-
Lambert law is used, and the absorption is quantitatively measured by ‘absorbance’ (A). For 
diffuse reflection mode the Kubelka-Munk (K-M) formula is most popular yielding a 
quantitative measure in ‘Kubelka-Munk units’. Further processing usually involves 
deconvolution of the individual absorption bands from the spectrum. Popular band shapes were 
already mentioned in section 2.1. For quantitatively correct deconvolution one should naturally 
first apply the Beer-Lambert or Kubelka-Munk transformation to the full spectrum and then 
extract the individual absorption bands. Quantitative tracking through time or with changing 
conditions then allows to derive information on kinetics and thermodynamics. Arrhenius, 
Eyring, and isotherm plots are easily derived provided a reliable quantitative deconvolution 
can be obtained.  
Apart from the measurement and tracking of concentrations, other forms of processing can be 
used to access different properties. Commonly derived from UV-VIS-NIR absorption are band 
gap energies through Tauc plots, reaction stoichiometries through Job plots, and equilibrium 
constants and stoichiometries of reversible complexation with the Benesi-Hildebrand method. 
In this section we further discuss only the two basic processing functions (Beer-Lambert and 
Kubelka-Munk) to obtain quantitative data in in situ spectroscopy, and Tauc/Cody plots for 
their intrinsic association to UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy. 
2.2.3.1 The Lambert-Beer and Kubelka-Munk functions 
Several metrics can be used to quantify experimental absorption, absorbance being the most 
popular. For transmission measurements on a uniform sample, the Beer-Lambert law, eq 5, 
describes the decay of light intensity (of a particular photon energy) as it passes through an 
absorbing translucent sample: 
 
𝐴= log⁡(
𝐼0
𝐼) = 𝜖𝑙𝑐 
(5) 
With absorbance A, incident light intensity I0, I the remaining intensity at pathlength l, c the 
concentration (or volumetric density) of the absorbing species, and 𝜖 the absorption coefficient 
at the particular photon energy. Often A10 is used as notation instead of A to specify the use of 
log10. For mixed samples, a weighted sum of absorption coefficients should be used. For non-
uniform samples corrections should be used due to the exponential (non-linear) decay of I0/I in 
A. 
With an analogy to transmission in transmission spectroscopy, the diffusively reflected light 
intensity (the absolute remittance) of an infinitely thick sample 𝑅∞ is defined by eq 6. 
 
𝑅∞=
𝐽
𝐼0 
(6) 

19 
 
 
where 𝐽 is the intensity of the reflected radiation and 𝐼0 is the intensity of the incident beam. 
Infinite thickness means that none of the impinging light penetrates through to the bottom of 
the sample and transmits. 
In a classical spectrophotometer an integration sphere with a (near) fully reflecting (‘white’) 
inner surface in the UV-VIS-NIR region is installed in the sample compartment. Popular 
materials are Halon polymeric materials, barium sulphate, or potassium bromide. This sphere 
contains a sample port and a reference port. The reference measurement is usually performed 
with a fully reflecting standard material at the sample and reference ports. The diffuse 
reflectance of the sample at the sample port is then measured against the diffuse reflectance of 
the standard by eq 7. 
 
𝑅∞
′ =
𝑅𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
𝑅𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑑 
(7) 
Where 𝑅𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑑⁡and 𝑅𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 are the light intensity diffusively reflected from an ideally white 
standard and from the sample respectively. Slight differences between 𝑅∞ and 𝑅∞
′  occur if 
𝑅𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑑 is smaller than 1. 
In analogy to transmittance and absorbance in transmission spectroscopy, a relation between 
absorbance and 𝑅∞
′  can be defined by eq 8. 
 
100⁡ × 𝑅∞
′ = %𝑇 
 
log⁡
1
𝑅∞
′ = 𝐴 
(8) 
where T is transmittance and A is ‘pseudo-absorbance’. Proceeding from here we will make no 
further distinction between 𝑅∞ and 𝑅∞
′ . 
In transmission mode the pathlength is simply the linear path through the sample followed by 
the beam and, for uniform samples, the linear Lambert-Beer law can be used. In DRS the 
pathlength is affected by the scattering events and by the absorbance itself (vide supra, Figure 
3 A). The scattering probability increases with 1/𝜆𝑛, where n is around 1 for particles of the 
size in the range of the wavelength. In addition, with higher absorbance, the observed diffuse 
reflected photons are more likely to have spent less time in the surface layer, and the average 
pathlength is decreased. To obtain specific absorption coefficients, it is required to solve a 
complex non-linear problem that depends on material properties. Several approaches have been 
suggested to give an acceptable representation of the phenomenon.29, 69 These models make 
assumptions on how the photons scatter and on certain properties of the rough surface, and they 
enable a mathematical transformation of the diffuse reflectance into a measure that varies 
linearly with absorbent’s concentration (analogues to Lambert-Beer). Different models may be 
better suited to different types of materials. In heterogeneous catalysis, the Kubelka-Munk 
formula (eq 9) is most used, based on the assumptions listed in Box 1. 
 
F(𝑅∞) =
(1−𝑅∞)2
2𝑅∞ 
(9) 
The full derivation of eq 9 can be found in Kortüm’s book and in more recent papers.7, 69-71 
1. Infinite thickness of the sample 
2. Infinite extension of the catalyst bed in the x-y directions 
3. Diffuse monochromatic incident light 
4. Uniform distribution and small concentration of absorption centers 
5. Absence of stray light 
6. Absence of fluorescence and specular reflection 

20 
 
 
7. Constant scattering coefficient over the absorption band 
8. Isotropic light scattering 
Box 1. The assumptions in the Kubelka-Munk derivations. In orange the least acceptable assumptions in in situ 
DRS measurements on catalysis using a state-of-the-art setup. 
 
Note that it will already be difficult to fulfill these assumptions in the sample setup shown in 
Figure 3 B and a different treatment will be needed. Also for other scenarios, for example 
measurements on thin absorbing films on coarse reflective surfaces, other methods should be 
used.72, 73 For the application of UV-VIS-NIR DRS to heterogeneous catalysis, a few of the 
assumptions in Box 1 should be given special attention: 
At the surface of a powder sample, a small fraction of light is reflected under the same angle 
as that of the incoming light beam without absorption. This is called specular reflection. In 
practice, this fraction is often negligibly small and it can also be adjusted for by modifying the 
spectroscopic setup. Deviations occur for strongly absorbing materials, i.e. large values of the 
K-M function. In these cases, the amount of diffusively reflected light is low and the specular 
reflection part is not negligible. Scattering increases with decreasing wavelength and with 
decreasing particle size of the catalyst. It is almost constant in the NIR and VIS range and 
increases continuously in the UV. Absorption bands in the UV region are thus superposed on 
the increasing scattering background. Both the position of the band maximum and the intensity 
are influenced, making it very difficult to quantify the absorption bands in the UV region 
accurately. In the NIR and VIS, with almost constant scattering coefficient 𝑆, the K-M function 
can be written as eq 10. 
 
F(𝑅∞) =
𝐾
𝑆=
𝜖⁡𝐶
𝑆  
(10) 
with C the concentration of absorbing species, S the K-M scattering constant, and K the K-M 
absorption coefficient. The K-M function for powders can then be considered an analogue of 
the Lambert-Beer law for solutions. Still, it requires a constant scattering coefficient over the 
width of the absorption band. 
The K-M theory has been critically evaluated by multiple authors, and several alternatives or 
extensions have been proposed.29, 69 No alternatives have however been developed that are 
generally superior without significantly sacrificing on simplicity. 
2.2.3.2 Band gap energies 
The optical band gap energy (𝐸𝑔) of a semiconductor is the minimum energy required to absorb 
a photon transferring a valence band (VB) electron to the conduction band (CB). It is an 
important parameter for photocatalysis, photovoltaics and photodetection, and an often 
measured property on heterogeneous catalysts holding structural information. A technique for 
obtaining 𝐸𝑔 for an amorphous semiconductor from the absorption spectrum was originally 
proposed by Tauc and Vancu in 1966.74 Their technique is now widely used, although not 
always in a rigorous manner. Here we review the theory and common errors in its usage applied 
to catalyst characterization. 
Tauc et al. demonstrated that the energy-dependent absorption coefficient α can be expressed 
by eq 11.: 
 
(α ∙ℎ𝑣)1/2 = 𝐵(ℎ𝑣−𝐸𝑔 ) 
(11) 
with ℎ Planck’s constant, 𝑣 photon frequency, and B the band tailing parameter, generally 
taken to be 1 for amorphous materials. For diffuse reflectance measurements, α can be replaced 

21 
 
 
by the K-M function (equation 10). For transmission and reflectance (T&R) measurements on 
thin film semiconductors α is derived using the Beer-Lambert law (equation 5). 𝐸𝑔⁡estimated 
from (equation 11) is only reliable for sufficient absorption, and could be inaccurate with 
optically thin films. The multiple-reflection interference model has been proposed as an 
alternative to determine the absorption coefficient from T&R spectra of thin films.75, 76  
For crystalline semiconductors the ½ exponent is replaced by 𝛾−1 , accounting for the 
expression for the transition rate depending on the nature of the electronic transition. 𝛾 is equal 
to 1/2, 3/2, 2 or 3 for the direct allowed, direct forbidden, indirect allowed and indirect 
forbidden transition band gaps respectively. The mathematical derivation of these values can 
be found in the handbook by M. Cardona and P. Yu, among others.77 A tangent line in the 
linear region of a Tauc plot, with (α ∙ℎ𝑣)1/𝛾 plotted versus ℎ𝑣, is extrapolated to the ℎ𝑣 axis 
and the zero-intercept gives 𝐸𝑔. 
The obtained optical bandgap is, however, very sensitive to the quality and handling of the 
spectroscopic data, and to the choice of 𝛾. This leads to diverging bandgap values reported in 
literature for the same materials. Firstly, as the method depends on an extrapolation making 
use of a wide energy domain of the spectrum, extra care is needed to guard the assumptions 
behind deriving α, for example using the Beer-Lambert or Kubelka-Munk relations. Photon 
energy dependent scattering may stand in the way of correct linearization, and absolute 
deviations from α may affect the slope of the tangent line. Secondly, a proper baseline must be 
used. In a defect-free crystalline semiconductor the absorption spectrum abruptly terminates at 
the energy gap, but for defected, doped, bulk or surface modified materials and amorphous 
semiconductors inter-band gap states give so-called ‘Urbach tails’ in the absorption 
spectrum.78-80 Heterogeneous catalysts typically belong to these last categories. 
Depending on the exponential tail region different approaches are appropriate. When unrelated 
absorption bands are present in the tail region (e.g. interbands, sub-bands, or absorption by 
intermixed species), extra care should be taken. An example is given by Makula et al.78 Tauc 
plots of pure TiO2 are compared to those with methyl orange added (MO + TiO2) in different 
amounts (indicated with a, b and c) (Figure 10 A). The changes in the measured Eg are 
substantial. It is necessary to subtract the contribution of MO from the spectrum (Figure 10 B). 
Since it can be challenging to deconvolute the K-M spectrum into spectra of individual 
components, alternatively, a linear fit is applied for the slope below the investigated absorption 
(baseline fitting) to estimate the 𝐸𝑔 (Figure 10 C). Both methods allow decent fitting of the 
TiO2 optical bandgap (Figure 10 D). 

22 
 
 
 
Figure 10. (A) Tauc plots of pure TiO2, MO and MO + TiO2 samples with different MO addition (a, b, c), 
including the Tauc lines. (B) Tauc plots after subtraction of the MO contribution from the spectrum. C) Tauc plot 
of MO + TiO2 with baseline fitting. (D) Table with the optical band gaps obtained from the methods in the plots 
of panels A-C. Adapted from ref. 78 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
With mixed phases, multiple bandgaps of intermixed semiconductor phases may be present. 
Alternatively a single semiconductor material may boast both an indirect bandgap energy and 
a direct bandgap energy, and the different values of 𝛾−1 should be evaluated. Finally, one 
should avoid vertically correcting the absorption spectrum based on a false assumption of 
incomplete light collection.81 
When this is all done correctly, there can still be a significant method-dependence in drawing 
the tangent line. An automated approach is therefore advised, for example as developed by 
Schwarting et al.82 Note that also when using an algorithmic bandgap derivation, the outcome 
should be evaluated equally critically. 
Alternative methods were proposed to deal with the limitations of Tauc plots. Some are of the 
same type as the Tauc method, but are based on slightly different assumptions.83 These include 
the Cody method (eq 12), which generally yields better linearity and therefore a less ambiguous 
fit,84 and the Sokolov or Mott-Davis modifications of the Tauc method.85 
 
(α/ℎ𝑣)1/γ = 𝐵(ℎ𝑣−𝐸𝑔) 
(12) 
In still other methods simply the inflection point is taken as the direct optical band gap, or a 
certain cut-off value of the absorption coefficient is chosen. Zanetta et al. propose the fitting 
of a sigmoidal curve onto the pure semiconductor edge to derive both the direct and indirect 
optical bandgaps (Figure 11).86 One may ask the question what the definition of an optical 
bandgap should be, and which methods yield the most correct result in agreement with this 
definition. For now, it is mostly advised to be clear in the methodology of obtaining the reported 
optical bandgaps. 
 

23 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Absorption spectra and Boltzmann sigmoidal curve fitting with indication of the derived direct and 
indirect optical bandgap energies for crystalline Germanium. Adapted from ref. 86. Copyright 2019 Springer 
Nature. 
2.3 Coupling to complementary techniques 
The measurement of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra enables fast, cheap, and non-destructive 
measurement of experimental parameters related to the electronic structure of the species under 
investigation, and to kinetic properties. The technique is also flexible in measurement 
temperature and pressure. However, it is almost never sufficient to derive a full characterization. 
A few challenges are relevant. The computational simulation of absorption spectra is not very 
accurate (errors of 2000 cm−1 are not uncommon, even with complete active space perturbation 
theory 2 (CASPT2)).87, 88 The electronic structure parameters give only indirect information on 
the geometry, and especially on the elemental composition. In many applications, the 
absorption spectrum is poorly resolved and is a superposition of several unrelated spectra of 
coexisting species. Therefore, the link between a model structure and its simulated spectrum 
on the one hand and the actual structure and its experimental spectrum is ambiguous. Moreover, 
UV-VIS-NIR range spectroscopies may encounter more difficulties than other spectroscopies 
in measuring across phases (e.g. through bubbles in electrocatalysis) and on strongly absorbing 
support materials (e.g. graphene), and it is surface specific. For certain applications, 
interference by fluorescence and phosphorescence may be an issue. Especially in the UV range, 
irradiation damage can still occur giving erroneous results, especially for organic materials. 
For these reasons UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is rarely used as a standalone 
characterization technique. As will repeatedly be demonstrated in section 3, and summarized 
in Table 1, multiple spectroscopies and other analytical techniques are usually combined. These 
can provide complementary information on elemental composition, atomic vibrations, 
oxidation states, stability, electronic properties, geometry, reactivity and catalysis, … . Some 
commonly used complementary techniques are listed in Table 4. Some complementary 
techniques can easily be implemented simultaneously under the same conditions (‘in situ’). For 

24 
 
 
some combinations specific cells or setups (e.g. stopped flow) may be required to achieve good 
in situ overlap, for others still sample isolation is needed. For example, through a rapid freeze 
quench (RFQ) where the reactants are first rapidly mixed and then frozen in a medium (e.g. 
isopentane) after an optimized mixing time that maximizes the concentration of an intermediate 
as determined through stopped-flow kinetic measurements.68 Alternatively, closed sampling 
systems can be used. 
Examples of in situ cells include those used for UV-VIS-NIR absorption in combination with 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), EPR, various synchrotron measurements, ….4-6, 39, 89-92 
Also in this category are operando measurements of catalysis, spectrophotometric titration, 
temperature programmed desorption, -oxidation and -reduction, and kinetics. Alternatively the 
complementary measurements can be ‘ex situ’, after isolating a sample. Some examples using 
a quench procedure are found in section 3.3.1. For some analytical techniques popular in 
catalysis research, UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is an excellent partner. Three 
examples stand out. 1) The ‘in situ’ monitoring of radiative damage in X-ray experiments,93, 94 
2) providing a fast response operando spectroscopy dimension to kinetic measurements with 
online MS or GC analysis (e.g. TAP, SSITKA, step response),95-98 and 3) selectively probing 
specific absorption features which we elaborate on further. 
Table 4. Characterization techniques used simultaneously with in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy. 
Complementary technique 
Derived information 
DRIFTS 
Bond vibration energies, change in dipole moment selective 
Raman 
Bond vibration energies, change in polarizability selective 
NMR 
Element specific atomic chemical environment 
EPR 
Electron spin and its interactions 
EXAFS 
Element specific, sample averaged local structure 
XANES 
Element specific, sample averaged oxidation state & coordination 
XPS 
Electron binding energies 
XRD 
Crystallographic structure 
GC 
Product characterisation and quantification 
MS 
Product characterisation and quantification 
Voltammetry 
Electrochemical properties 
The complementary information derived from the coupled techniques enables site-selective 
spectroscopy, where the spectroscopic data are unambiguously linked to the same UV-VIS-
NIR absorption band. Most notably is the combined use of absorption, MCD and resonance 
Raman (rR), originally popular in the study of metalloenzymes, but by now also applied to 
TMI zeolites and other catalysts. The features typically analyzed in Raman are those where the 
scattered light is redshifted from the incident radiation by the energy of a vibrational mode 
(referred to as Stokes scattering). The selection rules for Raman are based on the change in the 
polarizability of the molecule upon distortion in the vibrational mode, providing a method to 
view vibrations complementary to those observed through infrared spectroscopy.99 Raman 
spectroscopy often involves weak transitions that are difficult to observe in dilute mixtures. 
Resonance Raman spectroscopy solves this issue. Whereas normal Raman scattering involves 
using a laser at a non-absorbing wavelength, rR specifically tunes a laser into an intense 
absorption feature, generally a LMCT transition. In the charge transfer (CT) excited state, the 
molecule distorts along ligand-metal bonds, selectively enhancing the vibrations associated 
with this excited state distortion. This resonance Raman effect greatly enhances the intensity 
of these totally symmetric vibrational modes. In the case of metalloenzymes, this allows 
vibrational modes of an active site buried in a dilute protein to be clearly observed. Additionally, 
it associates these vibrations with a particular charge transfer band (and its associated 
intermediate in a mixture) as the intensity is only enhanced when the laser is tuned into the 
absorption band. Based on the types of vibrations enhanced, this can also provide additional 

25 
 
 
information on the nature of the charge transfer band as the enhanced vibrations indicate how 
the molecule is distorted in the excited state.99 Examples for the identification of catalytic active 
sites and intermediated are given for Cu and Fe zeolites in section 3.1.2. and for oxy-
hemocyanin in section 3.3.2. 
3. Research in catalysis with in situ UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy 
3.1 Heterogeneous thermal catalysis 
In situ UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy has been applied to metal (oxide) clusters and TMIs 
dispersed on zeolites, and other high-surface-area metal oxides, which show remarkable 
catalytic performance in a range of reactions. Studies concerning TMI zeolites are particularly 
relevant as they can host well defined TMI complexes. Regarding other metal oxides, research 
has focused on the tracking of surface properties of the catalyst, including oxidation state(s), 
defects and oxygen vacancies relevant to redox catalytic processes. This section highlights the 
in situ UV-VIS-NIR based research in the field of TMI-based heterogeneous catalysis and 
further presents the most recent works on supported metal oxide catalysts. Due to their partially 
filled d-shell and multiple oxidation and spin states, TMIs are relevant to the catalysis of 
oxidation-reduction reactions.100-102 Most of these reactions are carried out in the liquid or in 
the gas phase. In these applications, the use of solid catalysts is beneficial as separation of the 
catalyst and reaction mixture is facilitated. As such, supported transition metal catalysts show 
promise as they combine the superior redox capabilities of TMIs with the practical advantages 
of using a stable, solid support.100, 103, 104 The section also covers the measurement of 
chromophoric organic products from zeolite based acid catalysis. Recent research on methanol 
to hydrocarbons is shown. 
3.1.1 Tracking metal and metal oxide bulk and surface properties 
Metals and metal oxides supported on non-microporous oxides are widely used commercial 
catalysts. They are preferred for their easily scaled up synthesis, simple structure, stability, and 
good thermal and mass transport properties. Their versatile elemental composition provides the 
freedom to substitute elements (doping) and many oxides exist in amorphous form as well as 
in different crystal phases with diverging properties.105, 106 Besides functioning as structural 
supports, the oxides also influence catalysis through induced electronegativity and 
polarizability or by offering storage for surface intermediates.107 In many cases, the oxides play 
an active role in catalysis through oxygen vacancies, surface functional groups, surface defects 
or electron-hole pairs, and these can be tracked with UV-VIS-NIR range spectroscopies. The 
active oxides may in turn be supported on porous materials or on other oxides. They may be 
the only catalytically active phase or they may be a contributing phase to a bi- or 
multifunctional catalyst.108  
3.1.1.1 Supported noble metal nanoparticles 
Nanometer scale metal particles (NPs) boast increased surface-to-volume ratio, and electronic 
and geometric structures that differ from the bulk.109, 110 This unlocks their remarkable catalytic 
properties, particularly when dispersed on a support. The support can play a direct role in the 
catalytic performance or an indirect one. It may influence the size and morphology of the metal 
NPs, enable charge transfer from or to the metal, provide metal-support interactions, or 
stabilize the active metal species.111, 112 The catalytic performance of these materials therefore 
depends on numerous aspects which can be difficult to unravel and control. Several of these 
properties have been tracked with UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy. 

26 
 
 
Surface plasmon measurements on noble metal nanoparticles 
Noble metals exhibit localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), a unique optical feature in 
the UV-VIS-NIR range from the oscillation of electrons in the conduction band of metal NPs 
with an electromagnetic field.113 The LSPR spectrum holds information on the size and shape 
of the metal NPs, as well as on the refractive index (RI) of the surrounding media.114, 115 These 
are relevant properties to catalysis, and a handful of articles have tracked LSPR bands in this 
context, mainly focused on gold-based catalysts. 
Au-based catalysts catalyze a variety of oxidation and hydrogenation reactions, such as CO 
oxidation,116-118 the water-gas shift (WGS), the reverse water-gas shift (RWGS),119-121 and the 
hydrogenation of CO and CO2 to methanol.122, 123 Understanding the interaction of Au 
supported catalysts with O2 and H2 is of interest to identify key intermediates and conversions. 
Srinivasan et al. studied the adsorption of oxygen and hydrogen at 398 K by in situ UV-VIS 
DRS in a series of Au catalysts supported on SiO2, Al2O3, ZrO2, ZnO and TiO2 P-25.98 The Au 
plasmon peak position was analyzed as a function of the exposure time for 5 hours. Before 
exposure to an oxidative or reductive atmosphere, a broad Au plasmon centered at ~570 nm 
was measured. After exposure to O2, the peak slightly redshifted in all cases, whereas the 
subsequent exposure to H2 caused a blueshift. The blueshift indicates an increase in the 
conduction band electron density due to charge transfer from H2 to the Au NPs. Interestingly, 
the largest Au plasmon energy shifts occurred for catalysts supported on reducible oxides 
(Au/ZnO (Δλ= 11 nm) and Au/TiO2 (Δλ= 9 nm)) (Figure 12). Although TiO2 is more rapidly 
reduced by H2 than ZnO, the higher Δλ on the ZnO-supported catalyst indicates a smaller Au 
particle size on ZnO than on TiO2. This demonstrated that the adsorption capacity is a function 
of both the reducibility of the support and the Au surface sites density. 
 
Figure 12. Au plasmon position changes as determined from in situ UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy after 
exposure to alternating H2 and O2 flows at 398 K. Reproduced from 98. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
In the most accepted hypotheses, adsorption and catalysis occur at the gold-support interface.124, 
125 To evaluate the nature of the active sites in the Au-based catalysts, the authors analyzed the 
relative change of electron density (ΔN/N) in Au NPs during O2-H2 switching with in situ UV-
VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy. After flushing with He, O2 and H2 were found to adsorb 
only weakly on undercoordinated (coordination number = 6,7) top sites, indicating that the 
majority of O2 or H2 species should adsorb at the Au-support interface. For further 
characterization of the adsorbed species, UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is less 

27 
 
 
informative and complementary in situ and operando IR or Raman spectroscopies are usually 
used. In this sense, Wang et al. combined transient in situ diffuse reflectance infrared fourier 
transform spectroscopy (DRIFTS) and UV-VIS-NIR reflectance spectroscopy to monitor the 
changes induced by the CO oxidation reactants (CO and O2) in the Au NPs structure of an 
Au/TiO2 catalyst.126 FTIR results showed a sudden intensity increase of the CO vibrational 
band together with an intensity decrease of the CO2 band and a redshift of the CO band. The 
increase of the adsorbed CO band was not related to an increase of the CO2 formation rate, 
indicating that during this unstable state the O2 coverage was decreased probably due to 
structural changes on the Au/TiO2 surface, which were tracked by in situ UV-VIS-NIR 
reflectance spectroscopy. UV-VIS-NIR absorption analysis of the Au/TiO2 LSPR at ~600 nm 
(Figure 13 B) showed that exposure to the CO + O2 mixture immediately affected the LSPR, 
pointing at a change in the Au electronic properties. 
 
Figure 13. (A) Integrated UV reflectance in the 750-950 nm range as a function of time during CO adsorption, 
O2 adsorption and CO oxidation at 20 and 100 °C. (B) UV-VIS DRS spectra of TiO2 and Au/TiO2. Reproduced 
from 126. Copyright 2022 Springer Nature. 
The LSPR region was not uniformly affected. The 500-600 nm region changed little while in 
the 750-950 nm region reflectance increased, indicating that only a subset of the Au NPs was 
involved (Figure 13 A). In good agreement with the FTIR results, the addition of the CO + O2 
mixture first sharply decreased the 750-950 nm reflection to then grow back. The change in the 
Au NPs structure that leads to the change in LSPR can therefore be related to the deactivation 
period. The separate introduction of CO and O2 demonstrated that the Au structural changes 
were induced by CO adsorption, but also that in the presence of CO, O2 was needed for the 
reconstruction of the Au NPs. It was shown that O2 adsorption on Au/TiO2 is hindered, leading 
to a lower CO oxidation activity before reaching the steady state characterized by an enhanced 
catalytic performance. 
Effect of the catalytic support: transition metal and rare-earth oxides 
Transition metal and rare-earth (lanthanide) oxides have some properties that make them 
interesting support materials for catalysis. TiO2 and CeO2 have been highlighted for their 
inherent redox properties derived from intermixed oxidation states (Ti3+/Ti4+ and Ce3+/Ce4+ 
pairs), responsible for the presence of oxygen defects with catalytic relevance. In situ UV-VIS-
NIR absorption spectroscopy has been a useful tool to study these effects by virtue of its 
sensitivity to different oxidation states.8 
The RWGS reaction (eq 13) is commonly catalysed with oxide supported gold catalysts. Two 
main mechanisms are known: the redox mechanism and the associative mechanism.127, 128 The 

28 
 
 
redox mechanism applies to Au nanoparticles supported on reducible supports, where CO2 
reoxidizes the partially reduced support, leading to the formation of CO. In the associative 
mechanism, CO is formed from the decomposition of formate species derived from the 
interaction of CO2 with H2. Since formate species cannot be decomposed on Au nanoparticles, 
their evolution during reaction is associated with the support material. 
 
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O 
(13) 
Bobadilla et al. investigated the mechanism of the RWGS with Au/Al2O3 and Au/TiO2 
commercial catalysts.129 The catalytic activity of Au/TiO2 is superior to that of Au/Al2O3, and 
based on DRIFTS results the associative mechanism was followed with Au/Al2O3 catalyst 
while the redox mechanism was followed with Au/TiO2. TiO2 in its reduced form (Ti3+) is 
known to contain a high concentration of oxygen vacancies, which act as sites for CO2 
activation. The authors studied the importance of the TiO2 oxygen vacancies through the 
reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+ using in situ UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy during activation with 
H2 and the subsequent RWGS reaction. At room temperature, the spectra of pristine TiO2 
(Figure 14 A) show the TiO2 band gap at ~320 nm. H2 causes the appearance of a broad band 
in the 400-800 nm range, indicative of the reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+. The wide absorption band 
arises from a continuum of electronic energy levels derived from oxygen vacancies. After 
switching to the reaction mixture, the 400-800 nm band decreased in intensity, suggesting the 
participation of the oxygen vacancies in the reaction mechanism. The plasmon of the Au 
nanoparticles partially overlaps with the band gap edge of TiO2 (Figure 14 B), so one should 
be careful with its influence on the band gap estimate. In the difference spectra (Figure 15) a 
positive difference band centered at ~350 nm is observed, and attributed to the formation of 
Ti3+ modifying the bandgap absorption band. The positive difference feature at 400-800 nm 
confirms the involvement of oxygen vacancies.  
 
Figure 14. In situ UV-VIS absorption spectra as a function of the temperature of (A) TiO2 P25 and (B) Au/TiO2 
catalyst during activation under H2 (orange) and RWGS reaction (blue). Reprinted with permission from 129. 
Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 

29 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Au/TiO2 UV-VIS-NIR difference absorption spectra of before and after reaction, for different reaction 
temperatures. Reprinted with permission from 129. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
The RWGS catalytic performance on Au/CeO2 is related to the presence of oxygen vacancies 
and to the particle shape of the support.130 Ceria polyhedra (which terminate with the CeO2 
(111) surface) and polycrystalline ceria (which resembles sheets and contains stepped sites) 
were evaluated as supports by Ziemba et al. using a combination of in situ Raman spectroscopy, 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy, and transient DRIFTS.131 Changes in the degree of 
CeO2 reduction were tracked following the evolution of a VIS absorption band at 550 nm, 
attributed to a charge transfer from Ce3+ to Ce4+.132 At room temperature, the spectra of 
Au/CeO2 catalysts show a ~550 nm absorption band of Au surface plasmons. The CeO2 
polyhedra supported materials give stronger surface plasmon absorption, due to a higher 
concentration of gold metallic species. When the flow is switched from Ar to H2/Ar, an increase 
of the 550 nm absorption is observed for every sample, indicating the reduction of the CeO2 
support. After addition of the reaction mixture (CO2/H2/Ar), the absorption intensity decreases 
due to the re-oxidation of CeO2. These results evidence changes in the oxygen dynamics as a 
function of the gas atmosphere. 
To gain futher insights, the gold-loaded samples were analyzed by in situ UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption spectroscopy under reductive (H2/Ar) and oxidative (CO2/Ar) pretreatments 
followed by the RWGS reaction (CO2/H2/Ar) (Figure 16). Under CO2 atmosphere, a decrease 
of the band intensity is observed, especially in the catalyst supported on polycrystalline CeO2, 
illustrating that this CeO2 morphology is more prone to oxidation than the polyhedral 
counterpart. When the flow is switched to the CO2 and H2 mixture, the 550 nm absorption band 
increases, particularly for the Au/polycrystalline CeO2 sample. The RWGS reaction after a 
reductive pretreatment, however, has little effect on the absorption band. Together, the results 
indicate that the redox mechanism is predominant on bare CeO2 samples, although the 
associative mechanism also participates in the CeO2 polyhedra. The pure redox mechanism in 
polycrystalline CeO2 is related to the higher reducibility of the support. The associative 
mechanism is dominant on Au/CeO2, although the redox mechanism also takes place.  
 

30 
 
 
 
Figure 16. In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of Au/CeO2 samples during H2 pretreatment, CO2 
pretreatment and RWGS reaction. Reproduced from 131. Copyright 2022 Elsevier.  
The same group used time-resolved in situ Raman spectroscopy and UV-VIS DRS to study the 
effect of the pretreatment in the oxygen dynamics of the support in a 0.5 wt.% Au/CeO2 catalyst 
and its influence on the room temperature CO oxidation.133 
The reduction state of the support was elucidated by monitoring of the F2g Raman band and the 
570 nm UV-VIS band, as shown in Figure 17. The reducing pretreatment allows a higher 
degree of CeO2 reduction than the oxidative one. Under reaction conditions a fast re-oxidation 
of the CeO2 surface is detected, but the reducing pretreatment draws out the re-oxidation of the 
CeO2 subsurface. These results show a correlation with the catalytic activity, which is higher 
after the catalyst is subjected to a reducing pretreatment, thus showing a strong influence of the 
subsurface reduction state in the CO oxidation activity.  
 
Figure 17. Catalytic activity (black), time-dependent Raman (blue) and UV-Vis bands (brown) evolution for the 
CeO2 subsurface reduction state in a 0.5 wt% Au/CeO2 catalyst, (A) after two reaction cycles, (B) during CO 
oxidation after reducing pretreatment. Reproduced from ref. 133. 
Spectroscopic results also show that no charge transfer takes place from the support to the Au 
NPs, contrary to what was previously observed for Au/TiO2 catalysts. In the Au/CeO2 catalyst, 

31 
 
 
the electron is proposed to remain in the support (Ce3+), accelerate oxygen activation and not 
hamper CO adsorption on the metal particles.  
3.1.1.2 Transition metal oxide catalysts 
Transition metal oxides (TMO) are catalytically interesting thanks to their partially filled d 
orbitals, which facilitate electron transfer between reactants and active sites.134 This feature is 
complex to investigate due to the multitude of oxidation states and coordination numbers, but 
is well suited for study with UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy.135 Bensalem et al. used in situ UV-
VIS-NIR DRS to study the reduction kinetics of chromium oxide catalysts supported on Al2O3 
and SiO2 in a CO/He mixed atmosphere.136 By combining in situ UV-VIS-NIR DRS, on-line 
GC analysis and experimental design, Weckhuysen et al. correlated the activity of CrOx/Al2O3 
in the dehydrogenation of isobutane with the oxidation state of chromium surface species. The 
combined amount of surface Cr2+ and Cr3+ species, tracked by ‘pure component’ absorption 
fingerprints constructed by PCA, is a good predictor of dehydrogenation activity.137 
Supported VOx catalysts have also been extensively studied due to their promising catalytic 
behavior in partial oxidation, SCR or oxidative dehydrogenation (ODH) reactions. In situ UV-
VIS-NIR DRS has provided information about the reduced states of VOx supported on Al2O3, 
SiO2, ZrO2 or TiO2.138-140 Among them, TiO2 was shown to significantly enhance the catalytic 
properties of VOx.141-143 Godiksen et al. studied the V2O5/TiO2 system for its application in the 
NH3 assisted SCR, using combined transient UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy and in situ 
Raman spectroscopy.144 A 3% V2O5/TiO2 catalyst was first activated at 400 °C under air and 
then exposed to an SCR gas mixture of 500 ppm NH3, 500 ppm NO, and increasing O2 
concentrations in He from 0.8 to 10 vol.% O2.  
Raman spectra after activation shows a vanadyl band at ca. 1030 cm−1, ascribed to the terminal 
V=O bond on anatase. During exposure to NH3 and NO at 400 °C, the vanadyl band undergoes 
a redshift and decreases in intensity. This is probably due to the lower absorption coefficient 
of V4+=O compared to V5+=O, but may also indicate a deeper vanadium reduction to V3+. The 
addition of O2 gives rise to V4+=O and V5+=O species, with an increase of V5+=O species with 
increasing O2 partial pressure. UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra were recorded during the flow 
change from O2 to the NH3 and NO mixture. The difference spectra show a decrease of the 
band at 25 500 cm−1, attributed to CT transitions, as well as the appearance of a band at 15 000 
cm−1 (Figure 18). The latter is ascribed to d-d transitions of octahedral VO2+,145 thus indicating 
a reduction of V5+ to V4+. The UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra were compared to those 
obtained during H2-TPR. Vanadium undergoes a two-electron reduction under H2 yielding V3+, 
whereas under a NH3 + NO mixture, the reduction is a one-electron process yielding V4+. V4+ 
species were proposed to be part of a [VIV=O]2+ unit, detectable in UV-VIS-NIR absorption 
spectroscopy due to its d1 electron configuration. Further confirmation of this oxidations state 
by EPR was not achieved in the study due to paramagnetic interaction at high V loadings. 

32 
 
 
 
Figure 18. In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption difference spectra of a 3% V2O5/TiO2 catalyst during the gas flow 
change from O2 (green) to NO + NH3 (pink). Reproduced from 144. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
Hess and co-workers studied the oxidative dehydrogenation (ODH) of propane over VOx/TiO2 
(P25) catalysts with different vanadium surface densities (2.5, 1.2, 0.5 and 0.1 V/nm2).140 A 
combination of operando UV-Raman, solid state NMR, transient IR and operando UV-VIS 
spectroscopies was used to elucidate the propane ODH reaction mechanism. Bare P25 and 
vanadia-loaded samples were studied by operando UV-VIS spectroscopy under oxidizing and 
reactive conditions to understand the role of reduced vanadia in the reaction mechanism. When 
switching from oxidative to reactive conditions, the band gap slightly red-shifts and an 
absorption band at 520 nm emerges in the UV-VIS spectra of P25 , ascribed to a charge-transfer 
transition due to reduction of Ti4+ to Ti3+, and thus implying the formation of oxygen vacancies. 
This points to the oxidation of propane by the support lattice oxygen, leading to the formation 
of oxygen vacancies. UV-VIS spectra of the vanadia-loaded samples do not show a band gap 
energy shift nor a Ti3+ transfer signal, except for the sample containing 0.1 V/nm2. An intensity 
increase due to vanadium d-d transitions indicates the reduction of V5+ to V3+/V4+. 
Yun et al. used in situ Raman spectroscopy and UV-VIS-NIR DRS to investigate the electronic 
changes to VOx/TiO2 by nitrogen doping.146 They then correlated the electronic structure of the 
vanadium clusters with the activity for selective ethanol to acetaldehyde oxidation. The authors 
derived the average number of vanadium-oxygen-vanadium covalent bonds (CVB) from the 
edge energy (Eg) values collected from the UV-VIS-NIR absorption band through the 
empirically determined eq 14. 
 
CVB = 14.03 – 3.95Eg (eV) 
(14) 
Changes in the onset energy of the edge (Eg’) were used to monitor the formation of reduced 
vanadium centers during the partial oxidation reaction. The UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra 
of the sample supported on pristine TiO2 (Figure 19 A) are dominated by a broad band in the 
1.0-3.5 eV range, ascribed to LMCT transitions of tetrahedral V5+ moieties. The broad and 
weak nature of the absorption in the d-d transition energy range prevents the proper 
identification of individual V4+ components. The redshift of the peak and the appearance of a 
tail are indicative of the presence of vanadium polymeric species.139, 147, 148 

33 
 
 
 
Figure 19. In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of (A) VOx/TiO2 after reduction with ethanol at different 
temperatures for 1 h; (B) VOx/N-TiO2 catalysts with varying nitrogen content, after reduction with ethanol at 
200 °C for 1 h. Inset: UV-VIS-NIR absorption intensity at reduced centers as a function of N/V mol ratio. Adapted 
from 146. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
After reduction with ethanol at temperatures ranging from 100 to 250 °C, Eg’ increases with 
increasing reduction temperature in the N-free samples from 1.5 to 1.8 eV. The values are lower 
than those previously reported for oxide-supported VOx reduced species,138, 149 due to overlap 
of the V4+ and Ti3+ signals. The spectrum of the N-free sample after reduction at 200 °C was 
compared to those obtained for a series of VOx/N-TiO2 samples with different nitrogen contents. 
In the latter, the d-d bands are blue-shifted (Figure 19 B), indicating a larger reduction of 
vanadia and resulting in an increased number of active sites. Raman spectroscopy reveales 
minimal geometrical changes of the vanadia moieties, and the exceptional catalytic 
performance of the N-doped samples was attributed to the enhanced reducibility of VOx species 
in the presence of nitrogen. 
Recently, cubic In2O3 has emerged as efficient catalyst for CO2 activation.150, 151 Ziemba et al. 
used a combination of in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption and impedance spectroscopies to 
elucidate the CO2 activation process, the role of oxygen vacancies, and the participation of the 
adsorbates in the RWGS reaction.152 The VIS absorption band indicative of oxygen defects at 
700 nm was monitored under different gas atmospheres and temperatures, to understand the 
evolution of the oxygen defects (Figure 20 A). When switching between O2 and H2 at 130 °C, 
the spectrum shows an increase of the absorbance with the simultaneous detection of gas phase 
H2O by IR spectroscopy, indicating the reduction of In2O3. Under reaction conditions at the 
same temperature, no CO was detected in the gas phase since CO2 is not activated at such low 
temperature. However, the absorbance continues to increase with exposure to H2 through In2O3 
reduction. At 160 °C In2O3 reduction continues, but still no CO is detected. At 220 °C, the 
RWGS reaction occurs, giving rise to an absorption increase indicative of catalyst reduction. 
The absorbance then decreases over the next 30 minutes. The decrease of the absorption is the 
result of CO2 conversion, leading to re-oxidation of the surface. The maximum absorption is 
observed at 190 °C and decreases with temperature, suggesting that catalyst oxidation by CO2 
increases with the temperature, whereas reduction remains constant since the maximum 
amount of oxygen vacancies was reached. These results suggest CO2 activation and subsequent 
CO formation as the rate-limiting step. The above behaviour is confirmed by UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption experiments at 250 °C, while switching between reactive and reducing conditions 

34 
 
 
(Figure 20 B). A significant increase of the VIS absorption band at 532 nm can be related to 
the temperature increase and/or the oxidation. Subsequent H2 exposure causes an increase of 
both the absorptions at 532 and 700 nm, together with the detection of H2O in the gas phase, 
pointing out the reduction of the (sub)surface and the presence of small metallic indium 
domains. Under CO2 atmosphere, a decrease in absorption at 700 nm occurs indicating the 
reversibility of the reduction process. 
 
Figure 20. (A) In situ and operando VIS 700 nm absorption band evolution and CO2 conversion during O2 and 
H2 exposure at 130 °C followed by RWGS reaction from 130 to 280 °C. (B) Top: In situ and operando UV-VIS-
NIR absorption results for In2O3 under different gas exposures at 250 °C. Bottom: Gas-phase IR analysis during 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption measurements. Reproduced from 152. Copyright 2022 Wiley. 
3.1.2 Identification and tracking of dispersed catalytic molecular clusters 
In the investigation of transition metal complexes the use of UV-VIS-NIR range spectroscopies 
has been indispensable. The examples in the later sections on homogeneous and enzymatic 
catalysis demonstrate their advanced characterization based on absorption, CD and MCD 
spectroscopies coupled to many more complementary spectroscopies. Their susceptibility to 
advanced spectroscopic characterization generally enables detailed understanding of the 
geometry and electronic structure on the molecular level, and consequently of the catalysis. 
Similar examples exist on heterogeneous catalysts where TMI active sites are successfully 
dispersed into well-defined molecular clusters. Particularly on TMI exchanged zeolites the 
advances have been spectacular in the preceding decade. 
Zeolites are porous, crystalline aluminosilicates, built from linked [SiO4] and [AlO4]− 
tetrahedra with every oxygen atom shared between neighboring T-atoms.32, 33 Different zeolite 
topologies are distinguished by their crystal structure and pore system. Every [AlO4]− leads to 
the presence of one negative lattice charge which can be charge compensated by exchangeable, 
extra-framework cations. These can be protons, giving zeolites their well-known acidic 
properties,34 or (transition) metal cations. The zeolite matrix thus serves as a support to the acid 
or metal active sites, usually with a variety of exchange sites offering different coordination 
geometries and catalytic properties. Relevant zeolite topologies and their exchange sites are 

35 
 
 
shown in Figure 21. Six or eight membered ring exchange sites will be referred to again in this 
review and relate to any of the sites in the insert of Figure 21 that have open rings of six or 
eight tetrahedrons. The crystalline support gives rise to well defined active sites that – to some 
degree – can be tuned by varying the zeolite topology and the aluminum distribution in the 
lattice. With these levers, the effect of structural modifications on catalysis can be studied. 
Additionally, atoms outside the first coordination sphere can contribute to reactivity by guiding 
the approach of substrate or tuning the TS. These influences are referred to as ‘second-sphere 
effects’.26, 100, 153 Spectra of TMI-exchanged zeolites tend to be complex superpositions of 
absorption bands from different TMI species, coordinated in the different exchange sites. Their 
interpretation is usually complicated, but less so than those of TMI supported on many other 
materials by virtue of their strong tendency to disperse the supported TMIs. In some cases, the 
TMI species in the zeolite can be kept down to (quasi) single site, and spectroscopy becomes 
more evident. 
 
Figure 21. Framework structures and exchange sites of zeolite topologies mentioned in this review. Colors of the 
exchange sites match their naming in the legend. Adapted from ref. 154. Copyright 2021 Elsevier. 
3.1.2.1 UV-VIS-NIR fingerprinting on Cu and Fe exchanged zeolites 
In situ UV-VIS-NIR studies are especially numerous for copper and iron exchanged zeolites 
with applications in direct oxidation of methane to methanol (MTM),155, 156 deNOx catalysis,157-
159 and oxidation of benzene to phenol.160-162 In these reactions essential steps are the activation 
of N2O and O2 to form reactive surface bound oxygen species that perform challenging 
selective oxidation reactions. The first is the µ-oxo-dicopper(II) site,163-167 the second is the α-
O site (a mononuclear FeIV=O).17, 168-170 The unique spectroscopic handles of µ-oxo-dicopper 
and α-O in zeolites give the opportunity to study reaction kinetics and mechanisms by 
following the intensity changes of the relevant bands. Moreover, with good understanding of 
structure-spectroscopy relations, small structural changes in the species under investigation can 
be tracked spectroscopically and their impact on the catalytic processes can be studied.171 
The first step is to determine the structure of the reactive oxygen sites and other intermediates, 
to unambiguously link the site-specific UV-VIS-NIR absorption handles to the processes of 
interest. High resolution room temperature UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra were collected in 
diffuse reflectance mode using a quartz cell under controlled atmosphere of the materials after 
exposure and reaction with O2, nitrogen oxides, CH4 and benzene.17, 162, 163, 170 These 

36 
 
 
measurements are in situ in the sense that the sample is reacted and analysed in the same cell 
preserving the atmosphere. The information from UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy alone 
is insufficient to be conclusive on structure and electronic properties. To obtain the required 
information, the controlled atmosphere UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy was coupled to 
in situ resonance Raman (rR), Mössbauer, MCD, and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS, 
including X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES), extended X-ray absorption fine 
structure (EXAFS), nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy (NRVS)) measurements 
without disturbing the atmosphere. For the first two, borosilicate transfer tubes were connected 
to the quartz reactor, for the latter three a sample preserving preparation method in perfluoro-
2-methylpentane was used.17, 163, 169 
The combination of UV-VIS-NIR absorption, resonance Raman, and MCD spectroscopies is 
particularly powerful. They all use excitations in the UV-VIS-NIR range and the spectroscopic 
features at the same excitation energies are unambiguously related.100 The association of 
Mössbauer, XAS and NRVS spectral features with identical active sites, on the other hand, 
relies more strongly on statistical correlation of their appearance and on theoretical 
assumptions (incl. molecular modelling).  
Operando UV-VIS-NIR absorption measurements were then used to correlate the structurally 
assigned spectroscopic handles to reactivity. Finally, time resolved in situ UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption spectroscopy on selected spectroscopic handles provided site-selective kinetic data 
quantitatively linking reactivity to structure. The operando kinetic analysis with in situ UV-
VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is however rarely straightforward. In situ spectroscopy 
provides lower resolution and sensitivity, and usually more targeted synthesis is needed to 
increase active site loading and purity. This improved synthesis could be guided by the 
previously acquired structural information (for example see refs. 166, 168, 171, 172). 
If the absorption bands are particularly weak and broad, a careful background correction on the 
spectral baseline becomes essential and the baseline should be constant during the experiment. 
The latter condition requires that the reaction is highly selective to avoid contamination of the 
kinetic measurement from parallel transformations that give overlapping changes in the UV-
VIS-NIR absorption spectrum. This has been a particular challenge with Cu zeolites. Multiple 
[CuOCu]2+ species at different locations in the zeolite as well as [CuIIOH]+ and spectator 
species are present in the same material.166 The spectators do not take part in the reaction, but 
might have absorption bands that overlap with those of the active site. Likely some published 
quantitative kinetic data is contaminated by at the time unknown reactive sites that react 
simultaneously.164 The amount of spectator Fe species, on the other hand, can easily be limited 
to < 10% through careful synthesis and low loadings.172 
Another challenge is the limited area of the catalyst bed that is probed by the optic fiber used 
in in situ/operando UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy. This makes the measurement sensitive to 
inhomogeneities in the catalyst bed and in the flow, but also to disturbances in the setup. A 
stable flow and bed temperature must be established before reliable activity data can be 
collected. For relatively slow reactions the challenge is to keep the system stable over time, 
and multiple repeated measurements are recommended. Another solution is needed for very 
fast reactions where a stable flow cannot be achieved in time. The collection of kinetic data on 
the reaction of the extremely reactive alpha-O site with CH4 was attempted by cooling down 
with dry ice and liquid nitrogen, but condensation issues, methane condensation, and diffusion 
limitations remained problematic and a dedicated cell should be used.173 

37 
 
 
3.1.2.2 Partial oxidation of methane to methanol with Cu-zeolites 
The last two decades, both Cu- and Fe-exchanged zeolites have been researched for the 
selective oxidation of methane to methanol under milder conditions than in syngas routes. 
These reactions are generally run stoichiometrically because the recovery of the methanol is 
often achieved through addition of water, deactivating the catalyst. Fe-exchanged zeolites 
require N2O as oxidant while Cu exchanged zeolites can be activated with O2 as well.100 Recent 
work also reports the use of H2O as oxidant using Cu zeolites.174, 175 One of the challenges in 
this conversion, especially with N2O and O2, is to prevent thermodynamically favored 
overoxidation.176 Typically, the MTM process occurs on Cu-zeolites in a stepwise fashion to 
separate methane from the oxidant and prevent partial oxidation products from 
overoxidation.177 First, the Cu-zeolite is activated with O2 or N2O to form the active copper-
oxygen (Cu/O) species. This step can be split up into an autoreduction step in He at high 
temperature (~500 °C), and an activation with O2 or N2O at lower temperature (~200 °C).178, 
179 In the second step, methane is reacted over the copper zeolite at moderate temperatures, 
usually between 150 and 200 °C. The methoxy and methanol products are adsorbed onto the 
zeolite, and need to be extracted with water or steam.103, 179-182 Many different Cu/O species 
have been proposed in literature as the active sites for MTM.177 Mononuclear [CuOH]+ and 
binuclear [CuOCu]2+ species are described most often, based on spectroscopic results and ab 
initio modelling.163-165 Their reaction mechanisms are drawn in Figure 22. 
 
Figure 22. Reaction schemes and intermediates of methane to methanol over Cu-zeolites with (left) [CuOCu]2+ 
and (right) [CuIIOH]+ active sites, including the known UV-VIS-NIR absorption bands. 
The most analysed spectroscopic handle connected to MTM with copper zeolites is a ~22 000 
cm−1 absorption band found in Cu-MFI,163 Cu-MOR,153, 164, 167, 183 and Cu-CHA.165 The ~22 
000 cm−1 absorption band, through its rR profile, is assigned as a bridging oxo → Cu2+ LMCT 
of an extraframework [CuOCu]2+.164 Recently, also a [CuIIOH]+ in Cu-MOR was found to have 
an absorption band at 20 700 cm−1, while similar in energy to the 22 000 cm−1 band of 
[CuOCu]2+, they are easily distinguished from rR. 
which was assigned to an HO− → Cu2+ charge transfer.166 Given the similar energy of their 
absorption bands, there is a risk to interpret the results assuming only one of the two sites, and 
previously published results on site-specific reactivities must be assessed critically. To 
distinguish the two sites, the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is best coupled with rR and 
EPR spectroscopy. If accessible, cryogenic UV-VIS-NIR absorption may also be used to 
resolve the species. 

38 
 
 
MTM reaction kinetics are useful to disentangle and to compare kinetic parameters of different 
active sites for MTM versus methanol overoxidation.184, 185 Experimental kinetic parameters of 
elementary steps helped identify the electronic structure and crystallographic location.153, 164, 
186 In-silico proposed reaction mechanisms have been verified against the experimental 
activation barriers,153, 165 which has helped reveal structure-reactivity relationships.103, 153, 165 In 
situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy was used to study the mechanism of [CuOCu]2+ 
formation from a binuclear 2 Cu+ precursor in Cu-MFI, with O2 as well as through oxygen 
atom transfer (OAT) from N2O.187 The kinetics of N-O cleavage were evaluated by tracking 
the growth of the 22 700 cm−1 absorption band at different reaction temperatures from 25 to 
100 °C. The growth of the absorption band as a function of time was evaluated with a first 
order rate equation and the obtained rate constant at each particular temperature was used to 
construct an Arrhenius plot.⁡The resulting Arrhenius plot gave an apparent activation barrier 
Ea = 2.5 kcal/mol, which is consistent with DFT calculated apparent barriers of pathways with 
μ-1,1-O and μ-1,3-O,N N2O-bridged structures as intermediates in the conversion of 2 Cu+ to 
[CuOCu]2+ (Figure 23 A). 
When the 2 Cu+ precursor is contacted with O2 at room temperature, a 29 000 cm−1 absorption 
band appears (Figure 23 B). This band does not appear with N2O activation and was related to 
a μ-η2:η2 peroxo-bridged dicopper site [Cu2O2]2+ based on its characteristic resonance Raman 
vibrations. The peroxo species is not active in methane oxidation, but it transforms upon 
heating in inert or O2 atmosphere into [CuOCu]2+ with simultaneous growth of the 22 700 cm−1 
absorption band and loss of the 29 000 cm−1 absorption band. Where the second oxygen of the 
peroxo bridge ends up has not yet been confirmed. 
 
Figure 23. (A) Binding modes of N2O on the binuclear Cu+ center. (B) UV-VIS spectra of autoreduced Cu-MFI 
during O2 treatment at room temperature (top) and subsequent heating in He atmosphere to form [CuOCu]2+ 
(bottom). Adapted from refs. 187, 188. Copyright 2014 and 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The [CuOCu]2+ active sites react with methane with decay of the corresponding 22 700 cm−1 
absorption band and formation of 2 Cu+. The kinetics of the reaction were evaluated by 

39 
 
 
monitoring the disappearance of the absorption band at different temperatures on Cu-MFI 
(Figure 24).165 From the resulting Eyring plot, thermodynamic parameters of the transition state, 
including activation enthalpy ∆H⧧ and entropy ∆S⧧, were obtained (Table 5). Also, a 
significant KIE was found when reacting with CD4 instead of CH4, indicating that C-H bond 
breaking was involved in the rate limiting step of the CH4 oxidation.189 This was further 
confirmed by NMR product analysis of the reaction with CH2D2.  
Table 5. Comparison of the TS parameters for the [CuOCu]2+ sites in Cu-MFI and Cu-CHA from ref. 165 and for 
the [CuIIOH]+ site in Cu-MOR from ref. 166. 
 
 Site structure 
∆𝐻⧧ (kcal/mol) 
∆𝑆⧧ (cal/(mol*K)) 
Cu-MFI 
 [CuOCu]2+ 
8.7 
-45.5 
Cu-CHA 
 [CuOCu]2+ 
6.2 
-51.7 
Cu-MOR a 
 [CuIIOH] + 
15.7 
-39.5 
a Thermodynamic data on [CuOCu]2+ in MOR are not included in the comparison. This study,164 was performed on samples 
with a mixture of [CuOCu]2+, making the deconvolution inaccurate and inferred kinetic parameters unreliable (vide infra). 

40 
 
 
 
Figure 24. (A) Decay of the 22 700 cm−1 absorption band in time during reaction of [CuOCu]2+ in Cu-MFI with 
methane at 90 °C (left) and Eyring plot for the reaction of CH4 with [CuOCu]2+ in Cu-MFI (right). (B) Decay of 
the 22 400 cm−1 absorption band in time during reaction of [CuOCu]2+ in Cu-CHA with methane at 80 °C (left) 
and Eyring plot for the reaction of CH4 with [CuOCu]2+ in Cu-CHA (right). (C) Decay of the 20 700 cm−1 
absorption band in time during reaction of [CuIIOH]+ in Cu-MOR with methane at 130 °C (left) and Eyring plot 
for the reaction of CH4 with [CuIIOH]+ in Cu-MOR (right). (D) Schematic of bidentate oxygen ligation of 
[CuOCu]2+ cores in Cu-MFI (green box) and Cu-CHA (purple box) assigning out of plane (OOP) and in plane 
(IP) ligation with respect to the CuOCu plane. (E) DFT-calculated potential energy surface of [CuOCu]2+ (purple) 
and of localized structure (green). Adapted from refs. 163, 165, 166. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society, 
2009 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and 2022 American Chemical Society. 

41 
 
 
 
If the absorption band of the species under study overlaps with other absorption bands, one 
best integrates the absorption band used for kinetic tracking in a range where the influence of 
the superposing absorption band is limited. This is illustrated for the UV-VIS-NIR tracking of 
the reaction of [CuOCu]2+ with CH4 in Cu-CHA.165 The decay of the band during reaction at 
80 °C is shown in Figure 24 B. An isosbestic point was observed on the low energy side of the 
absorption band but not at the high energy side, indicating overlap with another higher energy 
absorption band connected to a different chemical transformation. Since a reliable 
deconvolution of the spectrum was unavailable, the integration was limited to the lower energy-
range. [CuOCu]2+ in Cu-CHA is significantly more reactive than the [CuOCu]2+ species in MFI. 
The high reactivity of Cu-CHA is due to a comparatively low enthalpy barrier ∆𝐻⧧ (Table 5). 
Further DFT calculations show that the relative rotations of the two bidentate oxygen ligands 
with respect to each other significantly affect the interaction between Cu atoms and the 
bridging oxo (Figure 24 D). The near 0° relative rotation of ligand sets in Cu-CHA leads to a 
destabilization of the [CuOCu]2+ core and makes it more reactive compared to the structural 
analogue in MFI, in which the bidentate ligands have a ~90° relative rotation. This shows how 
the rigid zeolite lattice can enforce an unstable active site geometry, reminiscent of the entatic 
state effect in metalloprotein chemistry. 
The 22 400 cm−1 DR UV-VIS absorption band was also observed in O2 or N2O activated Cu-
MOR, where it was shown to be an unresolved superposition of the absorption bands of three 
slightly distinct [CuOCu]2+ cores designated as MOR1, MOR2 and MOR3.153, 164, 167 MOR1 is 
in the eight membered ring side pocket that is exposed to the twelve membered ring channel. 
MOR2 and MOR3 are on the other side of the eight membered ring side pocket, across the 
compressed eight membered ring channel (see Figure 21) that runs parallel to the twelve 
membered ring main channel.164, 167 However, due to a lack of reliable deconvolution for the 
22 000 cm−1 absorption band into its three constituents, no accurate kinetics of each [CuOCu]2+ 
active site can be obtained. In ref. 164 the MOR1 and MOR2 CH4 activation energies were 
compared, but considering the more recently revealed contributions of also MOR3 and 
[CuIIOH]+ to the absorption in the ~22 000 cm−1 region, the ∆𝐻⧧ and ∆𝑆⧧ values should be re-
evaluated. The [CuIIOH]+ species in Cu-MOR is already present in the autoreduced material, 
in absence of the [CuOCu]2+ species that require activation with O2 or N2O. Without this 
spectral overlap, its kinetics were obtained by monitoring its 20 700 cm−1 charge transfer band 
with DR UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy (Figure 24 C). The first order rate constants 
were extracted and Eyring plots were constructed.166 [CuIIOH]+ has a 9.5 kcal/mol higher 
enthalpic barrier than [CuOCu]2+ in Cu-CHA (Table 5). From experimentally validated DFT 
models, the electron delocalization via the bridging O over the two Cu atoms in [CuOCu]2+ 
stabilizes the hydrogen atom abstraction (HAA) first product ([CuIOHCuII]2+) by 17 kcal/mol 
compared to the localized structure (Figure 24 E). Therefore, it is proposed that the higher 
reactivity of binuclear [CuOCu]2+ sites compared to mononuclear [CuOH]+ sites is a direct 
result of stabilization of the [CuIOHCuII]2+ product by electron delocalization over the two Cu 
cations via the bridging ligand, indicating the importance of copper nuclearity on reactivity. 
It should be noted that Cu speciations may be significantly impacted by the activation protocol, 
and this limits the consensus in the literature. In the above discussion, when the Cu-CHA is 
first autoreduced in He at high temperature and subsequently activated with O2 or N2O at lower 
temperature, mainly [CuOCu]2+ active sites form. As shown in Figure 25, a broad LMCT band 
between 22 200 and 35 000 cm−1 disappears upon exposure of the O2 or N2O activated Cu-
CHA to methane at 473 K. This suggests that the absorption features of active copper species 
fall in this range. Based on their characteristic Raman vibrations, Ipek et al. propose that trans-

42 
 
 
μ-1,2-peroxo dicopper(II) and [CuOCu]2+ form on Cu-CHA following O2 or He treatment at 
723 K, although this assignment has been criticised.165, 190 O2 treatment then results in a higher 
concentration of this species. 
 
Figure 25. UV-VIS absorption spectra of Cu-CHA after O2 treatment at 723 K (black) followed by 2 h CH4 
treatment at 473 K (red). The difference spectrum is shown in green. Adapted from ref. 190 Copyright 2017 
American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.3 Selective catalytic reduction of NO by NH3 with Cu zeolites 
Selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NOX by NH3 (NH3–SCR) to N2 and water is currently 
the leading deNOX technology for diesel engine emissions control.191 eq 15 is a standard low 
temperature (<250 °C) NH3-SCR reaction of NO. 
 
4NO + 4NH3 + O2 → 4N2 + 6H2O  
(15) 
Among various catalysts studied, Cu-CHA has been widely investigated and commercialized 
owing to its remarkable catalytic reactivity, low selectivity toward undesirable N2O production, 
and excellent hydrothermal stability.157, 158 Great efforts have been devoted to reveal the 
catalytic chemistry underlying the conspicuous performance of Cu-CHA in standard low 
temperature NH3-SCR reaction. In situ UV-VIS-NIR studies have contributed greatly to 
understanding the complex mechanism, particularly in combination with EPR, XAS and 
DRIFTS.158, 190, 192-197 Figure 26 illustrates a representative reaction scheme. It has been well 
established that isolated Cu2+ and [CuIIOH]+ species coordinated to the zeolite lattice (Figure 
27 B) act as the main active centers in Cu-CHA.192-194 The Cu2+ species are associated with 
exchange sites with two Al substitutions in the lattice, separated by one or two Si tetrahedral 
sites in the same six-membered ring, while the [CuIIOH]+ motif is ligated by one Al center and 
prefers to anchor near 8MR windows.198, 199 Fundamental SCR mechanistic studies 
demonstrate that NH3-SCR over Cu-zeolites proceeds via a redox cycle of Cu2+ and Cu+. NO 
and NH3 reduce Cu2+ to Cu+ and O2 reoxidizes Cu+ to Cu2+.200-202 The active Cu2+ and [CuIIOH]+ 
sites exhibit a strong affinity toward NH3, leading to the generation of [Cu(OH)(NH3)3]+ and 
[Cu(NH3)4]2+ complexes detached from the zeolite framework.203 Subsequently, NO interacts 
with these mobile, NH3-ligated Cu2+ complexes, leading to NO decomposition and the 
generation of [Cu(NH3)2]+ complexes (note the reduction of Cu2+ to Cu+ in this step). The small 

43 
 
 
size and low, delocalized charge of Cu+ ammine allow its migration through the zeolite pore 
structure. 
Two 
[Cu(NH3)2]+ 
species 
combine 
with 
dioxygen 
to 
form 
a [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ intermediate, which then regenerates two isolated Cu2+ species.192, 204 This 
mechanism is reminiscent of O2-assisted oxidation of Cu+ sites via multinuclear intermediates 
in bioinorganic chemistry.205-207 
 
Figure 26. A proposed reaction scheme and intermediates of standard low temperature NH3-SCR with Cu-
zeolites, including suggested UV-VIS-NIR absorption bands, based on the spectroscopic studies in ref. 196.  
As Cu+ has a fully occupied d shell (3d10), d-d transitions are only observable for Cu2+ (3d9). 
Therefore, monitoring the d-d transitions during the NH3-SCR reaction makes it possible to 
track the consumption and regeneration of Cu2+ species. Moreover, the d-d and CT transition 
energies are highly sensitive to coordination environment and therefore excellent features to 
probe the copper bound intermediates throughout the reaction scheme. After the high 
temperature oxidation treatment, the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectrum of Cu-CHA shows 
three absorption features at ~500, ~610, and ~760 nm (Figure 27 A), which are attributed to d-
d transitions of zeolite-coordinated Cu2+ species.208 Through combined DRIFTS data, it was 
derived that the dominant Cu2+ species in the O2-activated Cu-CHA sample was the isolated 

44 
 
 
[CuIIOH]+, and all three bands are generally attributed to [CuIIOH].198, 209 However, speciation 
of Cu species in Cu-CHA catalysts is significantly influenced by Si/Al ratio and Cu loading,210 
and the band assignments cannot be generalized to all Cu-CHA samples. The isolated Cu2+ and 
[CuIIOH]+ contents in Cu-CHA can be controlled by adjusting the Si/Al and Cu/Al ratios 
(Figure 27 B).193, 198, 199 
Upon exposure to NH3, a noticeable blueshift of the d-d transition absorption peak to 640 nm 
is observed, and the d-d features of the [CuIIOH]+ disappear, corresponding to the exchange of 
O-ligands for N-ligand. Subsequent reaction of the Cu2+-[NH3]x complexes with NO decreases 
the intensity of the 640 nm band, and simultaneous N2 release is observed.208 For the 
investigation of the oxidation half cycle, various oxidizing gas mixtures were fed to Cu-CHA 
after reduction by NO + NH3, with simultaneous UV-VIS-NIR absorption measurements. The 
oxidation treatments increases the intensity of the d-d absorption band, indicating the oxidation 
of Cu+ to Cu2+. Interestingly, the intensity of the d-d band is slightly higher under oxidation by 
NO/O2 and NO/NO2/O2 than by O2, suggesting that O2 acts as the primary oxidant in the 
oxidation half cycle, and that the presence of NOX promotes this step. The right panel of Figure 
27 A shows the kinetic curves for N2 formation and the intensity of the 760 nm band during 
NH3-SCR - reduction - NH3-SCR transient reactions, in which the gas feed was changed from 
NH3+NO+O2 to NH3+NO, and then reverted to NH3+NO+O2.208 
While the in situ UV-VIS-NIR spectra enable the tracking of the copper oxidation state and its 
dependence on reaction conditions, the assignments of the specific absorption bands to well 
defined intermediates has been more involved. From EPR, XAS, DRIFTS and DR-UV-VIS-
NIR spectroscopies, across different in situ studies, the Cu2+ → Cu+ half cycle with Cu-CHA 
is generally agreed upon (eq 16).209-211 
 
[CuII(OH)(NH3)3]+ + NO → [CuI(NH3)2]+ + N2 + 2H2O  
(16) 
Of particular importance was the XAS study by Paolucci et al. showing the mobilization of 
Cu+ through its solvation by NH3, allowing it to migrate through the zeolite and cyle between 
multinuclear and mononuclear intermediates.192 This mobilization, in combination with 
dependency on reaction conditions, gives access to multiple options for the rest of the reaction 
cycle, which is still debated. The DR-UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra are generally convoluted 
and not fully understood, but some features, besides the d-d transitions of [CuIIOH]+, have been 
(tentatively) assigned on Cu-CHA (see also Figure 27). 
Based on their behaviour on samples of different Si/Al and Cu/Al, Zhang et al. 209 assigned two 
LMCT bands at 215 nm and 240 nm respectively to isolated [CuIIOH]+ and Cu2+ sites. An 
additional 355 nm band is also present in their spectra for a Si/Al = 30 Cu-CHA. this is 
commonly assigned to binuclear Cu-oxo species.190, 195 With increasing temperature, the 
intensity of the 215 nm and 355 nm bands in the Si/Al = 30 sample respectively decrease and 
increase. Therefore, they proposed that upon O2 activation, two [CuIIOH]+ sites are bridged 
into a binuclear Cu-oxo intermediate, tentatively described as a [Cu2O2]2+ site. Upon exposure 
to NH3, mobile [Cu(NH3)4]2+ and [Cu(OH)(NH3)3]+ complexes are proposed. UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption features at ~240 & 680 nm and at 205 & 660 nm are respectively linked to these 
two complexes.209 Oda et al. reported a 370 nm absorption band on Cu-AEI zeolite that is only 
observed under steady-state NH3-SCR conditions, and therefore related to an unstable 
intermediate, which they also suggest for Cu-CHA.212 The O2 dependence of this band is shown 
in Figure 27 C, when the O2 concentration is gradually reduced from 10 to 0%, the intensity of 
the 370 nm band decreases until it finally disappears. When the O2 supply is restored the 370 
nm band reappears. The intermediate was trapped and isolated by reducing the reaction 

45 
 
 
temperature. The 370 nm band develops significantly below 473 K and reaches a maximum at 
323 K. It was further identified by in situ UV-VIS DRS studies coupled with XAS and 
measurements of reactivity towards NO, NH3 and a mixture of NO and NH3 at low reaction 
temperatures.196 Through spectroscopic similarity to antiferromagnetically coupled S = 0 μ-
η2:η2 peroxo-bridged dicopper(II) present in Cu proteins and other relevant model 
complexes,205, 213, 214 the intermediate species was finally  assigned as the μ-η2:η2 peroxo-
bridged diamino dicopper(II) ([Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+). Additionally, a d-d transition at 14 000 cm−1 
(~710 nm) and LMCT bands between 27 000 and 31 000 cm−1 (320-370 nm) were assigned to 
this species. Very recently Lei et al.197 observed a transient absorption band at 225 nm on Cu-
CHA in NH3 + NO atmosphere below 250 °C. Combining DRIFT and TD-DFT, and observing 
its correlation to an absorption band at 350 nm, they assigned this also to an LMCT of the 
confined μ-η2:η2 peroxo-bridged diamino dicopper(II). 
 
Figure 27. (A) (left) In situ UV-VIS absorption spectra of Cu-CHA during reduction half cycle. The catalyst was 
first oxidized under O2, followed by exposure to NH3 and then to NO. Time dependence of d-d transition band 
intensity of Cu2+ species and MS intensity of N2 during (middle) reduction half cycle and during (right) NH3-SCR 
- reduction - NH3-SCR transient reaction. (B) Cu-speciation in the Cu-CHA catalyst as a function of Si/Al and 
Cu/Al. (C) In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of Cu-AEI under (left) different gas mixtures at 473 K and 
(right) NH3-SCR at 473 K with different O2 concentration. Adapted from refs. 196, 208, 209, 212. Copyright 2020 Wiley, 
2022 American Chemical Society, and 2020 American Chemical Society. 
The assignment of UV-VIS-NIR absorption bands to specific complexes on Cu-CHA in NH3-
SCR conditions is severely obstructed by the multitude of intermediates present and the sample 
dependence of the copper speciation. Nevertheless, the absorption bands mentioned above have 
been used to derive mechanistic insight and to identify the active sites. Zhang et al.209 
monitored the CT bands of isolated Cu2+ and [CuIIOH]+ in the NH3-SCR reaction over Cu-
CHA at different temperatures. While the ~210 nm band of [CuIIOH]+ starts to diminish at low 
temperature, the 240 nm band of isolated Cu2+ decays at higher temperature, indicating 
[CuIIOH]+ sites are more active. The 355 nm band of binuclear Cu-oxo species is present below 
∼180 °C for Cu-CHA with Si/Al = 30, and below ~200 °C for Si/Al = 6. It then decreases with 
temperature, showing the formation of reduced dimers. Negri et al.196 tracked the 370 nm 
(27000 cm−1) LMCT band of [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ through pretreatment in O2, subsequent 
reduction in NH3+NO, and reoxidation with O2 at the SCR reaction temperature. Upon 
exposure to NH3, the d-d transition and LMCT band intensities decrease, although they do not 

46 
 
 
disappear completely (Figure 28), indicating NH3 reacts with [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ and reduces a 
fraction of the Cu2+ ions to Cu+. When [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ is exposed to NO, the corresponding 
absorption bands decrease faster with simultaneous formation of N2, indicating that 
[Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ is more reactive toward NO than NH3, and low-temperature NH3-SCR 
reaction likely involves the reaction of [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ with NO. From XANES data, the 
copper site is proposed to be reduced to a [CuI(NH3)]+ in this step.196 The role of O2 in the SCR 
mechanism, and the mechanism for its activation were further investigated by Lei et al.,197 
using the 225 nm absorption band of the peroxo bridged dicopper species. They observed 
increased N2 evolution in the cofeeding of O2 which they correlated to the intensity of the 
transient 225 nm feature. They thus propose the [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ as a key intermediate in the 
low temperature NH3-SCR of NO with Cu-CHA. 
 
Figure 28. UV-VIS-NIR DR absorption spectra of Cu-CHA exposure to (left) NH3/He and (right) NO/He at 
200 °C after forming the [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ complexes. Top and bottom panels on the right are initial and 
subsequent evolution of DR UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra respectively. Blue thick line: after NH3/He exposure, 
red thick line: spectrum collected after forming the [Cu2O2(NH3)4]2+ complexes, grey thin lines: intermediates, 
light blue thick line: after NO/He exposure, orange thick line: the final spectrum in the panel. Adapted from ref. 
196. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.4 Selective catalytic reduction of NO by NH3 with Fe zeolites 
Cu-zeolites are effective NH3-SCR catalysts at low operating temperatures (< 400 °C), but they 
are less performant at higher temperatures where copper aggregates into inactive clusters, and 
where N2O is formed as a by-product. Fe-zeolites on the other hand are better suited for high 
temperature NH3-SCR as they demonstrate improved stability and high-temperature SCR 
selectivity compared to their Cu-exchanged counterparts.215-220 While in Cu zeolite SCR small 
pore zeolites like CHA are preferred because they reduce the copper clustering, with Fe zeolite 
SCR, large pore zeolites (e.g. MOR and *BEA) are preferred. During the NH3-SCR reaction, 
the Fe active sites cycle between Fe2+ and Fe3+,220, 221 and several active sites have been 
proposed. These include Fe oxide particles, binuclear Fe3+ species and isolated Fe cations.157, 
222, 223 UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of Fe-zeolites are generally analyzed in three regions: 
< 300 nm, 300-400 nm and > 400 nm, which are roughly correlated to isolated Fe3+ species, 
aggregated Fe3+ species and Fe2O3 nanoparticles respectively.224, 225 In the case of the isolated 
Fe3+ species, only the CT bands of O ligands to Fe3+ are observable in the UV-VIS-NIR spectra 
since the d-d transitions are symmetry and spin forbidden. Typically two CT bands, which arise 
from the t1 → t2 and t1 → e transitions, are observed for each Fe3+ species and their exact 
energies depend on the number of ligands.226 For four-coordinated isolated Fe3+ the two 
absorption bands are both below 250 nm while for octahedrally coordinated Fe3+ the two bands 

47 
 
 
are at 187-234 and 244-305 nm, respectively. With these characteristic handles to follow, in 
situ UV-VIS spectroscopy has been employed to investigate the NH3-SCR process catalyzed 
by Fe-zeolites. 
Yasumura et al. conducted an in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption study on Fe-MOR to investigate 
the redox cycle of NH3-SCR.227 A charge transfer band centered at 265 nm and a shoulder 
above 300 nm indicate the presence of octahedrally coordinated Fe3+ species and oligomeric 
Fe3+ species as the main Fe species (Figure 29 A).227, 228 The 265 nm absorption band decreases 
upon exposure to NO + NH3 with simultaneous N2 formation and subsequently recovers in 
O2 or NO + O2 flow, indicating the NH3-SCR over Fe-MOR proceeds through a redox cycle. 
In addition, the recovery of the Fe3+ species is faster under NO + O2 flow than under the 
O2 flow, suggesting that NO promotes the reoxidation of Fe2+.  
Structural changes of Fe species in Fe-*BEA during NH3-SCR were also probed by in situ UV-
VIS-NIR spectroscopy.223 The UV-VIS-NIR spectrum of the untreated Fe-*BEA sample is 
characterized by two bands at ~220 and 275 nm (Figure 29 B), indicating ion-exchanged Fe 
species are mainly present as octahedral coordinated Fe3+ species. During heating from 423 K 
to 723 in O2, absorption increases below 250 nm and between 300-400 nm, indicating the 
formation of Fe3+ species in tetrahedral coordination and Fe-O-Fe species. The transformation 
of Fe species upon heating in O2 results from the removal of hydroxyl and water ligands on 
extra-framework Fe3+ cations. Under NH3-SCR conditions, there is only a small change in the 
overall intensity of the spectra, indicating these in situ formed Fe species during O2 oxidation 
are still present under NH3-SCR conditions. The deconvolution of the UV-VIS-NIR spectra 
further indicates that part of octahedrally coordinated Fe3+ species is restored at the expense of 
bridging Fe-O-Fe species (320 nm) at 423 K. Heating to 523 K, however, reverses this, as 
confirmed by in situ EXAFS analysis. These results suggest that the octahedral coordinated 
Fe3+ species are key intermediates for the reversible changes of Fe species during the NH3-
SCR reaction. In addition, the low catalytic activity at 423 K is attributed to the significant 
dissociation of binuclear Fe clusters into isolated octahedral coordinated Fe3+ species. 

48 
 
 
 
Figure 29. (A) (left) UV-VIS absorption spectra of Fe-MOR during exposure to NO + NH3 at 300 °C. (middle) 
Changes in the UV–VIS absorption intensity at 265 nm in NO + NH3 and the MS signal of N2. (right) Time course 
of the UV-VIS absorption intensity at 265 nm under O2 or NO + O2. (B) UV-VIS absorption spectra of Fe-*BEA 
during (left) heating in O2 and NH3–SCR reaction at different temperatures. (right) Deconvolution results of UV-
VIS spectra of Fe-*BEA during NH3–SCR reaction at different temperatures. Adapted from refs. 223, 227. Copyright 
2022 and 2013 American Chemical Society. 
3.1.2.5 N2O decomposition with Fe zeolites 
Fe-zeolites of several topologies can stabilize a S=2 square planar Fe2+ site, commonly named 
α-FeII, with an interesting capability to abstract the oxygen atom from N2O forming a surface 
oxygen and releasing N2.17, 168 At higher temperatures the surface oxygen recombines and is 
released as O2 making the N2O decomposition catalytic. While the site offers a good hypothesis 
for the lower N2O release in NH3-SCR with Fe-zeolites compared to Cu-zeolites, its role in 
SCR has never been specifically investigated despite the availability of very clear spectroscopic 
probes. 
The α-FeII site can be prepared in almost pure form enabling full attribution of spectroscopic 
features. Key absorption band assignments are summarized in Figure 30. The experimental 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption features of α-FeII were fully explained with the Fe2+ electronic 
structure by Hallaert et al.229 α-FeII  in Fe-*BEA exhibits a particularly high energy ligand field 
band at 15 900 cm−1, distinctive for the square planar ligand field of the high spin FeII. For α-
FeII  this ligand field band is particularly intense (see also Figure 1). Similar, but weaker 
absorption bands are observed in Fe-ZSM-5, Fe-FER and Fe-CHA. The surface oxygen formed 
upon oxygen atom abstraction from N2O remains bound to the α-FeII , yielding a high spin 
square pyramidal [Fe=O]2+, commonly named α-O. Also α-O can be produced in high purity, 
and there is a clear fingerprint experimental UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectrum. On Fe-*BEA 
the α-O spectrum includes an intense 16 900 cm−1 CT absorption band with a high energy 

49 
 
 
shoulder (also CT) at ∼20 000 cm−1 and broad absorption at ~6000 cm−1 from a d-d transition 
with vibronic coupling. Contrary to α-FeII the exact matching of electronic excitations to their 
corresponding experimental absorption bands in inconclusive for α-O.230 However, the lower 
energy d-d transition band shows vibronic coupling when observed in MCD, with a frequency 
of ~1000 cm−1.17 It can thus tentatively be linked to the dπ-dz² ligand field transition. The Fe=O 
stretch can also be observed with NRVS for α-O on Fe-*BEA at 885 cm−1.169 
 
Figure 30. Reaction schemes and intermediates of N2O decomposition and C-H activation with Fe zeolites, 
including the known UV-VIS-NIR absorption bands.  
In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy coupled to Mössbauer and Fourier-transform 
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectroscopy were used to identify the N2O ligation onto α-FeII 
that precedes oxygen atom abstraction.170 Around room temperature, N2O binds reversibly to 
the α-FeII end-on via the N atom to form a square pyramidal complex (α-N2O) with ligand field 
absorption bands at 5 000 and 11 500 cm−1. At low temperatures, a second N2O binds at the 
same side of the FeII site, as observed in low temperature Mössbauer and FTIR. When heated, 
the oxygen atom is abstracted to form α-O and N2. The thermodynamics of N2O adsorption 
were measured by tracking the 11 500 cm−1/15 900 cm−1 equilibrium on Fe-*BEA in different 
partial pressure of N2O at various temperatures (Figure 31 A). The different conditions shifted 
the equilibrium between both ligand field bands with a clear isosbestic point at 13 500 cm−1 
indicating a single reversible transformation. The adsorption was evaluated using a Langmuir 
adsorption model and the equilibrium constants were determined for the different temperatures 
(Figure 31 C). With the Van ’t Hoff equation the enthalpy of adsorption of ∆Ho = −4.8 ± 0.1 
kcal/mol and an entropy of adsorption of ∆So = −7.1 ± 0.4 cal/mol·K were derived.  
The oxygen atom abstraction was tracked by the decay of the 11 500 cm−1 absorption band of 
α-N2O and the simultaneous growth of the 16 900 cm−1 and 28 000 cm−1 bands of α-O (Figure 
31 B). An isosbestic point was observed at 14 000 cm−1 indicating a single transformation, 
selectively converting the adsorbed N2O into α-O. From a first order reaction model and an 

50 
 
 
Eyring plot (Figure 31 D), the enthalpy and entropy of the TS were determined to be ∆H⧧ = 
17.7 ± 1.4 kcal/mol and ∆S⧧= −22.4 ± 3.8 cal/mol·K. 
 
Figure 31. UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy of α-N2O and its thermodynamics. (A) (left) In situ UV-VIS-
NIR absorption difference spectra of Fe-*BEA at 308 K after high temperature He treatment with p(N2O) ranging 
from 0 to 0.05 atmosphere. (C) Van ‘t Hoff plot of data derived from the adsorption data from in situ UV-VIS-
NIR absorption spectra analogous to those shown in the left. (B) (left) In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption difference 
spectra of Fe-*BEA at 373 K following the transformation of α-N2O to α-O over a time interval of 15 minutes in 
an atmosphere of 35 vol.% N2O in He. (D) Eyring plot of data derived from in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption 
spectra analogous to those shown in the left. Adapted from ref. 170. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. 
The spectroscopic and thermodynamic data were used to build an experimentally validated 
reaction mechanism that was evaluated with molecular modelling. This revealed the role of the 
coordination geometry of α-FeII. A distortion of the square planar geometry where the Fe atom 
is pulled out of the plane of oxygen atoms strengthens the η1-O binding of N2O and lowers the 
apparent activation barrier for oxygen atom abstraction. Interestingly, this structural difference 
exists between the α-FeII sites in Fe-*BEA and Fe-CHA. The comparison of their N2O binding 
and activation thermodynamics has, however, not yet been made. Note that the two α-FeII sites 
also differ in other aspects (second coordination sphere, pore system, ligand field strength) so 
that the comparison would still not be a perfect experimental representation of the molecular 
modelling findings. 
3.1.2.6 C-H bond activation with α-O on Fe-zeolites 
The α-O site is highly reactive for partial oxidations of methane, other alkanes and benzene. 
The products of these reactions have been investigated with coupled in situ spectroscopies 
including UV-VIS-NIR absorption, rR, MCD, EPR, NRVS and XAS.162, 231 From the benzene 
reaction on Fe-ZSM-5, a deactivating FeIII-phenolate was identified with a spectroscopic 
handle at 13 900 cm−1, which is composed of two overlapping bands at 11 600 and 13 300 cm−1. 
The pathway to the FeIII phenolate competes with the catalytic pathway to phenol that leads to 
the regeneration of the α-FeII precursor to α-O. On Fe-*BEA the analogous absorption feature 

51 
 
 
lies at 15 200 cm−1. A 10 500 cm−1 band was identified as the adsorption complex of benzene 
on α-FeII. Similarly, in the reaction of α-O with methane, a deactivating pathway to FeIII-OH 
and FeIII-OCH3 was identified through their UV-VIS-NIR absorption handles around 22 000 
cm−1. Here the pathway competes with the catalytic route to methanol and α-FeII. For both 
reactions, the spectroscopic handles are known, the intermediates are identified, and interesting 
conclusions for better catalyst design have been derived, but in situ UV-VIS-NIR tracking of 
the kinetics and thermodynamics remains to be achieved. 
3.1.2.7 Non-zeolitic single atom catalysts 
Zeolite supported TMI catalysts are especially interesting to study with UV-VIS-NIR 
absorption because well-defined TMI sites alleviate the disadvantageous low spectral 
resolution of the technique. Increasingly, other methods to prepare uniformly dispersed TMI 
species are developed. Notably ‘single atom catalysts’ (SAC) have emerged as a hot topic in 
catalysis in recent years, referring to heterogeneous catalysis with single isolated atoms 
decorated on a support. These materials are used for thermal heterogeneous catalysis as well 
as electro- and photocatalysis.232-234 While UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy would 
clearly be a powerful tool in their in situ study, there are only few examples to be found in 
literature so far and the technique is not commonly listed as an important characterization 
technique.233 A common limitation is the strong absorption of the support material hampering 
the detection of weaker TMI single atom absorption bands. The scarce examples that can be 
found often involve band gap energies measured using the Tauc plot method, but rarely involve 
the identification of ligand field environment and electronic structure as with zeolites.235, 236 
An exception is the detection of a unique redshift of the cinnamyl alcohol π-π* absorption band 
upon contact with atomically dispersed Pd on Al2O3.237 Other examples are the appearance of 
a clearly resolved charge transfer band of atomically dispersed Ru on defective TiO2 
nanosheets,236 and the description of a copper species on amorphous silica with an absorption 
band at 22700 cm−1 active in methane oxidation.238 
3.1.3 Tracking chromophoric products 
Besides the absorption of the catalyst itself, also chromophoric reagents and products may be 
tracked spectroscopically. In general these enable simple and cheap analytical methods to track 
reaction mechanisms and kinetics, and they are explained in standard analytical chemistry 
textbooks.40 
3.1.3.1 zeolite catalyzed methanol to hydrocarbons  
Industrial methanol conversions to hydrocarbons (MTH) are typically catalysed by acid 
zeolites (HZSM-5, HSSZ-13) or zeotype catalysts (HSAPO-34). The selectivity toward 
different hydrocarbons is directed by choosing the suitable catalyst and appropriate reaction 
conditions.239 The resulting products are either rich in gasoline, olefins, or aromatics, and the 
corresponding processes are then referred to as methanol-to-gasoline (MTG), methanol-to-
olefins (MTO), or methanol-to-aromatics (MTA). Since the MTH process was discovered and 
patented by the Mobil Research Laboratory in the late 1970s,240, 241 mechanistic understanding 
of MTH has steadily grown,242-245 which facilitates better catalyst design and preparation,246, 
247 as well as process development.248-250 
Although the formation mechanism of the first C-C bond remains under debate,251-254 the steady 
state formation of hydrocarbons is believed to proceed indirectly through a hydrocarbon pool 
(HCP), in which the active species include polyalkylated aromatics, carbocations and 
olefins.255 The HCP is then methylated by methanol and dealkylated to yield the desired olefins. 
However, the exact nature of the HCP and detailed reaction mechanism are still the subject of 

52 
 
 
debate.239, 256, 257 In addition, the HCP can further develop into species that are inactive for 
MTH, such as heavy aromatic coke, that ultimately lead to catalyst deactivation. Inside the 
zeolite, the size of hydrocarbon species is constrained by the nanospace defined by the zeolite 
framework giving rise to the ‘shape selectivity’ of zeolites. However, the hydrocarbon species 
can grow into bulky polyaromatic molecules on the outer surface of the catalyst particles, which 
tend to block the pores of the catalyst. 
In situ and operando UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is a vital tool to follow the 
formation of the HCP species inside zeolite catalysts during methanol conversion. The 
technique can differentiate between carbocationic HCP species and their neutral counterparts, 
which have distinct bands in a UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectrum resulting from the shifted π-
π* and n- π* relative energies.258 In addition, UV-VIS-NIR DRS can help track the 
accumulation of deactivation species (cokes) in and on the zeolite crystals.259 Coking generally 
involves a complex mixture of organic molecules, mainly polyaromatic molecules and cations 
with absorption bands in the UV-VIS range. As coke builds up in the catalyst particles, the 
catalyst darkens in color corresponding to an increase of broad unresolved ranges in the 
absorption spectrum. Through deconvolution the absorption spectra into Gaussian bands, 
meaningful information on cokes composition can be extracted.259 Assignments of UV-VIS 
DR adsorption bands of hydrocarbon species formed in the zeolite catalyzed MTH reaction are 
summarized in Table 6. However, the observed absorption bands are usually weak and broad, 
and UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy alone is not always sufficiently sensitive to 
understand 
the 
chemical 
composition 
of 
the 
cokes. 
This 
is 
exemplified 
by 
hexamethylbenzenium (HMB+) and methylnaphthyl cation, which are both potential 
intermediates in the MTH process and exhibit a similar absorption band ~390 nm.260 The 
HMB+ serves as an active HCP species, whereas methylnaphthyl cations are deactivation coke. 
To achieve a more accurate interpretation of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra, solid-state NMR 
and FTIR are generally used to supplement the analysis.258  
Table 6. Characteristic UV-VIS-NIR absorption bands in zeolite catalyzed methanol conversion reactions. 
Species 
Wavelength (nm) 
References 
Neutral (methylated) benzenes / cyclopentadienyl 
species 
≤295 
255, 261, 262 
Monoenylic/dienylic carbocations 
300-330 
263  
Less methylated benzene carbocations (up to three 
methyl groups) 
340-360 
262, 264 
Highly methylated benzene carbocations (4-6 
methyl groups) 
385-410 
259, 260 
Methylated naphthalene carbocations 
400-435 
265, 266 
Neutral/charged polyaromatics (coke) 
≥600 
259, 260 
UV-VIS spectroscopy has been extensively applied to investigate the impacts of zeolite 
topology, acidity, and reaction conditions on the formation of hydrocarbon species, which 
closely correlate to the reaction and deactivation routes in the MTH process. The nature of 
hydrocarbon species during the MTH process over the CHA zeolites (HSSZ-13 and HSAPO-
34) was investigated at different temperatures by in situ UV-VIS-NIR DRS with the aid of 
NNMF analysis.259, 263, 267, 268 The NNMF analysis allows for the division of the time-resolved 

53 
 
 
UV-VIS-NIR spectra into two groups of spectra with different kinetic behaviours, which 
separates the manifold of formed hydrocarbon species into two main groups. The first group 
of species increased with the conversion, peaked at full conversion, and subsequently declined 
with time on stream. Therefore, these species are strongly associated with catalyst activity. The 
formation of the second group commenced at the maximum formation of the first group of 
hydrocarbon species and continued to increase until the catalyst completely deactivated. Thus, 
these species are related to catalyst deactivation. The nature of the species appears to be similar 
for HSSZ-13 and HSAPO-34 (Figure 32 A-D). At low temperature (573 K), the first group of 
species of both zeolites contain absorption bands at 33 650 cm−1 (300 nm) and 26 000 cm−1 
(385 nm), which can be attributed to monoenylic and highly methylated benzene carbocations, 
respectively. The second group of species on CHA zeolites are characterized by absorption 
bands at 30 000 cm−1 (330 nm) and 24 000 cm−1 (415 nm), corresponding respectively to low 
methylated benzene and methylated naphthalene carbocations. Interestingly, the reaction 
temperature significantly influences the chemistry of the hydrocarbon species. At higher 
reaction temperatures (> 673 K), low methylated benzene carbocations (31 000 cm−1, 320 nm) 
and methylated naphthalene carbocations (24 000 cm−1, 415 nm), identified as the deactivation 
species during low temperature MTH process, become the predominant HCP active species, 
while the formation of highly conjugated neutral polyaromatics deposited on the external 
surface of the catalysts leads to a featureless spectrum of the second group. It was proposed 
that at low reaction temperature deactivation occurs because of pore filling with methylated 
naphthalene carbocations while at higher reaction temperature highly conjugated 
polyaromatics on the external surface block the pores. Besides, it was noted that the active 
hydrocarbon species in HSAPO-34 were more stable than in HSSZ-13. This is likely due to the 
stronger acidity of HSSZ-13, which promotes the formation of more conjugated and bulky 
hydrocarbon species.259 

54 
 
 
 
Figure 32. (left in each panel) Deconvolution of the UV–VIS-NIR absorption spectra into two groups of bands 
by NNMF analysis. (right in each panel) The evolution of each group as a function of methanol loading on the 
catalyst material of HSSZ-13 catalyzed methanol conversion at (A) 573 K and (B) 723 K and HSAPO-34 
catalyzed methanol conversion at (C) 573 K and (D) 673 K. (red: active hydrocarbon species, black: deactivating 
hydrocarbon species). Reproduced from refs. 259, 267. Copyright 2014 Wiley and copyright 2015 American 
Chemical Society. 

55 
 
 
In situ UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy was applied to investigate how different small pore zeolites 
catalyse the MTO process. 263, 268 Figure 33 shows the formation and evolution of retained 
hydrocarbon species in small pore zeolites CHA, DDR, and LEV topologies tracked by in situ 
UV-VIS spectroscopy during MTO. Concurrently, in situ X-ray diffraction was used to track 
the zeolite lattice expansion. Although the pore structures of the three zeolite material are 
similar, as they consist of large zeolite cages interconnected by eight-membered-ring windows, 
it was demonstrated that small differences in size and shape of the cages have a substantial 
impact on retained hydrocarbon species that lead to the lattice expansion. The interaction 
between the retained hydrocarbon species and the structures of the zeolite framework results 
in distinct degrees and orientations of lattice expansion for each zeolite frameworks. In CHA 
zeolite, where the largest expansion was observed, methylated naphthalene and pyrene are the 
predominant species. For DDR zeolite, 1-methylnaphthalene and phenalene are the primary 
species formed. In LEV zeolite, methylated benzene and naphthalene are the main observed 
species. To study the kinetics of the involved hydrocarbon species during MTO process, the 
time evolution of the in situ UV-VIS spectra during the conversion of methanol over CHA, 
DDR, and LEV zeolites were analyzed using Multivariate Curve Resolution-Alternating Least 
Squares (MCR-ALS). With MCR-ALS the series of UV-VIS spectra could be deconvoluted 
into components with similar kinetic behaviours. For DDR, three components were extracted 
(Figure 33 B), corresponding to the dominant species during the three stages of MTO process: 
the induction period, the active period, and the deactivation period. These allow tracking of the 
hydrocarbon species. At a lower reaction temperature (623 K), a distinct feature around 25 000 
cm−1 (400 nm) attributed to 1-methylnaphthalene is observed during the deactivation period. 
However, at a higher reaction temperature (723 K), this feature appears during the active period. 
These findings again indicate a temperature-dependent change in the role of the hydrocarbon 
species, thereby influencing the reaction and deactivation mechanism. 
 

56 
 
 
 
Figure 33. (A) In situ UV-VIS spectra during methanol conversion at 673 K and hydrocarbon species 
corresponding to the UV-VIS absorbance bands over the (left)CHA, (middle) DDR and (right) LEV catalysts. (B) 
(left) MCR-ALS components and (right) their respective contributions to the overall in situ UV-VIS spectra 
versus time for the conversion of methanol over DDR zeolite at a reaction temperature of (top) 623 K and (bottom) 
723 K. The colors of the contribution plots correspond to the colors of the components. Reproduced from refs. 263, 
269. Copyright 2017 and 2018 American Chemical Society. 
As cokes accumulate in the zeolites, the intensity of the characteristic absorption by 
polyaromatics above 600 nm gradually increases, making UV-VIS DRS a useful tool to 
investigate the coke evolution during MTH process. By placing UV-VIS-NIR absorption 
probes at different positions along the reactor bed, the evolution of active species and coke in 
the MTO reaction along the catalyst bed can be monitored. Such spatiotemporal approach can 
track the coke front as it progresses towards the reactor end. Photos of the catalyst bed and the 
corresponding in situ UV-VIS spectra for the first 2 h of MTO reaction over HZSM-5 and 
MgZSM-5 are shown in Figure 34 A.268 In the case of MTO process over HZSM-5, coke 
formed rapidly over the entire catalyst bed at the beginning of the reaction and a broad 
absorption band below 25 000 cm−1 (400 nm) appeared. With reaction time, it shifted to lower 
wavenumbers. The spectral region below 25 000 cm−1 is generally dominated by neutral and 
charged aromatic species. The redshift corresponds to the growth of larger aromatic 

57 
 
 
molecules.260, 270 In contrast, MgZSM-5 exhibited a much lighter color and weaker intensity of 
absorption bands below 25 000 cm−1 compared to HZSM-5, indicating much less formation of 
coke species. The UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of HZSM-5 after feeding a mixture of 
ethylene and propylene showed band positions and intensities that were very similar to the UV-
VIS-NIR absorption spectra during MTO reaction, while adsorption below 25 000 cm−1 was 
not observed during light olefins conversion over MgZSM-5. Coke formation from olefins 
aromatization, the so-called secondary coke formation, was therefore slower over MgZSM-5. 
Magnesium in the zeolite leads to a reduction of the strong Brønsted acid sites (BAS) and 
therefore prevents the formation of secondary coke. The less pronounced olefin aromatization 
on MgZSM-5 explains its higher selectivity toward light olefins and longer lifetime than H-
ZSM-5. The prevention of secondary reactions by incorporating alkaline-earth metals in the 
zeolite was also reported by Yarulina et al.271 Figure 34 B shows the in situ UV-VIS DR 
absorption spectra collected during methanol conversion over two HZSM-5 zeolites with 
different Si/Al ratios, and a Ca-modified ZSM-5 at 773 K. Aromatic species did not accumulate 
in Ca-modified ZSM-5 as evidenced by the absence of absorption below 25 000 cm−1. For the 
HZSM-5 zeolites, formation of polyaromatic species (naphthalene and homologues) was 
observed during the first seconds of MTO. As evidenced by 1 H-1 H double-quantum (DQ) 
and 1 H-1 H radio frequency driven recoupling (RFDR) magic angle spinning (MAS) NMR, 
alkaline-earth metals tend to deprotonate BAS, thus neutralizing inherent zeolite acidity and 
forming Lewis acid sites (LAS) and isolated BAS. UV-VIS DRS revealed that the presence of 
LAS in Ca-modified ZSM-5 prevented the formation of polyaromatic species during MTO 
process, thereby extending the lifetime of the catalyst. 

58 
 
 
 

59 
 
 
Figure 34. (A) Photo of the reactor bed after 2h MTO reaction and in situ UV-VIS absorption spectra of 
conversion of methanol or a mixture of propylene and ethylene at three positions along the reactor bed over (top) 
HZSM-5 and (bottom) MgZSM-5. (B) in situ UV-VIS absorption spectra collected during methanol conversion 
over (left) AE3, (middle) Z2 and (right) Z1 at 773 K. Reproduced from refs. 268, 271. Copyright 2018 Royal Society 
of Chemistry and copyright 2018 Springer Nature. 
Thuy et al. reported that coating ZSM-5 with a catalytically inactive siliceous exterior rim 
dramatically improves diffusion and reduces the accumulation of coke on external surfaces.272 
The Si-zoned ZSM-5 demonstrates an enhanced catalyst lifetime for the MTH process and 
diffusion properties that resemble particles with a much smaller size. Comparison of the UV-
VIS DR spectra for representative homogeneous and Si-zoned samples reveals a notable 
reduction in both internal and external coke relative to HCP species for the Si-zoned catalyst, 
suggesting the presence of a siliceous exterior suppresses the formation of cokes. As evidenced 
by computational simulation, both internal diffusion and surface permeation are enhanced in 
Si-rich regions of Si-zoned ZSM-5, thereby improving the diffusion properties of nanoporous 
catalysts. 
3.2 Homogeneous thermal catalysis 
In homogeneous catalysis, better resolved UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra are often obtained 
compared to heterogeneous catalysts. The intermediates are structurally more uniform and the 
systems are translucent, so that transmission mode measurements with better signal-to-noise 
can be used. Operando and in situ spectroscopy are commonly used in homogeneous catalysis 
to study the reaction mechanism and to understand the catalytic cycle at the molecular level.273 
Often the tracking of these transformations yields spectral evolutions with clear isosbestic 
points. Through the detection, identification and quantification of reaction intermediates and 
organic compounds, kinetic models are proposed, and the structure-performance relationships 
of the homogeneous catalyst are understood. Thus, the gained insights are valuable for a 
rational optimization of the system and for the design of novel catalysts.  
From a technical point of view, the operando and in situ spectroscopy reactor must meet the 
requirements of a homogeneous reaction, such as stirring, thermostable conditions, and 
controlled atmosphere. Therefore, different configurations can be used, such as reactors with 
submersible optometers, a fiber optic spectrometer in a special Schlenk vessel, or a stopped 
flow combined with a diode array to monitor reactions at small time intervals (see reference 274 
for technical details and 275 for analytical insights).  
Within the field of homogeneous catalysis, in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is 
mainly applied to the study of organometallic catalysis, as it allows the detection of metal 
associated electronic transitions, in addition to the formation of organic molecules. 276, 277 
Notably, the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectrum of transition metal complexes involves two 
types of transitions; d-d transitions at lower energy levels and with lower absorption 
coefficients, and CT transitions at higher energies and with higher absorption coefficients (see 
also section 2.1). The UV-VIS-NIR absorption pattern of organometallics is dependent on the 
metal center, the ligands, and the solvent. The number of combinations that can be made is 
therefore very large and the attribution of absorption bands to specific transitions is usually 
derived from literature databases and pure component spectra (‘fingerprint spectra’).275 For 
instance, the π-π* transition of a Schiff base Ni complex is observed between 339-350 nm, 
whereas for the Au complex, the transition is found in the range of 291-331 nm.278, 279 On the 
other hand, for a Ru Schiff base complex, the π-π* transition lies at 203-223 nm, and the n-π* 
and d-d transitions lie in the 355-406 nm and 616-630 nm range, respectively. Replacing the 

60 
 
 
ligand by tridentate pyridinediimine (pydim), shifts the transition bands to 278-318 nm, 425-
449 nm, and 536-566 nm.280 
Due to their sensitivity to UV-VIS-NIR range spectroscopies, most of this section will handle 
organometallic complex catalysts, including examples of stopped flow absorption, C-term 
MCD and CD. Also examples on various types of reactions are given. The section ends with 
catalysis without organometallic complexes. 
3.2.1 Organometallic catalysts 
3.2.1.1 Selected applications of stopped flow absorption 
Stopped flow is used in homogeneous catalysis to observe short-lived intermediates and study 
fast reaction events that occur within milliseconds (see also section 2.2.2.2). It uses specifically 
timed rapid mixing of reagents and halting of the reaction. Through the monitoring of time-
dependent changes in spectroscopy and reactant concentrations, reaction rates and 
intermediates are determined. 
Grubbs Catalysts 
Grubbs catalysts are ruthenium-based complexes used in metathesis reactions. The reaction 
mechanism involves an initiation step followed by conversion and decomposition. During the 
initiation step, a by-product in the form of a styrene derivative is typically generated. This by-
product can undergo competitive metathetic reincorporation at the ruthenium center, leading 
to catalyst regeneration. Notably, third-generation Grubbs catalysts (G-III-X) (where X = H, 
Cl, Br) exhibit an exceptionally fast initiation step. The lower-limit of the dissociative initiation 
rate constant (k1) of G-III-Br has been estimated to be > 4 s−1. Through the use of a stopped-
flow system, the reaction between G-III-Br and ethyl vinyl ether (EVE) was successfully 
monitored and the initiation step was studied (Figure 35). G-III-Br undergoes aerobic oxidation 
in toluene and exposure to air could intermittently increase the first-order quenching rate of the 
348 nm feature during successive runs. Refinements were made to the stopped-flow system to 
ensure anaerobic conditions (Figure 35 A). The kinetics could thus be confidently attributed to 
metathesis initiation. A 354 nm centered absorption band, believed to originate from a metal 
to benzylidene-π* MLCT was tracked.281 
The band appears approximately 8 milliseconds after mixing a solution of G-III-Br + 3-Br-
pyridine (L) with solutions of ethyl vinyl ether in toluene at 5 °C (Figure 35 B). To determine 
the empirical first-order rate constants of the reaction, a non-linear regression analysis was 
applied to the exponential decay in absorbance. Subsequently, the empirical rate constants 
(kobs.) were calculated by averaging data from a minimum of 10 experiments for each 
concentration variation. The kinetics derived from these experiments support a mechanism 
wherein the dissociative and associative pathways converge at the pyridyl-free complex (alkene 
coordination complex), preparing the alkene to undergo metathesis with the benzylidene. The 
authors propose that both the associative and dissociative pathways play significant roles in the 
initiation process. 

61 
 
 
 
Figure 35. (A) Schematic of reactants mixing via stopped-flow (UV-VIS), G-III-Br: third-generation Grubbs 
catalyst, [L]: exogenous ligand such as 3-Br-pyridine, EVE: ethyl vinyl ether, Ru=CHOEt: initiation product; (B) 
UV-VIS spectra of the reaction of G-III-Br+[L] with EVE. Adapted from ref. 281. Copyright 2019 Royal Society 
of Chemistry. 
 
Stopped flow experiments also enable in-depth kinetic investigation of ligand substitution and 
catalytic oxidation of H2O to O2 on ruthenium complexes bearing the pentapyridyl ligand 
(6,6’’-(methoxy(pyridin-2-yl)methylene)di-2,2’-bipyridine: L-OMe).282 The complex trans-
[RuII(Cl)(L-OMe-κ-N5)]1+ , referred to as trans-1+, undergoes a substitution of the sixth 
coordination 
ligand 
in 
an 
aqueous 
solution 
containing 
trifluoromethanesulfonic 
acid/trifluoroethanol (used to enhance solubility), leading to the formation of the Ru aquo 
complex trans-22+. This substitution process is relatively slow, with a pseudo-first-order rate 
constant of k1=3.3*10−4 s−1 and a half-time of t1/2=35 minutes. In contrast, the analogous 
complex with the L-Me ligand shows faster reactivity under the same conditions, with a rate 
constant of k1’=1.5*10−3 s−1 and half time of t1/2=8 min. 
The authors then investigated the substitution reaction of trans-1+ upon one-electron oxidation 
in presence of ceriumIV ammonium nitrate, towards a trans-[RuIII(Cl)(L-OMe-κ-N5)]2+ 
complex denoted (trans-12+). This rapid outer-sphere oxidation reaction was monitored using 
stopped-flow UV-VIS spectroscopy and fitted to a second-order kinetic profile, with a rate 
constant of k2=8.0*104 M−1 s−1. Interestingly, the obtained spectra reveal a second, slower 
process occurring simultaneously with the formation of the oxidized complex (trans-12+), 
corresponding to the isomerization of (trans-12+) to (cis-12+), which remains in equilibrium. 
Tracking complex formation 
The synthesis of organometallic complexes is commonly studied using in situ UV-VIS 
absorption spectroscopy. An example is the formation of μ-chloro binuclear diphosphine (PP) 
rhodium complexes [Rh(PP)(μ-Cl)]2, with the ligands BINAP, SegPhos, DM-SegPhos, and 
DiFluorPhos, through two consecutive steps starting from the precursor [(Rh(COD)(μ-Cl))2] 
(COD = cyclooctadiene).283 UV-VIS absorption spectra were used to study the kinetics of 
diolefin exchange with chelating diphosphine in the rhodium coordination sphere. For the 
BINAP exchange, an isosbestic point was observed at 338.5 nm, indicating a single 
transformation. The second order rate constants for each step were derived from stopped flow 
experiments with a diode array spectrophotometer. However, the kinetic studies were hindered 
by an equilibrium between the starting and target complex on one side, and the intermediate on 
the other. Therefore, the competitive reaction steps were separated and then successfully 

62 
 
 
quantified using UV-VIS spectroscopy. It was found that the in situ formation of these catalyst 
precursors requires a longer time than typically expected, and that the second step is rate-
determining. 
In further studies the formation of an unexpected monomeric pentacoordinated neutral complex 
of the type [RhCl(PP)(diolefin)] was reported in equilibrium with the dimeric target compound 
[Rh(PP)(μ-Cl)]2.284 The in situ UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy showed that this 
pentacoordinated complex is an intermediate of the reaction that may arise from the generated 
target complex [Rh(PP)(μ-Cl)]2 through reaction with the free diolefin, or even directly from 
[Rh(diolefin)(μ-Cl)]2 and the diphosphine. Thus, the quantitative formation of this 
pentacoordinate mononuclear complex can be avoided with a proper choice of the rhodium 
source and the ligands, and by controlling the reaction conditions such as the solvent and the 
temperature. To conclude this work, further detailed mechanistic investigations using in situ 
UV-VIS absorption monitoring of the [Rh(diphosphine)(μ-X)]2 preparation were performed.285 
The reaction spectra revealed different reactivity and intermediates formation depending on the 
precursor complex, the type of ligand, and the reaction conditions, especially the reaction 
temperature and the used solvent. 
Catalytic cycles 
The oxidative addition of organometallic complexes is often the rate-determining step in a 
catalytic cycle and therefore a relevant subject for operando and in situ UV-VIS absorption 
studies.286 In this context, Guilera et al. monitored the addition of iodobenzene to 
[(PPh3)2Pd(dba)] by means of in situ stopped flow UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy. The 
disappearance of the absorption bands of [(PPh3)2Pd(dba)] (at 491 and 432 nm), was monitored 
and synchronized on the millisecond scale with dispersive EXAFS.287 The study allowed the 
determination of the order and rate constant of this step, and revealed that the concerted 
oxidative addition takes place in a cis configuration, followed by a cis-trans isomerization.  
3.2.1.2 Applications of C-term MCD 
Magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy is useful to investigate the electronic structure and 
bonding of homogeneous catalysts, especially of paramagnetic metal and f-element complexes. 
It offers insights in the interactions between ligands and the metal center.288, 289 As with 
metalloenzymes, C-term MCD intensity is most frequently analyzed due to its ability to provide 
highly informative bands. Still, its application to non-enzymatic organometallic reactions has 
so far been limited. Herein, we present lead examples that highlight the importance of C-term 
MCD in understanding reaction mechanisms, and in determining reactive species of various 
transition metal catalysts used in C-C cross-coupling reactions.290  
C-term MCD spectroscopy was used to determine the structures and coordination number of 
high-valent Ni complexes catalyzing C-C coupling.291 This catalyst shows interesting 
variations in the rate of reductive elimination, contingent upon both the oxidation state of the 
transition metal center and the characteristics of the coordinated ligands. MCD allowed the 
determination of the C-to-Ni charge transfer energies, revealing that the C-C bond formation 
during reductive elimination and the charge transfer transitions involve the same frontier 
molecular orbitals, allowing its usage for kinetic tracking. 
Iron-bisphosphine complexes represent another class of catalysts used in C-C cross-coupling 
reactions. The nature of the in situ formed iron species, the active form of the catalyst, and the 
catalytic mechanisms remain uncertain.292 Neidig et al. conducted a study on the Fe-SciOPP-
catalyzed Kumada cross-coupling of MesMgBr and primary alkyl halides, using C-term MCD 
spectroscopy to identify the reactive iron species.293 Upon adding one equivalent of MesMgBr 

63 
 
 
to FeCl2(SciOPP), the NIR MCD spectrum displays two transitions, indicating the formation 
of a tetrahedral high-spin FeII complex, FeBrMes(SciOPP) (Figure 36 A). With the addition of 
a second equivalent of MesMgBr, three new transitions emerge in the NIR MCD spectrum, 
indicating the formation of a square planar FeII complex, FeMes2(SciOPP) (Figure 36 B). When 
an excess of the Grignard reagent is introduced, the MCD spectrum reveals the formation of 
the FeMes3− complex (Figure 36 C, D). Based on these observations, it was suggested that the 
FeMes2(SciOPP) complex serves as the active species in this reaction. It first reacts with the 
primary alkyl halide to generate the C-C product and the mono-mesitylated species. Then, the 
mono-mesitylated species reacts with another equivalent of MesMgBr, leading to the 
regeneration of the active bis-mesitylated species, completing the catalytic cycle. 
 
Figure 36. 5 K, NIR MCD spectra for the reaction of FeCl2(SciOPP) with one equiv. (A), two equiv. (B), 20 
equiv. (C), and 100 equiv of MesMgBr (D). Adapted with permission from ref. 293. Copyright 2014 American 
Chemical Society. 
In a subsequent investigation, C-term MCD spectroscopy was used to study the Fe-SciOPP 
catalyst in the cross-coupling reaction involving phenyl nucleophiles and secondary alkyl 
halides.294 VTVH MCD analysis enabled the determination of crucial parameters such as the 
coordination number, oxidation state, and spin state of paramagnetic organometallic species 
generated in situ. VTVH MCD reveals that when two equivalents of PhMgBr are added to 
FeCl2(SciOPP), a four-coordinate FePh2(SciOPP) species is formed. It was further determined 
that this species adopts a high-spin distorted square pyramidal geometry. These findings 
indicate that unlike the coupling of MesMgBr and primary alkyl halides, the reactive species 
in these reactions is the mono-phenylated iron complex. 

64 
 
 
3.2.1.3 Applications of CD 
Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is an optical technique highly sensitive to chirality, 
making it a valuable tool for analyzing and distinguishing analytes within a chiral host-guest 
system. It finds practical application in high-throughput screening (HTS) processes. In the 
realm of enantioselective organometallic transformations, CD spectroscopy has been employed 
to determine the enantiomeric excess (ee) for chiral catalysts. 
For metal complexes exhibiting CD-active MLCT bands, the addition of a chiral guest allows 
modulation of the MLCT bands, facilitating the differentiation of enantiomers, and thus the 
calculation of ee.  
On the other hand, Exciton-Coupled Circular Dichroism (ECCD) is used when dealing with 
compounds that contain two or more chromophores arranged in a helical manner. To establish 
the absolute configuration of the analyte the Cotton effect is analyzed. This method is 
particularly useful for resolving the handedness or stereochemistry of complex chiral molecules. 
However, the enantiomeric excess values determined from CD have relatively high absolute 
errors compared to chiral high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis, and 
therefore additional optimization should be implemented to enhance the accuracy and 
reliability of this technique.295  
ECCD was employed as an optical readout for the asymmetric copper catalyst used in the 
Michael addition of malonate to nitrostyrenes. This catalyst includes a helically chiral ligand, 
and the absolute configuration of the ligand is reversed depending on the oxidation state of the 
copper center, which in turn controls the stereoselectivity of the reaction.296 ECCD 
spectroscopy proved instrumental in differentiating between the two possible pseudo-
enantiomeric states of the catalyst that arise after reduction or oxidation. The CD spectra 
obtained for the CuII and CuI complexes displayed mirror images, consistent with the inversion 
of the asymmetric orientation of the chromophores upon change in oxidation state (Figure 37). 
These findings strongly suggest that ligand reorganization occurs alongside the inversion of 
helicity, as anticipated. 

65 
 
 
 
Figure 37. CD (L.mol−1.cm−1 ) and UV (L.mol−1.cm−1) spectra of the reduction/oxidation induced switching 
between CuII and CuI. Adapted from ref. 296 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2.1.4 Further reactions 
A large variety of chemical transformations is catalyzed using soluble organometallics. 
Examples of their in situ tracking of UV-VIS-NIR absorption are given in this section to 
emphasize the wide application. In our selection, we cover ethylene oligomerization, alcohol 
oxidation, asymmetric hydrogenation, dehydroperoxidation, and the dehydrogenation of 
formic acid. 
Ethylene oligomerization 
In situ UV-VIS was used to study the oligomerization of ethylene into metallacyclopentanes 
using for instance the rac-(ebthi)M(η2 -Me3SiC2- SiMe3) complex (with ebthi = 1,2-ethylene-
1,1’-bis(η5 -tetrahydroindenyl)) as a catalyst.297, 298 Two different organometallics with M= Zr 
(Figure 38 A) and M= Hf (Figure 38 B) were tested. The obtained reaction spectra of the Zr 
based complex with ethylene (Figure 38 C) have an isosbestic point at 436 nm indicating a 
pseudo first-order reaction with the pseudo-rate constants k’ = k.[ethylene] = 0.0365 s−1 
determined by a non-linear curve fit. Plotting k’ as a function of the ethylene concentration 
allows deriving the rate constant, here 0.35 L*mol−1*s−1.  
With the analogous Hf complex (Figure 38 B), the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra during 
reaction do not exhibit isosbestic points (Figure 38 D), and the corresponding extinction 
diagrams show two distinct straight lines indicating a consecutive reaction, wherein the first 
reaction is fast and the second is considerably slower. This allows a separate treatment of the 
two steps. However, the reaction of 1-Hf with ethylene is reversible towards 2-Hf at room 
temperature, whereas the consecutive reaction yielding 3-Hf requires 100 °C (Figure 38 B). 
Hence, an intermediate B was suggested, whose formation can occur from the reverse reaction 
of 2-Hf in presence of ethylene through an SN2 mechanism (Figure 38 B). This reveals an 
influence of ethylene on the observed overall rate formation of 2.298, 299 Plotting the observed 
rate constants k’obs.1= 78.6 s−1 and k’obs.2= 2.4 s−1, obtained from the reaction UV-Vis spectra 

66 
 
 
vs. the ethylene concentration results in the rate constants kobs.1= 929 L*mol−1*s−1 and kobs.2= 
32 L*mol−1*s−1 for both reactions. 
 
Figure 38. (A) Reaction of rac-(ebthi)Zr(η2 -Me3SiC2- SiMe3) with ethylene; (B) Reaction of rac-
(ebthi)Hf(η2 -Me3SiC2- SiMe3) with ethylene via intermediate B; (C) UV-VIS absorption spectra for the 
reaction of rac-(ebthi)Zr(η2 -Me3SiC2- SiMe3) with ethylene in toluene at r.t., k’ = 0.0365 s−1 (the pseudo-
rate constants k’ for the formation of 3-Zr as a function of ethylene concentration, rate constant k was 
determined from the slope of the linear regression); (D) UV-Vis spectra for the reaction of rac-(ebthi)Hf(η2
-Me3SiC2- SiMe3) with ethylene in toluene, at room temperzture, k’obs.1 = 78.6 s−1, k’obs.2 = 2.4 s−1). Adapted 
from ref. 297. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
Chromium-based 
organometallics 
complexes 
were 
also 
used 
for 
ethylene 
oligomerization.300 These catalysts promote the production of hexene or octene from 
ethylene, and are commonly employed in the reaction as precatalysts, that require an 
activator. In this process, methylaluminoxane or alkylaluminum reagents are typically 
employed as activators, playing a crucial role in reducing the Cr complex to generate the 
active intermediate. UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy was used by the group of Sydora 
and Blakemore to understand the activation processes, as well as the redox chemistry of 
these chromium-based precatalysts, prior to olefin oligomerization. Therefore, a family 
of Cr(P,N)Cl3(THF) complexes (where (P,N) represents a bidentate phosphorus- and
nitrogen-containing ligand) were studied, and the UV-VIS spectra show two d-d
absorption bands at 450 and 650 nm prior to the activation. The addition of
decamethylcobaltocene Cp*2Co as a reducing agent, results in a decrease in absorbance 
at λ = 247 and 350 nm, and a significant increase in absorbance at λ = 298 nm. Two 
isosbestic points at 237 and 276 nm are observed, indicating the reduction of the CrIII
complex to CrII. On the other hand, the reactivity of the CrIII complex was probed with 
the AlEt3 activator. The UV-VIS spectra show an increase in absorbance at λ = 227 and 
342 nm, a decrease in absorbance at λ = 297 nm, as well as two isosbestic points at 244 
and 310 nm, demonstrating the conversion of the CrIII complex to a new reduced Al-
bound Cr species. This was then titrated with Cp*2Co, resulting in a decrease of bands 
at λ = 221 and 358 nm, an increase at λ = 290 nm, with two isosbestic points at 254 and 

67 
 
 
323 nm, indicating the formation of a two-electron-reduced species. Based on these 
findings, the authors proposed that the Lewis acidity and the reductive activity of 
alkylaluminum reagents enables the multi-electron reduction of CrIII, permitting its 
backbonding with coordinated ethylene ligands, thus promoting the oligomerization 
reaction. 
Furthermore, the effect of different AlR3 activators on the performance of the Cr complex 
in the oligomerization of ethylene was investigated by Grauke et al.301 The authors used 
UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy to monitor the Cr complex formation upon mixing the 
Cr(acac)3 precursor, the (PNP) ligand (Ph2PN(iPr)PPh2), and the activator. An intra-
ligand transition band at 260 nm and a LMCT complex transition band at 337 nm were 
identified for Cr(acac)3 in cyclohexane, which remain unchanged after the addition of 
PNP, indicating no coordination to the metal center (Figure 39 A). However, upon 
addition of modified methylaluminoxane (MMAO) (used as a reference), the formation 
of (PNP)CrII(CH3)2 is detected by the appearance of a 325 nm absorption band. A higher 
band intensity is observed in the case of AlMe3, indicating an effective methylation of 
the Cr center. With AltBu, on the other hand, the alkylation is less efficient (Figure 39
B). Complementary in situ EPR, ATR-IR, and XANES/EXAFS studies were then 
conducted to better understand the valence state of Cr, and its coordination environment.
The results show that one-electron reduction is possible in presence of all Al activators, 
whereas deep reduction to CrI requires bulky activators such as AlOct3. 
 
Figure 39. (A) In situ UV-VIS absorption spectra of Cr(acac)3 before and after adding PNP ligand; (B) Spectra 
of Cr(acac)3/PNP in presence of different activators. Adapted from ref. 301. Copyright 2019 Wiley. 
Alcohol oxidation  
The aerobic oxidation of benzylic and aliphatic alcohols using Cu/TEMPO (TEMPO = 
(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl) is an important reaction for the synthesis of fine 
chemicals.302, 303 In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy coupled with EPR and 

68 
 
 
attenuated total reflection (ATR)-IR, and later extended to simultaneous operando 
EPR/XANES/EXAFS/UV-VIS-NIR/ATR-IR, enabled a better understanding of the 
mechanism.283, 304 Prior to the reaction, a MLCT band at 310 nm is observed when adding the 
catalyst precursor CuIOTf in MeCN. This band is shifted to a higher wavelength (348 nm), and 
a new MLCT band appears at 450 nm when bpy (2,2’-bipyridine) is added, indicating the 
replacement of the coordinated solvent by the ligand (Figure 40). The band shift revealed the 
dipolar interaction of the (bpy)CuI complex with O2, indicating a stabilization of the CuI species 
against oxidation as the band at ~660 nm, corresponding to CuII d-d transitions, remains 
negligible (Figure 40). However, coordination of NMI (N-methylimidazole) to the (bpy)CuI 
complex reduces the CuII/CuI reduction potential and raises its ability to reduce O2 towards 
(bpy)(NMI)(CH3CN)CuII-OOH and (bpy)(NMI)CuII(µ-OH)2CuII(bpy)(NMI)(CH3CN).305 This 
binuclear species is cleaved during reaction with TEMPO to form (bpy)(NMI)(OOH)CuII-
TEMPO and (bpy)(NMI)(CH3CN)CuIIOOH-TEMPO, which are considered to be the active 
species in the alcohol oxidation. 
 
Figure 40. (a) UV-VIS spectra of [(MeCN)4]CuOTf complex in MeCN (b)+bpy (c) after 20 min bubbling O2 at
20 °C (d) +NMI (e) +NMI after 15 min (f) +BzOH (g) +TEMPO. Adapted from ref. 304. Copyright 2015 Wiley. 
Asymmetric hydrogenation 
The rhodium diphosphine complex [Rh(Me-Duphos)(cod)]BF4 (structure 4, Figure 41 A) was 
reported as a catalyst for the in situ hydrogenation of the cylooctadiene group (cod) in MeOH. 
This catalyst generates the corresponding solvated complex, which is the active catalytic 

69 
 
 
species in the reaction (Figure 41 A).297 Due to low amount of the cod hydrogenation 
intermediate (cyclooctene complex (coe)),306 the consecutive reaction can be regarded as a 
pseudo-first-order reaction with a pseudo-rate constants k'2cod. The recorded UV-VIS 
absorption spectra during the reaction showed four isosbestic points indicating a kinetically 
uniform reaction (Figure 41 B). From nonlinear curve fitting of the decay, and fitting the 
evolution to a pseudo-first order kinetic equation, the pseudo rate constant k'2cod was calculated 
to be 0.119 min−1. 
 
Figure 41. (A) The formation of the solvate complex [Rh(Me-DuPHOS)(MeOH)2]BF4 via coe intermediate; (B) 
Reaction spectra for the hydrogenation of [Rh(Me-Du-PHOS)(cod)]BF4 in MeOH at r.t. Adapted from ref. 297. 
Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
Similarly, the authors investigated the deactivation mechanism of the rhodium diphosphine 
complexes in asymmetric hydrogenation. The presence of aromatic solvents in the reaction 
such as benzene and toluene have the potential to inhibit these reactions. Hence, the stability 
constants of the rhodium diphosphine complexes were obtained via UV-VIS absorption 
monitoring of the benzene titration of [Rh(DPPE)(MeOH)2]BF4 to derive the desired stability 
constant of 18 l/mol after linearization using the Benesi-Hildebrand equation.307 
An enantioselective version of this reaction was explored using the chiral [Rh(dipamp)][BF4] 
complex as a catalyst for the selective hydrogenation of ethyl-(Z)-α-acetamidocinnamate (mac) 
to N-acetyl-(R)-phenylalanine.308 The reaction intermediate [Rh(dipamp)(mac)]+, generated 
upon coordination of mac to the rhodium center via the C=C and the oxygen atom of the amide 
group, normally leads to the formation of the S conformer. Thus, to understand this unique 
stereoselectivity, in situ UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy was used for thorough kinetic studies. 
The results revealed that the reactivity of the intermediate diastereoisomers towards hydrogen 
is at the origin of the observed enantioselectivity. 
In another study, 309 the transfer hydrogenation of acetophenone using the Ikariya–Noyori 
complex [(mesitylene)RuCl(R,R)-(TsDPEN)] in presence of formic acid/triethylamine 
mixtures was studied using operando UV-VIS-NIR absorption and NMR spectroscopy to 
monitor the reaction intermediates. The generated formate complex was detected by NMR, 
while the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy allowed tracking the unsaturated reaction 
intermediate during the reaction based on its characteristic absorbance at 565 nm. The UV-VIS 
absorption data imply an almost quantitative transformation of the unsaturated intermediate 
during the reaction towards the formate complex in presence of formic acid, but a less favorable 
decarboxylation of the latter towards the Ru-hydride complex. These findings suggest that three 
reactions can compete with the hydride complex formation, (1) a re-insertion of CO2 forming 

70 
 
 
the formate complex, (2) hydrogen transfer to form the desired product and (3) protonation by 
the excess of formic acid, which causes its consumption and a decrease in the reaction 
performance. 
Dehydroperoxidation  
In 2018, Schaub and coworkers investigated the chromium catalyzed dehydroperoxidation of 
cyclohexyl hydroperoxide (CHHP) to cyclohexanone.276 With in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption 
spectroscopy, the metal complex species were detected, a reaction mechanism was proposed, 
and the reaction conditions were optimized. The absence of strong absorption bands between 
300-1000 nm in the pure catalyst spectra indicates the +6 oxidation state (Ar electron 
configuration) of the Cr center. Further addition of CHHP leads to a decrease of the absorption 
band at 450 nm linked to the coordination of the substrate to the CrVI. Since no new bands are 
observed around 600 nm, the oxidations state is considered unchanged. Interestingly, a new 
absorption band at 480 nm, assigned to a peroxy to CrVI CT, appears, indicating the formation 
of the cyclohexylperoxychromium(VI)complex (Figure 42). A blueshift of the absorbance to 
420 nm occurs with the decomposition of this complex into CrO2(OH)2. The authors propose 
that the decomposition of cyclohexyl hydroperoxide proceeds via a non-radical, non-redox 
mechanism, through formation of the cyclohexylperoxy chromium complex as the reactive 
intermediate. This was confirmed by further NMR and DFT studies.  
 
Figure 42. UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of the reaction of CrO3*py in presence of CHHP in α,α,α-
trifluorotoluene at 5 °C. Insert: (blue line) Spectrum of the formed cyclohexylperoxychromium(VI) complex after 
2 min; (shifted black line) decomposition after 10 min and (red line) full decomposition after 48 h. Adapted from 
ref. 276. Copyright 2018 Wiley. 
Formic acid dehydrogenation 
Formic acid decomposes into CO2 and H2 and is therefore a liquid carrier for these gases under 
acidic conditions and at ambient temperature. The Fe/PP3 iron catalyst system, formed in situ 
from Fe(BF4)2-6H2O and the tetradentate ligand tris[(2-diphenylphosphino)-ethyl]phosphine 
(P(CH2CH2PPh2)3, PP3), is an effective catalyst for this reaction.310, 311 In situ Raman, ATR-IR, 
and UV-VIS absorption spectroscopies were used to identify the intermediate complexes.312 
The UV-VIS absorption spectrum of the Fe/PP3 system in THF shows the π → π* and MLCT 
transitions of the formed complex (bands at 277 and 508 nm, respectively), as well as the 
interaction between the Fe/PP3 complex and the additional THF ligand (318 nm absorption 
band) (Figure 43). Upon addition of formic acid, the band at 318 immediately disappears, and 
the MLCT band loses intensity and shifts to 499 nm. The formic acid coordinates onto the 
Fe/PP3 catalytic system by displacing the previously coordinated THF to form the Fe-PP3-
bidentate formate complex, which is considered the catalytically active complex for the release 

71 
 
 
of CO2 and H2. The addition of NaCl led to the formation of a deactivated [FeCl(PP3)]BF4 
complex in THF, as chlorine is preferentially coordinated over formic acid. This appears in the 
UV-VIS absorption spectrum through absorption bands at 327 and 380 nm, and a redshift of 
the 499 nm absorption band (Figure 43). 
 
 
Figure 43. In situ UV-VIS absorption spectra obtained from Fe/PP3 in THF, after addition of formic acid and 
further addition of NaCl. Adapted from ref. 313. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
A recently introduced setup to study homogeneous catalysts with in situ DRS uses a suspension 
of α-Al2O3 to diffusively reflect the incident light (Figure 3 B). The signal is processed using 
the K-M formula, with K/S assumed directly proportional to the concentration of measured 
species in the solution. The scattering coefficient was calculated as the reciprocal average 
distance between the α-Al2O3 particles.30 This system was used to study the catalytic 
dehydrogenation of formic acid to H2 and CO2 catalyzed by the iridium complex 
[Cp*Ir(4DHBP)(OH2)]SO4 at 80 °C. The turnover frequency (TOF) and turnover number 
(TON) of the reaction were determined at 5467 h−1 and 15094, respectively, in agreement with 
previous studies. Advantages of the approach are a high signal-to-noise ratio and the reliable 
collection of spectra without mechanical errors from gas meters. However, the impact of the 
escaping light should be critically evaluated, as the K-M assumption of infinite sample 
thickness (see section 2.1.1) is clearly not fulfilled. 
3.2.2 Non-organometallic transformation 
3.2.2.1 Imide reduction 
The reduction of imides and amides in the presence of phenylsilanes as hydrogenating agent, 
is a good example of homogeneously catalyzed non-organometallic reactions. They are 
commonly studied by in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption, ATR-IR, and Raman spectroscopy. 
Using boronic acid,314 or fluoride catalysts,315 two scenarios are proposed. The catalyst can 
either activate the target reagents or the hydrogenating agent.313 For the tetra-n-
butylammonium fluoride (TBAF)-catalyzed reaction, the in situ UV-VIS absorption spectra 
show no interaction between the imide (N-methylphthalimide) and TBAF, as the imide bands 
at 265, 302, and 324 nm remain unchanged over time in the presence of the catalyst (Figure 44 
A). However, upon the addition of Ph2SiH2, the 324 nm absorption starts fading indicating the 

72 
 
 
onset of the carbonyl group reduction. A new absorption band at 370 nm appears from the 
desired product (N-methylisoindolinone). An additional band at 536 nm indicates the formation 
of small amounts of chromophores as side products. It was derived that in the first stage of the 
reaction, TBAF is coordinated to the silicon atom of Ph2SiH2 forming a reactive penta-
coordinated silicon species. This readily attacks the carbonyl group of the imide yielding a 
hexacoordinated silicon species where the hydride transfer can take place.  
In the boronic acid-catalyzed reduction of N,N-dimethylbenzamide to N,N-dimethylbenzamine, 
interaction of boronic acid with the amide via hydrogen bonding is observed by in situ UV-
VIS absorption spectroscopy (Figure 44 B). The addition of PhSiH3 to the boronic acid reveals 
no change in the spectra whereas the further addition of the amide causes a significant blueshift 
indicating the interaction (Figure 44 B, C). The mechanism is proposed to be initiated by the 
activation of the carbonyl group of the amide by the boronic acid, enabling attack of the silane 
towards the formation of the corresponding siloxane and the desired amine. Thus, in both 
reactions with boronic acid or fluoride, the formation of phenylsiloxanes is believed to be the 
driving force. 
 
Figure 44. (A) In situ UV-VIS absorption spectra for the reaction of N-methylphthalimide and Ph2SiH2 using 
TBAF as catalyst; (B) UV-VIS absorption spectra of N,N-dimethylbenzamide, PhSiH3, and the boric acid and 
their mixtures in toluene; (C) in situ UV-VIS absorption spectra for the reaction of N,N-dimethylbenzamide and 
PhSiH3 with the boric acid in toluene. Adapted from refs. 314, 315. Copyright 2011 Wiley and 2013 Wiley. 
3.2.2.2 Cycloaddition 
Another example of non-organometallic transformations studied by in situ UV-VIS is the [3 + 
3] cyclocondensation reaction of ketene acetals with a diene. Depending on the nature of the 
Lewis acid and its interaction with the ketene acetal, different products can be obtained. The 
use of both AlCl3 and TiCl4 leads to the generation of salicylate,316 but via a different 
mechanism.317 A strong redshift of the absorption edge is observed in the case of TiCl4, 
indicating an increase in electron density of the C-O bond of the ketene-acetal by electron 
delocalization (Figure 45). This is due to the TiCl4 attack, transforming the group into a 
chlorine-containing titanium bis-chelate complex, active in the UV-VIS region. For AlCl3 the 
absence of dπ electrons prevents the formation of metal-donor resonance structures, and the 
absorption edge in the UV-VIS absorption spectrum is accordingly slightly blue-shifted. An 
aluminum tris-chelate complex without chlorinated ligands is formed instead. 

73 
 
 
 
Figure 45. In situ UV-Vis absorption spectra recorded during the (A) AlCl3- and (B) TiCl4-mediated reaction 
using ketenacetale (6a & 6b) in CH2Cl2. Adapted from ref. 313, using data with permission from refs. 316, 317. 
Copyrights 2013 American Chemical Society, 2011 Wiley and 2013 Elsevier. 
As illustrated above, in situ UV-VIS spectroscopy has proven its relevance for monitoring 
homogeneous transformations, especially when organometallic complexes are involved. 
Nevertheless, IR and NMR spectroscopies are preferably used in this field, as shorter 
wavelengths (higher energy radiation) often promote side reactions.318 As also shown in this 
section, detailed analysis and interpretation of UV-VIS-NIR absorption bands is rather rare in 
homogeneous catalysis studies. Instead, single transformations with clear isosbestic points in 
the absorption spectrum are commonly performed, and any dynamics in the region of the 
absorption spectrum can be used for kinetic measurements. As with heterogeneous catalysis, 
no single spectroscopy can provide full understanding of the relevant properties, and the 
coupling of different spectroscopies is common.319 This applies for instance to organometallic 
reactions, where UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is often combined with attenuated total 
reflection (ATR)-IR and Raman spectroscopy to identify the metal complexes as well as the 
intermediate species.320 
3.3 Enzymes 
Using complex metal-containing active sites, metalloenzymes perform some of the most 
difficult and selective catalytic reactions. Metalloenzyme catalysis involves active sites that 
combine properties of heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis. They involve a large variety 
of ligated complexes that influence UV-VIS-NIR sensitive properties, derived from electronic 
transitions both on the metals and on the ligands, as observed for homogeneous TMI complexes. 
Besides this, they also are influenced by their mantle, similarly to the support effects in 
heterogeneous catalysis, but supplemented with properties unique to the extended protein 
ligand. This section shows examples of typical methods used in the kinetic and mechanistic 

74 
 
 
study of metalloenzyme catalysis with in situ UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopy. Then the power of 
combined absorption, rR, and MCD spectroscopy, originating from the field of 
metalloenzymes, is demonstrated. We summarize two recent applications of stopped-flow 
absorption combined with a higher resolution spectroscopic method on metalloenzyme 
intermediates. Spectroscopic definition of these intermediates and stopped-flow derived 
isotope sensitivity of kinetics (kinetic isotope effects) allowed determination of key reaction 
mechanisms. These intermediates also parallel relevant intermediates defined in heterogeneous 
metallozeolite catalysts from site selective spectroscopic studies. 
A challenge common to all characterisation of enzymes remains the measurement of in vivo 
properties in the setups used for in situ characterisation.321, 322 In heterogeneous catalysis one 
often refers to the ‘pressure gap’ to indicate the discrepancies between the productive 
conditions and the conditions under which spectroscopic measurement is possible. For 
enzymes the gap is of another nature. In vivo conditions often imply low enzyme 
concentrations and specific environments (e.g. cofactors, ionic strength, pH, temperature, 
embedding in cellular membranes, …). Deviations from these conditions can induce non-
negligible changes to enzyme structure and reactivity. Naturally, one may just as well be more 
interested in enzyme characterization in reactor conditions for industrial purposes. Both types 
of settings can bedifficult to correspond with in situ measurements, commonly on isolated, up-
concentrated enzymes at low temperatures. The fragility and redox sensitivity of enzymes, as 
well as their strong diversity can present additional challenges to sample preparation and to 
scholarly consensus. An well-known example is the discussion on the structure of the active 
site in particulate monooxygenase.323 Moreover radiative damage makes measurements with 
high energy radiation problematic. 
A more UV-VIS-NIR range specific challenge for the spectroscopic investigation of enzyme 
catalysis is the interfering absorption by the surrounding mantle. Aromatic amino acids absorb 
strongly in the UV and this can make certain active site signals difficult to discern. An option 
is to measure instead on smallermodel complexes, but then any relevant effect of the greater 
protein structure is no longer considered. 
3.3.1 Kinetics: stopped-flow absorption and rapid freeze quench trapping 
In their catalytic cycles, metalloenzymes progress through a series of key intermediates; 
understanding these individual steps is necessary to unlock deep insight into enzyme function. 
Stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy is used to investigate them. This technique is 
particularly useful for metalloenzymes since the open shell metal centers within the active site 
have clear absorption features that can be tracked. A great example is the measurement of a 
critical intermediate and its reactivity in the catalysis of soluble methane monooxygenase 
(sMMO). sMMO is a binuclear non-heme iron enzyme capable of oxidizing methane to 
methanol at ambient conditions, a difficult feat given the strong C-H bond of methane.324 
Stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption was essential in observing the CH4 reactive intermediate Q 
of sMMO through appearance of its distinct 430 nm absorbance feature.325 This feature 
provided a handle for tracking the kinetics of the reaction of intermediate Q with CH4. The rate 
of decay of the 430 nm feature with CH4 allows extraction of Q’s very low CH4 reaction barrier 
(ΔG‡ = 10.3 kcal/mol).326 Substituting CH4 for CD4 allows determination of an H/D kinetic 
isotope effect of 50 via the change in rate of decay of the 430 nm feature (Figure 46).327 This 
large KIE indicates Q reacts with CH4 via hydrogen atom abstraction (HAA) in a tunneling 
mechanism. These and other data have been used recently to rationalize the low barrier of HAA 
from CH4 by using the front oxo of the two oxo bridges of the diferryl active site to overlap 

75 
 
 
with the H-C bonding orbital of CH4 and using the oxo bridge at the rear to stabilize the electron 
gained from the HAA (Figure 47).328  
 
Figure 46. Change in the rate of decay of intermediate Q with varying CH4 and CD4 concentrations. (Inset) 
Stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption spectra of decay of intermediate Q from 4 to 30 s. Adapted from refs. 325, 327. 
Copyright 1993 The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and copyright 1996 American 
Chemical Society. 
 
Figure 47. Density functional theory model of sMMO’s intermediate Q performing H-atom abstraction on CH4. 
(Color scheme: red = O, green = Fe, grey = C, blue = N, and white = H). Adapted from ref. 328. Copyright 2021 
American Chemical Society. 
The absorption features still lack the capacity to probe the chemical structure of intermediates, 
necessitating the use of methods that can be coupled to the absorption band for higher 
resolution analysis. This requires trapping of the intermediates through RFQ. Other key 
spectroscopies, also using UV-VIS-NIR range light, can be subsequently used to gain 
information from the absorption features of the intermediate in the frozen mixture. For charge 
transfer bands that have high absorption intensity, rR spectroscopy can be used to gain 
vibrational information on the active site of the intermediate. For ligand field bands, which are 
often too weak to observe in stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption, MCD at low temperature can 
allow visualization of these bands. Additionally, magnetic information on the ground state of 
the intermediate’s active site can be obtained through VTVH MCD of the excited state intensity. 
Background on these techniques and metalloenzyme applications paralleling studies on 
metallozeolites are explored below, but for a more in-depth background we point readers to 
our previous review.100  
3.3.2 Resonance Raman profiling of absorption bands 
In the case of the protein oxy-hemocyanin, the vibrations of a small four atom core in a 73 kDA 
protein that has a ~3 mM concentration can be observed in rR and used to assign the the 
vibrations and electronic structure of its μ-η2:η2-peroxide dicopper(II) core (Figure 48 A, B).205, 

76 
 
 
329 Isotope perturbation (or lack of perturbation) was extremely helpful in vibrational 
assignments of 18O2 oxy-hemocyanin, assigning both the O-O stretch at 744 cm−1 from the 
significant redshift upon 18O labeling and the Cu-Cu stretch at 286 cm−1 from the lack of isotope 
perturbation.329 Additionally, non-totally symmetric vibrations are not resonance Raman 
allowed, resulting in weak intensity like the 543 cm−1 Cu-O (B3u) mode in oxy-hemocyanin; 
however, the first overtone at 2x the energy of the fundamental is symmetric and resonance 
Raman allowed, giving the intensity seen in the 1087 cm−1 vibration (Figure 48 B). Finally, the 
intensity of all these vibrations is measured at different laser excitation wavelengths to generate 
a resonance Raman excitation profile, helping assign the two LMCT bands of hemocyanin as 
the peroxide σ and peroxide π CT bands at higher and lower energy respectively (Figure 48 
C).205 
 
Figure 48. (A) Arthropod hemocyanin with active site highlighted. (B) Resonance Raman spectrum of oxy-
hemocyanin. (C) Resonance Raman excitation profile of the 286 cm−1 (Cu-Cu) and 744 cm−1 (O-O) vibrations of 
hemocyanin. Adapted with permission from refs. 205, 329. Copyright 1994 and 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy coupled to rR spectroscopy was critical in 
solving a major outstanding issue in bioinorganic chemistry, the mechanism of 
monooxygenation by the enzyme tyrosinase. Tyrosinase (Ty) is a coupled binuclear Cu enzyme 
that binds O2 to catalyze the rate-limiting step in melanin biosynthesis. Oxy-Ty uses a μ-η2:η2-
peroxide dicopper(II) core to monooxygenate L-tyrosine to L-DOPA (Figure 49 A); this core 
can then oxidize catechols to ortho-quinones that couple to form melanins. This core has two 
clear peroxide to CuII charge transfer transitions at 345 and 650 nm. The same transitions are 
observed in oxy-hemocyanin. Lasers can be tuned into these CT bands to reveal the same set 
of rR features as in oxy-Hemocyanin: the Cu-Cu stretch at 280 cm−1, the O-O stretch at 739 
cm−1, and the rR allowed first overtone of the forbidden B3u Cu-O stretch at 1078 cm−1 (Figure 
49 B).205 These CT bands also provided a handle to gain kinetic information on active site 
reactivity via stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy. 

77 
 
 
 
Figure 49. (A) Conversion of L-tyrosine to L-DOPAquinone by the enzyme tyrosinase in melanin biosynthesis. 
(B) The main vibrational modes of the Cu2O2 core in tyrosinase. Resonance Raman spectra of oxy-Ty (blue) and 
the ternary intermediate of tyrosinase (red). (C) Dependence of kobs on substrate concentration in H2O (solid blue) 
and D2O (solid red) with a linear fit of the low substrate regime (dashed). (D) QM/MM reaction coordinate for 
the monooxygenation of phenol by tyrosinase. Adapted from ref. 330. Copyright 2022 National Academy of 
Sciences. 
Under single turnover conditions where oxy-Ty solely monooxygenates the phenolic substrate, 
the rate of decay of the oxy-Ty intermediate’s 345 nm feature has linear dependence at low 
substrate concentrations, but deviates from linearity at higher substrate concentrations (Figure 
49 C). This nonlinear dependence indicates the rapid formation of a ternary intermediate upon 
binding of substrate.330 RFQ of deoxy-Ty mixed with an O2 saturated buffered solution 
containing substrate allows trapping of this ternary intermediate. Tuning a laser into the 345 
nm feature of this intermediate for rR spectroscopy reveals the same three features as in Oxy-
Ty, but with the O-O stretch and the B3u overtone shifted by +3 cm−1 and +24 cm−1, respectively. 
This indicates the preservation of the μ-η2:η2-peroxide dicopper(II) core but with an active site 
perturbation from binding of substrate. This spectroscopic perturbation combined with a 
solvent secondary kinetic isotope effect (Figure 49 C) was a significant revelation as it ruled 
out past models for the ternary complex in tyrosinase including direct bonding of a 
deprotonated phenol to one of the copper atoms or oxidation of the CuII to CuIII. Multiple 
QM/MM models were evaluated for possible substrate binding to the active site with one model 
reasonably matching the spectroscopic observations. This model has the phenolic substrate 
bound protonated above the μ-η2:η2-peroxide dicopper(II) core and hydrogen bonding to one 
of the oxygen atoms of the peroxide (Figure 49 D left). Understanding this key intermediate 
allowed derivation of the reaction mechanism for monooxygenation. The docking of the 
protonated substrate at the core with the hydrogen bond to the peroxide allows proton transfer 
to the active site upon breaking the O-O bond. The subsequent non-protonated bridging oxo is 
then able to attack the ortho carbon of the aromatic core of the substrate to form the C-O 
bond.330 
3.3.3 The application of magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy 
MCD spectroscopy was a particularly helpful characterization tool for the blue copper site in 
the intensely blue colored protein plastocyanin where the CT bands at higher energy (Figure 
50 bands 1-4) have smaller C0/D0 ratios whereas the low energy ligand field transitions (Figure 
A 
C 
B 
D 

78 
 
 
50 bands 5-8) have larger C0/D0 ratios. The low energy of the ligand field transitions coupled 
to ligand field theory first showed that the blue copper site has a distorted tetrahedral 
structure.331  
 
Figure 50. (Top) low-temperature absorption and (bottom) low-temperature MCD of plastocyanin. Adapted with 
permission from ref. 331. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, as indicated by the scheme in Figure 6, changes in MCD intensity with variation 
in the temperature and applied field of the sample also reflect the magnetic properties of the 
ground state. VTVH MCD can be plotted (Figure 51) and fit to extract spin Hamiltonian 
parameters of the ground states of key intermediates. This has been extremely useful in the 
case of non-Kramers systems (i.e. integer spin) like high spin FeII and FeIV (S = 2) systems that 
are generally not detectable by EPR spectroscopy.332 These spin Hamiltonian parameters 
provide complimentary insight into geometric and electronic structure. These changes in 
intensity with temperature and field are also dependent on the polarization of the electronic 
transition, providing information that is valuable for band assignment.18, 333 
 
Figure 51. (Top) Saturation magnetization VTVH MCD for an S = 2 system. Adapted with permission from ref. 
332. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy of a key intermediate was critical in understanding the 
mechanism of selective substrate halogenation by the α-ketoglutarate dependent Fe enzyme 
SyrB2, although here through coupling to variable-temperature (VT) MCD. SyrB2 is a 
mononuclear non-heme enzyme involved in the synthesis of the phytotoxin syringomycin E.334 
This enzyme reacts with O2 to form a high-spin FeIV=O intermediate that performs H-atom 
abstraction to selectively halogenate specific C-H bonds.335 This key FeIV=O intermediate can 
be clearly observed through stopped-flow UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy through 

79 
 
 
appearance and decay of a distinct 318 nm absorbance feature with additional lower energy 
weaker bands. These absorption features are broad and overlap, giving minimal information 
(Figure 52 top). However, MCD of the trapped intermediate at low temperature reveals detailed 
insight into these electronic transitions with three clear bands observed at low energy (Figure 
52 bottom, bands I-III). VT MCD of these bands at a strong magnetic field (7 T) was correlated 
to the zero field splitting of the ground state of the intermediate (D = +7 cm−1 and E/D = 
0.02).336 
 
Figure 52. Absorption (top) and 7 T VT MCD (bottom) of the Br-FeIV=O intermediate in SyrB2. The lowest 
energy bands are labeled with roman numerals. *Minor heme contaminant. Adapted from ref. 336. Copyright 2016 
American Chemical Society. 
The derivative shape of band I between 8 000 and 14 000 cm−1 combined with its C0/D0 ratio 
and temperature dependence allowed its assignment as the ligand field dxz/yzπ* → dz²σ* 
transition. The higher resolution of the low temperature MCD spectrum reveals the vibronic 
coupling of the Fe-O stretch in this electronic transition. Two sets of vibronic progressions are 
necessary to fit Band I, indicating a split in the energy of the degenerate dxz/yzπ* set to two 
transitions at ~9 500 cm−1 and 10 200 cm−1 (Figure 53 A). This is due to the halide binding to 
the FeIV along the y-axis in the equatorial plane of the halogenase active site that π-donates and 
raises the energy of the dyz orbital compared to the dxz orbital; the dxz orbital has a stronger 
interaction with the oxo p π orbital due to lack of competition with the halide ligand. Parameters 
extracted from the vibronic progressions allowed mapping of the excited state potential energy 
surfaces (Figure 53 B). The Fe-O bond elongates as this enzyme approaches the transition state. 
This elongation has a more dramatic effect on the dxz orbital compared to the dyz orbital due to 
its greater interaction with the oxo p π orbital. Thus, at the transition state, the dxz → dz² 
transition is lower in energy and more polarized towards an FeIII oxyl in the xz plane for H-
atom abstraction (Figure 53 C).336 

80 
 
 
 
Figure 53. (A) VT MCD spectrum of band I, the dxz/yzπ* → dz²σ* transitions in the FeIV=O intermediate in SyrB2. 
(B) Potential energy surfaces of the ground state and two lowest energy excited states. (C) FMO contours of the 
FeIV=O intermediate at the transition state with potential approach of the C-H bond in the yz plane (top) and xz 
plane (bottom). X refers to the halide. Adapted from ref. 336. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Thus, there are two potential routes for approach of the reactant’s C-H bond for HAA: parallel 
to the Fe-O bond through the dz² orbital with oxo pσ character, the σ pathway, or perpendicular 
to the Fe-O bond through the dxz orbital with oxo pπ character, the π pathway. The π pathway 
requires promotion of an electron from the dxz to dz², which is high in energy (~32 kcal/mol) at 
the ground state geometry (Fe-O = 1.64 Å). However, as the Fe-O bond elongates to reach the 
TS at a bond length of 1.82 Å, this promotion energy lowers to ~7 kcal/mol (Figure 54).337 This 
decreased promotion energy combined with the greater oxyl character of the LUMO in the 
excited state results in roughly equal barriers for HAA through either the σ or π channel, 
parallel or perpendicular to the Fe-O bond respectively.  
 
Figure 54. Change in the promotion energy from the dπ* to dσ* orbital with elongation of the FeIV=O bond. 
Ground state dσ* LUMO with O character (bottom left) and excited state dπ* LUMO with O character (top right). 
Adapted from ref. 337. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
HAA through the σ channel can only allow rebound hydroxylation due to the orientation of the 
resulting radical along the resulting FeIII-OH bond. However, HAA through the π channel 
orients the radical above the Fe(OH)Cl plane (Figure 55 left), allowing kinetic feasibility for 

81 
 
 
either rebound hydroxylation or halogenation. Although hydroxylation is thermodynamically 
favored, the lower driving force of halogenation is compensated by the lower intrinsic barrier 
for halogenation rebound making it the favorable reaction pathway for the native substrate 
(Figure 55).338 This requires the second-sphere of the protein to play a large role in promoting 
halogenation. It orients the C-H bond to approach through the π channel to prevent the 
hydroxylation that would occur through the σ channel. It also positions the substrate radical for 
good overlap with the halide dπ orbital to promote halogenation. Stopped-flow absorption 
spectroscopy identified the key FeIV=O intermediate and RFQ coupled to low temperature 
MCD (and nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy)339 allowed elucidation of its geometric 
and electronic structure that determine its reactivity. 
 
Figure 55. DFT model of the Cl-FeIII-OH SyrB2 intermediate chlorination (green) vs hydroxylation (red) after 
HAA reaction coordinate through the π channel. Adapted from ref. 338. Copyright 2017 American Chemical 
Society. 
3.3.4 Correlation of enzyme active site intermediates to metallozeolite catalysts 
The constraints of the protein on the first coordination sphere of the metal cofactor and the 
complex second-sphere interactions of their active site pockets with the substrate bring about 
their highly selective and difficult chemistry. These have some parallels in heterogeneous 
catalysts. Specifically, metallozeolites are known to both bind metals with a rigid first 
coordination sphere and have complex second-sphere interactions with substrates that dictate 
reactivity.26, 100, 177 Thus, understanding of key intermediates in metalloenzymes gained from a 
combination of stopped-flow absorption spectroscopy, RFQ, rR, and MCD can provide insight 
into metallozeolite intermediates. This is enhanced by the site-selectivity of rR and VT MCD 
in probing an active site in a mixture. 
In particular, the μ-η2:η2-peroxide dicopper(II) core seen in the coupled binuclear copper 
enzyme family is also observed in copper containing zeolites. In copper zeolite O2 chemistry, 
this μ-η2:η2-peroxide dicopper(II) intermediate is a precursor that upon heating converts to the 
methane reactive mono-μ-oxo dicopper(II) active site (section 3.1.2.2).188 Understanding this 
active site in biology can provide insight into how the μ-η2:η2-peroxide dicopper(II) converts 
to the mono-μ-oxo dicopper(II) core in zeolites, a phenomenon that is not well understood. It 
also indicates the potential reactivity of this μ-η2:η2-peroxide dicopper(II) precursor site in 

82 
 
 
zeolites. Monooxygenation of benzene at low temperature has been observed in Fe zeolites162 
but is a relatively uncultivated field in copper zeolites. The presence of a core that is known to 
monooxygenate phenol in copper biology could provide insight into whether copper zeolites 
can perform similar low temperature monooxygenation chemistry. 
Additionally, the FeIV=O core seen in a variety of iron containing enzymes also plays an 
important role in zeolite catalysis. The α-O FeIV=O intermediate in iron zeolites is able to 
oxidize methane to methanol at room temperature (section 3.1.2.5).17 The knowledge gained 
from understanding FeIV=O FMOs in these biological systems provides insight into the 
mechanism of HAA in α-O. Specifically, the lowest energy MCD band observed in α-O appears 
to have vibronic structure very similar to the lowest energy band in the FeIV=O intermediate of 
SyrB2. Just as analysis of this key ligand-field band in SyrB2 unlocked understanding of the 
HAA and rebound mechanisms occurring through specific d-orbital FMOs, similar insight in 
α-O could provide deeper insight into its mechanism of HAA and rebound that relates to 
differences in zeolite topology. 
3.4 Electrocatalysis 
In electrocatalysis, an external electric potential is used as the driving force, pushing reactions 
by shifting thermodynamic equilibria, and enabling thermally inaccessible reaction pathways 
and chemical intermediates.10 Electron transfer and changes in oxidation state are central to 
this type of catalysts, which are consequently mostly based on transition metals. The systems 
make use of solid state electrodes of conducting material and a catalyst that is either in solution 
or supported on the electrodes.340 UV-VIS-NIR excitations probe properties that are directly 
relevant to electrocatalysis, and it is therefore a very popular technique in their study. The 
measurement of high quality spectra can, however, be challenged by the multiphase nature of 
the systems and by the need for diffuse reflectance mode measurements. Moreover, while in 
thermal heterogeneous catalysis the surface is often most relevant and representative for the 
studied catalysis, in electrocatalysis electron exchange further below the surface may be 
relevant.341 This is less accessible for UV-VIS-NIR radiation. The occurrence of preferential 
conduction paths may lead to non-uniformities and non-representative measurements.342, 343 
Also research into electrochemical batteries and sensors, both driven by similar processes as 
electrocatalysis, is well supported by UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy. The use of 
operando UV-VIS spectroscopy for (photo)electocatalysis was very recently reviewed by 
Mesa et al.10 In this section we will therefore limit ourselves to some recent examples. 
Despite decades of extensive research, the efficiency and stability of electrocatalytic processes 
still remain low.344 Of particular interest is the identification of bottlenecks and contributions 
to overpotentials, the elucidation of the preferential redox couples, and the investigation of 
their reversibility. Ott et al. used in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy to monitor the 
reversible redox behavior of cobalt species in metal-organic framework (MOF) UU-
100(Co).345 Under an applied potential of -1.50 V in DMF, freshly prepared UU-100(Co)(CoIII) 
undergoes reduction and new absorption bands at ∼520 and 670 nm linked to CoI appear 
(Figure 56 A). Reoxidation of the catalyst by stepping the potential back to -0.05 V results in 
a 670 nm bleach band and a slight redshift (∼1-2 nm) of the 520 nm peak, which indicates the 
formation of CoII. With repetitive electrochromic switching experiments and monitoring the 
absorbance changes at 520 and 670 nm, the reversibility of the CoI/CoII switching was shown. 
The switch between CoI and CoIII, on the other hand, was found to be prohibited (Figure 56 B). 
A similar CoI ↔ CoII system was investigated with in situ UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy by 
Song et al., who observed the same absorption bands (Figure 56 C).346 

83 
 
 
 
Figure 56. UV-VIS-NIR absorption data on (A) UU-100(Co) thin film switching between -1.5 and -0.05 V, and 
(C) COF-366-Co at steady-state at different applied potentials. (B) Optical Absorbance kinetics curve of the UU-
100(Co) thin films measured at 520 and 670 nm by switching the potential from -0.05 to -1.5 V. Adapted from 
ref. 345, 346. Copyrights 2019 American Chemical Society and 2015 American Association for the Advancement of 
Science. 
The evolution of the UV-VIS-NIR absorption was followed in electrocatalytic water oxidation 
over an Ir-based catalyst.347, 348 From the UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of IrOx under applied 
potentials (Figure 57 A, left) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) of the IrOx films, Carlota and 
coworkers identified three redox transitions and three redox states beyond the starting redox 
state as well as their characteristic absorption bands above the open-circuit potential (OCP).347 
By taking the spectroscopic handles identified by comparison to the absorption spectra of Ir 
mono-μ-oxo dimers containing IrIII-IrIII, IrIV- IrIV, IrIV- IrV and IrV- IrV moieties as a reference, 
the three redox transitions, at 600, 800 and 460 nm, are assigned to the sequential oxidation of 
IrIII-IrIII to IrIII-IrIV, IrIV-IrIV, and IrIV-IrV, respectively.349 With a model using the Lambert-Beer 
law and Gaussian distributions of concentration over potential, the absorption spectra were 
deconvoluted and concentrations of each redox state at different potentials were derived 
(Figure 57 B). Analysis of the bias-dependent optical signals reveals the change of these redox 
species with increasing applied potential from an OER pre-catalytic IrIII state to an OER active 
IrIV-containing state. The kinetics of the redox states in IrOx were further analyzed through the 
decay of the absorption bands centered at 600, 800 and 460 nm, respectively. To access the 
OER reaction kinetics of the active redox state as a function of its concentration, the decay was 
measured after turning off the applied potential. The decay is attributed to the depletion of IrIV. 
Its faster decay after turning off at more positive applied potentials implies a greater reactivity 
of this state at increasing potentials (Figure 57 C). Such spectral evolution is also observed in 
the case of an Ir dimeric molecular (Irmolecular) catalyst (Figure 57 A, right).348 The optical 
signals related to the three redox transitions in IrOx and Irmolecular have broadly similar features. 
The concentration distributions in Irmolecular shift anodically by ∼100 mV with respect to IrOx 
for all the three redox transitions. However, in contrast with IrOx, Irmolecular exhibits potential 
independent OER reaction kinetics (Figure 57 C). The difference between the molecular 
catalyst and the heterogeneous oxide film in terms of OER kinetics is attributed to the lack of 
co-operative effects in the Irmolecular system with isolated Ir centers. 

84 
 
 
 
Figure 57. (A) Absorption changes of (right) IrOx and (left) Irmolecular on mesoporous indium tin oxide upon 
applying an oxidative potential in 0.1 M HClO4 aqueous solution at pH 1.2. (B) Normalized deconvolution of the 
spectroelectrochemical data of Irmolecular and IrOx. (C) Absorption decay after turning the potential off. Adapted 
from refs. 347-349. Copyrights 2021 and 2022 American Chemical Society. 
Zachary et al. used operando UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy to elucidate redox 
behavior of pure Ni and Fe-doped NiFe catalysts for OER.350 When the applied potential 
increases, both Ni and NiFe catalysts develop a spectroscopic feature that corresponds to the 
band-edge absorption due to the decrease of band gaps of both the Ni and NiFe catalysts upon 
proton-coupled oxidation (Figure 58 B, D). The similar absorption onsets of Ni and NiFe 
systems (~1.5 eV) are consistent with the calculated band gaps. Figure 58 A, C illustrates the 
absorption at 2.5 eV as a function of applied potential, which demonstrates a direct correlation 
between the optical and redox changes in the catalyst. In the pure Ni catalyst system, the UV-
VIS-NIR absorbance depends on the applied potential before the onset of oxygen evolution 
reaction (OER) activity. According to first-principles calculations, the Ni is oxidized from Ni2+ 
to Ni3+ followed by further oxidation to a mixed Ni3+/4+ state at a potential that coincidences 
with the onset of OER activity and both Ni3+and Ni4+contribute to the conduction band 
minimum (CBM) in the Ni catalyst. In contrast, absorbance changes are negligible in a NiFe 
catalyst before the onset of OER activity due to the formation of significant amount of Fe4+, 
which is revealed as the dominant species for CBM in a NiFe catalyst. Within the catalytic 
wave, absorbance of both Ni and NiFe catalysts are independent of the applied potential 
because rapid water oxidation impedes the formation of species with higher oxidation states 
given these species have neither significant population nor lifetime.  

85 
 
 
 
Figure 58. Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) (Left) and UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra (Right) of the (A) & (B) 
pure Ni and (C) & (D) 25% Fe films. Data points in the CVs correspond to the absorbance at 2.5 eV with the 
same color coding as in the spectra. Adapted from ref. 341. Copyright 2017 National Academy of Sciences. 
By performing in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy with varying sample thickness, 
one can differentiate between the surface and bulk reaction process occurring over a catalyst. 
This is exemplified by Sacha et al. in the case of NiOx catalyst in water oxidation. Relationships 
between film thickness and UV-VIS-NIR absorbance were obtained in pre-catalytic and 
catalytic conditions.341 Increasing film thickness results in greater absorption at potentials prior 
to the onset of the OER, indicating that pre-catalytic oxidation of NiOx to NiOOH in alkaline 
electrolyte is a bulk oxidation process (Figure 59 A). In contrast, absorption on the electrode 
during the catalytic process is unaffected by the film thickness, suggesting that the intermediate 
species that formed during water oxidation catalysis are limited to the near surface of the 
catalyst (Figure 59 B). 

86 
 
 
 
Figure 59. Change in UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra of each sample; (A) after activation with respect to the 
absorbance before activation, and (B) after catalysis onset with respect to the absorbance before catalytic process. 
Adapted from ref. 341. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.5 Photocatalysis 
Photocatalysis harvests photon energy for chemical transformations. It has been widely 
investigated for applications including hydrogen evolution, pollutant degradation, organic 
synthesis, and biomass valorization, and is found in enzymatic catalysis.351-355 In general, 
photocatalysis begins with light absorption, which transforms the photocatalyst to an excited 
state. Most commonly electronic excitations are leveraged using abundantly available solar 
UV-VIS-NIR range radiation, with the catalytic valorisation of NIR range excitations being 
more cumbersome.356 The excited photocatalyst then activates the reactant directly or catalyzes 
the generation of active species for indirect reactant conversion.354 The catalyst may be 
heterogeneous, homogeneous or enzymatic, preferably in a form that maximizes the potential 
for light harvesting. Currently, the efficiencies of most photocatalytic systems are too low for 
industrial application, and further material development backed by deeper fundamental 
understanding is needed. 
UV-VIS-NIR range spectroscopies are highly relevant characterization tools in photocatalysis, 
given the intrinsic similarity between the spectroscopically probed electronic transitions and 
the catalytically relevant excitation. Moreover the technique is easily matched with in situ and 
operando conditions.10 In situ and operando spectroscopies in general for photocatalysis were 

87 
 
 
very recently reviewed by Hamoud et al.39 Here we limit the section to representative 
demonstrations of UV-VIS-NIR absorption measurements for in situ photocatalysis studies, 
covering the broad timescales that are relevant. 
Light absorption, charge separation, and transfer of charges to the reaction centers are 
elementary steps in photocatalysis that mainly take place in fs-s time scales. Commonly, but 
not exclusively, semiconductor materials are used where an electron from the valence band 
(VB) is excited into the conduction band (CB) leaving an electron hole in the VB. Alternatively 
molecular reactive electronic excited states may be generated. Active species generated in these 
ultrafast processes, including electron-hole pairs and photo-excited chemicals – mainly radical 
intermediates – are typefied by their highly reactive features and short lifetimes. These photo-
induced short-lived excited states can cause characteristic optical absorption features in the 
UV-VIS-NIR spectral range. With the help of pump lasers, UV-VIS-NIR absorption 
spectroscopy is used to study photo-induced processes in situ down to the femtosecond regime 
(see also technical details in section 2.2.1.3 and Figure 9),62 in a technique known as ultrafast 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy or transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. In addition 
to the ultrafast monitoring of the dynamics of excited species, electronic and structural changes 
at the catalyst surface can be monitored in combination with reaction progress over hours or 
days under different conditions providing mechanistic insight.357-359 
3.5.1 Transient absorption to monitor ultrafast processes (fs-to-s time scale) 
The TA spectroscopy measurement is accomplished by the pump-probe technique, wherein a 
fraction of the molecules are first promoted to an electronically excited state using a pump 
pulse. A probe pulse is then sent through the sample with a time delay (τ) relative to the pump 
pulse. The resulting TA signals are typically presented as the difference between the 
absorbance of the excited and ground state samples as expressed by eq 17. 
 
∆𝐴(𝜆, 𝜏) = ⁡𝐴(𝜆, 𝜏) −𝐴(𝜆)𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑⁡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 
(17) 
where 𝐴(𝜆, 𝜏) and 𝐴(𝜆)𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑⁡𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑒 are respectively the absorbance of the excited state at delay 
𝜏 and of the ground state. In general, a TA spectrum contains contributions from ground state 
bleach (GSB, negative), excited state absorption (ESA, positive) and stimulated emission (SE, 
negative) (Figure 60). All these contributions can be tracked for catalytic insight,360 although 
mostly the SE and bleach bands are used in the UV-VIS-NIR range. ESA bands can be difficult 
to resolve, and may hinder the tracking of the SE and bleach bands.361 ESA bands can also be 
tracked by their vibrational excitations in the IR.362, 363 
 
Figure 60. Schematic of a pump-probe transient absorption experiment. At t0 the ground state absorption spectrum 
is measured, before applying a pump pulse. This is used as the reference spectrum A(λ)ground state in eq 17. At a later 

88 
 
 
time t1, the probe pulse is applied selectively exciting electrons from the ground state to an excited state (in this 
case from VB to CB). Then with delay τ, the absorption spectrum is measured again to get A(λ,τ) of eq 17. These 
pump-probe sequences are repeated for different τ to produce a time series of TA spectra. 
TA spectroscopy was performed to reveal the mechanism of ligand-controlled performance of 
cadmium sulfide (CdS) quantum dots (QDs) for the conversion of lignin.364 Electron decay 
processes of CdS QDs with different ligands were observed after applying laser pulses of 400 
nm. The ligands CdS-C3, CdS-C6, and CdS-C9 are schematically illustrated in Figure 61 A. 
They were monitored over ∼2.4 ns after excitation. The decay of photogenerated electrons was 
tracked based on the ~460 nm bleaching band, which corresponds to the excitation of CdS QDs 
from the ground to the first excited state (Figure 61 B). Figure 61 C shows CdS-Cx QDs decay 
almost independently of ligand length, indicating that intrinsic decay is largely responsible for 
the recovery of QDs. However, recovery kinetics depend strongly on ligand length in the 
presence of a lignin model compound, 2-phenoxy-1-phenylethanol (PPol) (Figure 61 D). 
Increasing electron decay rates are observed with decreasing ligand lengths, which corresponds 
to the catalytic efficiency of CdS QDs for lignin conversion, i.e., CdS-C3 > CdS-C6 > CdS-
C9. The electron decay kinetic curves were fitted into a multiexponential equation, which 
indicates three electron decay processes, a fast process (<50 ps), a slow process (∼100 ps), and 
a nanosecond range process (2 - 5 ns). The slow and nanosecond processes were assigned to 
the intrinsic decay of CdS QDs while the fast process was attributed to the electron transfer 
from the QDs to PPol.364 The weighted contribution of the corresponding decay process 
indicates that the electron transfer from QDs to PPol dominates the decay kinetics for CdS-C3 
and CdS-C6 QDs in the presence of PPol. The TA spectroscopy not only illustrates the electron 
decay pathways in CdS-QDs with different ligands but also demonstrates that surface ligands 
control the electron transfer process. 
 
Figure 61. (A) Schematic illustration of CdS-C3, CdS-C6, and CdS-C9. (B) The steady-state absorption spectrum 
of CdS-C6 (red line, upper) and transient absorption spectra of CdS-C6 after 400 nm excitation (bottom). TA 

89 
 
 
dynamics probed at 460 nm of CdS-Cx QDs in the (C) absence and (D) presence of lignin model compound PPol. 
Reproduced from ref. 364. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Charge dynamics resolved by TA have tracked the mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction 
using a NiII complex as catalyst, a RuII complex as photosensitizer, and 1,3-dimethyl-2-phenyl-
2,3-dihydro-1Hbenzo[d]imidazole (BIH) as the electron donor.365, 366 Upon laser excitation at 
440 nm, the bleaching signal of the ground-state RuII appears at 446 nm and the absorption 
attenuation signal of the excited-state *RuII at 365 nm. The addition of BIH gives a new band 
(510 nm) indicating the formation of RuI through the quenching of the excited *RuII state with 
BIH. Upon further addition of NiII, the decay of the RuI signal is accelerated. The following 
reaction pathway was derived: RuII is excited into *RuII upon irradiation, BIH quenches *RuII 
to form RuI, and then RuI turns back into RuII by donating an electron to NiII, converting it into 
NiI. Other in situ spectroscopic techniques, including time-resolved XAS, DRIFTS, and 
operando surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy as well as theoretical modelling 
demonstrated that the reduced NiI is the catalytically active species for CO2 reduction.365, 366 
The lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers can be monitored by TA to evaluate the electron 
transfer rate of different processes.367, 368 An informative example is the photocatalytic 
degradation of intelligent ink, with glycerol and resazurin as major components. TiO2 in the 
anatase phase is a ~30 times more efficient catalyst than the rutile phase for this degradation. 
The phase-dependent lifetimes of electrons and holes in these systems were investigated using 
TA,368 using absorption peaks at 900 nm (photogenerated electrons) and 550 nm 
(photogenerated holes) to track the decay kinetics. TA spectra in presence of glycerol, resazurin 
dye, and intelligent ink, were recorded separately (Figure 62 A, B). Fitting of the electron decay 
indicates the addition of glycerol for anatase results in long-lived excited electrons with a 
lifetime in the second range. For rutile, on the other hand, the excited electron was short-lived 
with a lifetime in the millisecond range (Figure 62 C, D). Comparing the phase-dependent 
lifetimes of electrons in the presence of different reactants, the authors proposed that the lower 
activity of rutile is due to the deficiency of its photogenerated holes to efficiently drive glycerol 
oxidation.368 
 

90 
 
 
Figure 62. The normalized transient decays from TA for (A) anatase and (B) rutile probed at 900 nm. Summary 
of different time scales from TA dynamics of the photocatalytic processes with (C) anatase and (D) rutile. 
Reproduced from ref. 368. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Another example is the derivation of the Z-scheme structure of black/red phosphorus (BP/RP) 
hetero-phase junction photocatalysts.369, 370 Excitation of BP/RP induces a broad absorption 
band centered at 550 nm linked to surface-trapped electrons. Its decay time profile was fitted 
by a function with two exponentials indicating the lifetime of electrons trapped at shallow (τ1) 
and deep sites (τ2). The decay lifetimes decreased from pure RP (τ1: 15.9 ps; τ2: 315.2 ps) to 
BP/RP (τ1: 6.5 ps; τ1: 166.2 ps) indicating interfacial electron transfer. With a similar 
methodology, the Z-scheme structure for TiO2/Ce2S3 was clarified using the decay of a 645 nm 
absorption band.369 
The wavelength of TA curves can provide information regarding the evolution/decay of various 
intermediate species involved in chemical reactions.371-373 Using the TA spectra, the dynamics 
of three distinct types of excitons of CdSe/CdS-Pt, 1D CdS nanorods (NRs) with a CdSe “seed” 
inside and a Pt “dot” at one end, were examined. These excitons are classified by their localized 
area, which can be differentiated by their absorption peak wavelengths. More specifically, the 
peak at ~540 nm is attributed to excitons localized in the CdSe seed (X3), the profound peak 
at ~ 450 nm is attributed to excitons localized in the CdS rod (X1), while the small shoulder at 
470 nm is attributed to both excitons localized in the CdS bulb region surrounding the CdSe 
seed (X2) and in the CdSe seed (X3) (Figure 63).371, 372 Fitting these TA spectra to 
multiexponential functions reveals the formation probabilities and half-lives of different 
excitons, i.e., ∼46%, 22.5 ns for excitons localized in the CdS rod (X1), 7%, 32.1 ns for 
excitons localized in CdS bulb region surrounding the CdSe seed (X2), and 47%, 8.3 ns for 
excitons localized in the CdSe seed (X3).372 These distinct features were used to study the 
photocatalytic H2 generation over CdSe/CdS-Pt and CdS-Pt NRs and the electron-donor 
dependence of these catalysts.371 When weakly reductive MeOH is used as electron donor, the 
trapped-hole transfer rate in CdS NRs is slower than that of the CdSe core. On the other hand, 
sulfite as electron donor can provide enough driving force for trapped holes in CdS NRs to 
transfer. Hole transfer from the CdSe core is more difficult since core-confined holes are harder 
to access by the electron donor.371 These trapped holes in distinct spatial locations, which were 
characterized and monitored by TA spectra, result in different activity depending on the 
electron acceptors. 
 
 

91 
 
 
Figure 63. (A) Schematic illustration of three distinct exciton states (X1, X2, and X3) in CdSe/CdS-Pt 
nanocrystals (upper panel) and their corresponding energy level diagram (lower panel). X1, X2, and X3 refer to 
excitons localized in the CdS rod, the CdS bulb region surrounding the CdSe seed, and the CdSe seed, respectively. 
Excitation energy decreases in the order X1 > X2 >X3. (B) TA spectra after 400 nm excitation for 0.2 to 1 000 
ps. Reproduced from refs. 371, 372. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
TA can also be used to track chemical reactions that take place at ultra-fast speeds. 
Phenothiazine (PTZ) can be used as a hole acceptor to facilitate H2 generation from water 
splitting through the efficient extraction of photo-generated holes.374 The monitoring of PTZ 
oxidation is possible with the well-separated characteristic absorptions of PTZ+ (∼520 nm) and 
the bleaching band of CdS NRs (~450 nm). TA in the 500-600 nm spectral range, which 
includes the signal of the trapped hole, decays with a time constant of ∼3.6 ns. This feature is 
accompanied by the appearance of the PTZ+ absorption band at ∼520 nm. These spectral 
features are direct evidence of the trapped hole transfer from CdS NRs to PTZ molecules. 
Fitting TA kinetics with multiexponential curves shows the trapped holes are extracted by PTZ 
(half-life = 3.8 ± 1.7 ns), leading to the formation of long-lived charge-separated states (CdS–
PTZ+, half-life = 310 ± 50 ns). A high extraction efficiency of 94.7 ± 9.0% was achieved, 
contributing to the much faster hole transfer rates to PTZ than the slow conduction band 
electron–trapped hole recombination (half lifetime of 67 ± 1 ns). These TA results illustrate 
that the key to efficient photocatalytic H2 evolution over CdS nanocrystals is the efficient 
extraction of trapped holes to prevent electron-hole recombination.  
3.5.2 Time-course spectra to monitor reaction changes (s-to-day time scale) 
In addition to monitoring the dynamics of excited species in an ultrafast way, in situ/operando 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy can also be employed to track the change of reaction 
systems parallel to the whole reaction course over hours or days under different conditions. 
Copper on porous titanium dioxide aerogel (Cu/TiO2) exhibit high efficiency in photocatalytic 
CO2 reduction to CO in an aqueous solution. Interestingly, the CO2 reduction rate improves in 
the presence of O2. As the O2 content increases, CO production reaches a maximum at 0.5 
vol%, while the competing H2 evolution is limited.357 In situ UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy 
was applied to monitor changes in Cu/TiO2 after different irradiation times in the presence and 
the absence of O2. Before irradiation, Cu/TiO2 is characterized by the band gap of TiO2 at 350 
nm and several less defined broad bands between 400 and 900 nm, which are ascribed to charge 
transfer transitions in TiO2 and CuO (below 450 nm) and d-d transitions of CuII (600-900 nm). 
This indicates that CuII is the main species in fresh Cu/TiO2. The in situ UV-VIS absorption 
spectra were expressed relative to fresh Cu/TiO2. A band with a maximum of 380 nm, assigned 
to CuI, is observed when the catalyst is exposed to 100% CO2 after 1 min irradiation (Figure 
64 A). Its intensity increases within the first 2 min of irradiation, and then disappears. After 
exposure to light for 10 min, a sharp minimum at ~580 nm caused by the formation of metallic 
Cu is observed. Cu0 and CuI species are also formed in presence of O2 with concentrations of 
0.1 and 0.5 vol % (Figure 64 B, C).357 The kinetics of CuII reduction and accordingly the 
fraction of different Cu species are affected by O2. Temporal changes in the UV-VIS absorption 
spectra suggested O2 leads to slower CuII reduction to CuI and Cu0 as well as a lower Cu0 
fraction. The highest rate of CO formation is achieved at the beginning of the photocatalytic 
process, i.e., within the first 30 min regardless of the O2 content. UV-VIS absorption spectra 
indicate CuI is present at this time and is therefore responsible for CO2 photoreduction. On the 
other hand, Cu0 is the main species after 30 min, the amount of CO formed between 30 min 
and 20 h is lower than that formed between 0 and 30 min, indicating a low intrinsic activity of 
Cu0. At O2 concentrations higher than 0.5 vol%, CuII cannot be reduced to CuI, thus resulting 

92 
 
 
in lower activity. Therefore, CuI was proposed to be the active species of Cu/TiO2 for CO2 
photoreduction to CO (Figure 64 D). 
 
Figure 64. UV-VIS absorption spectra (Kubelka-Munk) of Cu/TiO2 after different irradiation times in (A) 100% 
CO2, (B) 0.1 vol % O2/CO2, and (C) 0.5 vol % O2/CO2. (D) Proposed mechanism for photocatalytic conversion 
of CO2 over Cu/TiO2 and the nature of active copper species. Reproduced from ref. 357. Copyright 2019 Cell Press. 
In situ UV-VIS DRS was conducted to gain mechanistic insight into photocatalytic CO2 
reduction on a covalent organic framework (COF) photocatalyst, consisting of a photoactive 
two-dimensional triazine COF and a Re-based molecular catalyst (Re-COF) (Figure 65 A).358 
An induction period of about 15 min is observed over the Re-COF (Figure 65 B). As shown in 
Figure 65 C, in the initial 15 min (denoted Step I), prominent absorption in the 550 - 800 nm 
region that resembles the broad absorption of the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) band of 
triazine increases, accompanied by decreasing absorption at 400 - 500 nm with an isosbestic 
point at 539 nm. This indicates the formation of the excited ICT state. Similar spectra are 
observed in the absence of CO2. The spectral evolution during the first 15 min can thus be 
attributed to the accumulation of charge separation (CS) state, before catalysis initiates (Step I, 
Figure 65 A). Following Step I, the absorption at 550 - 800 nm decreases significantly (Figure 
65 C, denoted Step II), while the absorption at <430 nm grows with a new isosbestic point at 
430 nm. The distinct features of Step I and Step II suggest the formation of different 
intermediate species. Indeed, step II evolution is negligible in the system without CO2 or when 
Re-COF is replaced by COF, indicating that the newly formed intermediate species is 
associated with CO2 and Re molecules. The spectra remain almost constant in Step III, 
suggesting that the system reaches equilibrium after Step II, and this is consistent with the time 
window for steady generation of CO (Figure 65 B).358 
 

93 
 
 
 
Figure 65. (A) Schematic illustration of Re-COF structure and the proposed catalytic mechanism for CO2 
reduction over Re-COF. (B) Production of CO as a function of time from the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 
over Re-COF. (C) The in situ DRS UV–VIS absorption spectra of Re-COF under photocatalytic conditions within 
15 min (upper panel) and 3 h (lower panel). The inset in lower panel shows the in situ spectra collected from 5 to 
9 h. Reproduced from ref. 358. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
A fully automated triple combination of in situ illumination, UV-VIS-NIR absorption 
spectroscopy, and NMR spectroscopy enabled the simultaneous and time-resolved detection of 
paramagnetic and diamagnetic species to study the photoreduction of aryl halides to aryls with 
N,N-bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-perylene-3,4,9,10-bisdicarboximide (PDI) as photocatalyst.277 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is a powerful tool for the detection of stable radicals, 
which are often not accessible by NMR spectroscopy. After a few minutes of illumination, the 
absorption bands of PDI•− at 698 and 794 nm grow in while the absorbance bands of PDI at 
455 and 482 nm steadily decrease, enabling a semiquantitative reaction profile for the evolution 
of PDI•−. Complementary to the UV-VIS absorption spectra, NMR spectra give full 
quantitative information about diamagnetic reactants and products in the reaction.  
The coupled UV-VIS absorption, EPR, and IR spectroscopies were employed for mechanistic 
studies of a copper-iron system for photocatalytic H2 generation from water.359 The copper-
iron system contains a heteroleptic copper photosensitizer [Cu(P∧P)(N∧N)]+, which includes 
bidentate P∧P (Xantphos) and N∧N (2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline) chelate 
ligands, and an iron-based water reduction catalyst. The role of the copper photosensitizer 
[Cu(P∧P)(N∧N)]+, which can be oxidized or reduced after photoexcitation, in the copper-iron 
system was investigated. [Cu(P∧P)(N∧N)]+ exhibits a UV-VIS adsorption feature at 390 nm, 
which decreases after several redox cycles, while a new band at 475 nm assigned to 
[Cu(N∧N)2]+ arises. UV-VIS absorption spectroscopy reveals the in situ change of the original 
heteroleptic photosensitizer toward a [Cu(N∧N)2]+ species during catalysis, proving the 
presence of the oxidative cycle. EPR spectroscopy shows the presence of the reductive cycle, 
and in situ FTIR spectroscopy provided evidence for the formation of a catalytic diiron 
intermediate. 

94 
 
 
4. Outlook and Conclusions 
In situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy is a simple and cheap technique to study catalysts 
and catalytic reactions. It is in most cases non-destructive and non-intrusive (with exceptions 
in homogeneous and photocatalysis). The spectra can give information on individual transition 
metal ions, on nanoparticles of TMI oxides and metals, and on organic molecules, radicals and 
ions. It is well suited for in situ and operando measurements in combination with specialized 
cells, making use of fiber optics, diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, ultrafast laser pulses, and 
microscopy. This enables its measurement in various methodologies including stopped flow 
experiments, transient response and step response experiments, transient absorption 
experiments, electrochemical conditions, and at variable temperatures and magnetic fields. 
These methodologies give access to a variety of catalytically relevant data including electronic 
structure and reaction kinetics. Data processing of the absorption spectra is necessary to extract 
band gap energies and to quantitatively measure concentrations and conversions, and is widely 
adopted. It is however important to keep track of the sensitivities and assumptions of these 
methods, particularly for Tauc/Cody plots and the processing of diffuse reflectance data with 
the Kubelka-Munk formula. 
The UV-VIS-NIR range has both its limitations and advantages for in situ use. Heterogeneous 
catalysis is usually carried out well above room temperature. The absorption bands are sensitive 
to elevated temperatures with absorption bands broadening and shifting through vibronic 
coupling. If the bands are weak, they may almost completely disappear in the background at 
high temperature. Such bands are of no use in e.g. kinetic or structural analysis. Low 
temperatures are a challenge too due to icing and physical obstructions such as bubbling and 
separation of phases in liquid environment. In homogeneous catalysis solvents should also not 
have absorption bands in the UV-VIS-NIR range. In heterogeneous catalysis black supports 
such as graphene and carbon black prevent UV-VIS-NIR absorption measurements. Finally, 
the UV-VIS-NIR induced transitions are assumed not to be destructive for the catalyst nor 
interfering with the processes under study. This is not always the case, most evidently for 
photocatalysis, but also for homogeneous catalysis in general. We see that in theory the 
potential of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy at varied conditions offers great 
opportunities in better understanding catalysts’ structures and electronic properties with 
relatively cheap and accessible setups, and that such measurements could alleviate the main 
drawback of poor spectral resolution. However such measurements remain scarce probably due 
to practical obstacles and challenges in data analysis. 
UV-VIS-NIR absorption offers a window into electronic structure with direct relevance to 
reactivity and catalysis. Nevertheless this potential remains underused in catalysis research, 
especially on complex heterogeneous catalysts and on homogeneous catalysts, despite the 
popular measurement of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra on these systems. Exceptions are the 
examples given on copper and iron exchanged zeolites. The assignment of spectroscopic bands 
to their electronic transitions is often omitted, using the absorption band merely for 
fingerprinting and/or kinetic tracking. One of the reasons is again the poor spectral resolution 
leading to difficult deconvolution, although often better resolutions could be obtained with 
state-of-the-art spectrophotometers and setups. Another reason is the difficulty in interpretation. 
The automated use of databases on absorption spectra could help here to benefit from the 
numerous existing measurements in literature, as well as advanced statistical analysis of time 
series data on absorption data from transient/step response experiments. Extension of the 
studies on copper and iron zeolites to other transition metals could provide useful reference 
data for other more complex catalyst. Moreover, knowledge transfer across the disciplines such 

95 
 
 
as links of identified species in enzymatic work to heterogeneous metal complexes can be 
instrumental and should be stimulated. Further advances in the simulation of absorption spectra 
can also be expected, with better infrastructure and algorithms giving better access to higher 
level, more accurate methods (e.g. from TD-DFT to coupled cluster and multireference 
methods). On that note an up-to-date review work on the computational simulation of 
electronic absorption spectra with guidelines and insights from benchmarking would be a 
welcome addition to the literature.  
There is no doubt that multi-spectroscopic approaches will remain the key to in-depth 
understanding in catalysis. The electronic information of UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectra is 
(for example) combined with (1) vibrational information from FTIR and/or rR; (2) with 
structural information from XANES, EXAFS ….; (3) magnetic information from EPR and/or 
MCD. Applying these techniques at reaction conditions remains a challenge, as not all 
spectroscopies are sufficiently sensitive. The technological hurdles to do so have, however 
progressed strongly.4 This review has highlighted the compatibility of UV-VIS-NIR 
spectroscopies with some catalytic systems and measurement techniques. The UV-VIS-NIR 
range uniquely allows the application of three techniques (absorption, rR and MCD) that give 
complementary information site-selectively by probing the same excitation events. The direct 
relation between the spectroscopic data can therefore be established with more confidence than 
for other spectroscopy combinations. Examples of in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption 
spectroscopy combined with rR and MCD have been given for copper and iron zeolites and for 
metalloenzymes. This could be extended beyond these applications. 
Numerous advances can be expected for in situ UV-VIS-NIR absorption spectroscopy. 
Developments continue in optical equipment for transient absorption to further expand its range 
into the attoseconds. Improved cells enable the combined measurement of more spectroscopies. 
Improved light collection and sample irradiation, and the more widespread use of statistical 
analysis and the availability of databases may alleviate the limits on spectral resolution. These 
developments will be important beyond the field of catalysis. With the exponential 
development of sensors and electrochemical batteries, UV-VIS-NIR spectroscopies have also 
entered the broader material science field. In the case of battery research S-based batteries are 
very well suited for UV-VIS-NIR range spectroscopy as each polysulfide has an absorption 
band in the UV-VIS range.372, 375, 376 Sensors are often semiconductors with a band gap or 
nanotarticles with surface plasmon resonance in the UV-VIS-NIR range.377, 378 An example is 
the NIR surface plasmon resonance of starch capped CuS quantum dots, sensitive to uptake of 
environmentally relevant divalent heavy metals.379 Hopefully the more widespread use will 
spur developments in spectroscopy, to the benefit of better understanding advanced materials 
in general. 
5. References  
 
(1) Lever, A. B. P. Inorganic electronic spectroscopy; 1984. 
(2) Solomon, E. I.; Lever, A. B. P. Inorganic electronic structure and spectroscopy. Volume 1: 
Methodology; 2000. 
(3) van Vreeswijk, S. H.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Emerging analytical methods to characterize 
zeolite-based materials. Natl Sci Rev 2022, 9,  
(4) Vogt, C.; Wondergem, C. S.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Ultraviolet-visible (uv-vis) spectroscopy. 
In Springer handbook of advanced catalyst characterization, Wachs, I. E., Bañares, M. A. Eds.; 
Springer International Publishing, 2023; pp 237-264. 

96 
 
 
(5) Bravo-Suárez, J. J.; Srinivasan, P. D. Design characteristics of in situ and operando 
ultraviolet-visible and vibrational spectroscopic reaction cells for heterogeneous catalysis. Cat 
Rev - Sci Eng 2017, 59, 295-445. 
(6) Valecillos, J.; Elordi, G.; Cui, M.; Aguayo, A. T.; Castaño, P. Evaluating catalytic (gas–
solid) spectroscopic cells as intrinsic kinetic reactors: Methanol-to-hydrocarbon reaction as a 
case study. Chem Eng J 2022, 450,  
(7) Jentoft, F. C. Chapter 3 ultraviolet–visible–near infrared spectroscopy in catalysis. 
Advances in catalysis, 2009; pp 129-211. 
(8) Schoonheydt, R. A. Uv-vis-nir spectroscopy and microscopy of heterogeneous catalysts. 
Chem Soc Rev 2010, 39, 5051-5066. 
(9) Mu, C.; Lv, C.; Meng, X.; Sun, J.; Tong, Z.; Huang, K. In situ characterization techniques 
applied in photocatalysis: A review. Adv Mater Interfaces 2023, 10, 2201842. 
(10) Mesa, C. A.; Pastor, E.; Francàs, L. Uv–vis operando spectroelectrochemistry for 
(photo)electrocatalysis: Principles and guidelines. Curr Opin Electrochem 2022, 35,  
(11) Suppan, P.; Ghoneim, N. Solvatochromism; Royal Society of Chemistry, 1997. 
(12) Hirayama, K. Handbook of ultraviolet and visible absorption spectra of organic 
compounds; Springer US, 1967. 
(13) Mataga, N.; Kubota, T. Molecular interactions and electronic spectra; Marcel Dekker 
Incorporated, 1970. 
(14) Atkins, P. W.; Friedman, R. S. Molecular quantum mechanics; OUP Oxford, 2011. 
(15) Electronic absorption spectroscopy-vibronic coupling and band shape analysis. Comments 
Inorg Chem 2007, 3, 300-318. 
(16) Al-Jalali, M. A.; Aljghami, I. F.; Mahzia, Y. M. Voigt deconvolution method and its 
applications to pure oxygen absorption spectrum at 1270nm band. Spectrochim Acta A Mol 
Biomol Spectrosc 2016, 157, 34-40. 
(17) Snyder, B. E.; Vanelderen, P.; Bols, M. L.; Hallaert, S. D.; Bottger, L. H.; Ungur, L.; 
Pierloot, K.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F.; Solomon, E. I. The active site of low-temperature 
methane hydroxylation in iron-containing zeolites. Nature 2016, 536, 317-321. 
(18) Mason, W. R. A practical guide to magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy; John Wiley 
& Sons, 2007. 
(19) Kobayashi, N.; Muranaka, A.; Mack, J. Circular dichroism and magnetic circular 
dichroism spectroscopy for organic chemists; The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2011. DOI: 
10.1039/9781849732932. 
(20) Jensen, F. Introduction to computational chemistry; Wiley, 2017. 
(21) Fehér, P. P.; Madarász, Á.; Stirling, A. A practice-oriented benchmark strategy to predict 
the uv-vis spectra of organic photocatalysts**. Chemistry–Methods 2023, 3, e202200069. 
(22) Latouche, C.; Skouteris, D.; Palazzetti, F.; Barone, V. Td-dft benchmark on inorganic pt(ii) 
and ir(iii) complexes. J Chem Theory Comput 2015, 11, 3281-3289. 
(23) Gómez, S.; Giovannini, T.; Cappelli, C. Multiple facets of modeling electronic absorption 
spectra of systems in solution. ACS Phys Chem Au 2023, 3, 1-16. 
(24) Zhang, T.; Liu, S.; Zhu, L.; Liu, F.; Zhong, K.; Zhang, Y.; Bai, R.; Lan, Y. Theoretical 
study of fmo adjusted c-h cleavage and oxidative addition in nickel catalysed c-h arylation. 
Commun Chem 2019, 2, 31. 
(25) Wu, K.; Rodríguez-Córdoba, W.; Lian, T. Exciton localization and dissociation dynamics 
in cds and cds–pt quantum confined nanorods: Effect of nonuniform rod diameters. J Phys 
Chem B 2014, 118, 14062-14069. 
(26) Rhoda, H. M.; Heyer, A. J.; Snyder, B. E. R.; Plessers, D.; Bols, M. L.; Schoonheydt, R. 
A.; Sels, B. F.; Solomon, E. I. Second-sphere lattice effects in copper and iron zeolite catalysis. 
Chem Rev 2022, 122, 12207-12243. 

97 
 
 
(27) Chen, Y.-C.; Foo, D.; Dehanov, N.; Thennadil, S. N. Spatially and angularly resolved 
spectroscopy for in-situ estimation of concentration and particle size in colloidal suspensions. 
Anal Bioanal Chem 2017, 409, 6975-6988. 
(28) Ohtani, B.; Bowman, R. M.; Colombo Jr, D. P.; Kominami, H.; Noguchi, H.; Uosaki, K. 
Femtosecond diffuse reflectance spectroscopy of aqueous titanium(iv) oxide suspension: 
Correlation of electron-hole recombination kinetics with photocatalytic activity. Chem Lett 
1998, 27, 579-580. 
(29) Hecht, H. G. The interpretation of diffuse reflectance spectra. J Res Natl Bur Stand A Phys 
Chem 1976, 80A, 567-583. 
(30) Li, R.; Kodaira, T.; Kawanami, H. In situ formic acid dehydrogenation observation using 
a uv-vis-diffuse-reflectance spectroscopy system. Chem Commun (Camb) 2022, 58, 11079-
11082. 
(31) Meunier, F. C. The design and testing of kinetically-appropriate operando spectroscopic 
cells for investigating heterogeneous catalytic reactions. Chem Soc Rev 2010, 39, 4602-4614. 
(32) Flanigen, E. M. Chapter 2 zeolites and molecular sieves an historical perspective. In 
Introduction to zeolite science and practice, Studies in surface science and catalysis, 1991; pp 
13-34. 
(33) Davis, M. E. Zeolites and molecular sieves: Not just ordinary catalysts. Ind Eng Chem Res 
2002, 30, 1675-1683. 
(34) Derouane, E. G.; Védrine, J. C.; Pinto, R. R.; Borges, P. M.; Costa, L.; Lemos, M. A. N. 
D. A.; Lemos, F.; Ribeiro, F. R. The acidity of zeolites: Concepts, measurements and relation 
to catalysis: A review on experimental and theoretical methods for the study of zeolite acidity. 
Cat Rev - Sci Eng 2013, 55, 454-515. 
(35) Srinivasan, P. D.; Nitz, S. R.; Stephens, K. J.; Atchison, E.; Bravo-Suarez, J. J. Modified 
harrick reaction cell for in situ/operando fiber optics diffuse reflectance uv–visible 
spectroscopic characterization of catalysts. Appl Catal A Gen 2018, 561, 7-18. 
(36) Bernad, B.; Ferrero, A.; Strothkämper, C.; Campos, J.; Pons, A.; Quast, T.; Hauer, K. O.; 
Schirmacher, A. Deviation of white diffuse reflectance standards from perfect reflecting 
diffuser at visible and near-infrared spectral ranges. Metrologia 2019, 56, 055005. 
(37) Shi, H.; Lercher, J. A.; Yu, X.-Y. Sailing into uncharted waters: Recent advances in the in 
situ monitoring of catalytic processes in aqueous environments. Catal Sci Technol 2015, 5, 
3035-3060. 
(38) Meirer, F.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Spatial and temporal exploration of heterogeneous 
catalysts with synchrotron radiation. Nat Rev Mater 2018, 3, 324-340. 
(39) Issa Hamoud, H.; Wolski, L.; Pankin, I.; Bañares, M. A.; Daturi, M.; El-Roz, M. In situ 
and operando spectroscopies in photocatalysis: Powerful techniques for a better understanding 
of the performance and the reaction mechanism. Top Curr Chem 2022, 380, 37. 
(40) Skoog, D. A.; West, D. M.; Holler, F. J.; Crouch, S. R. Fundamentals of analytical 
chemistry / douglas a. Skoog, donald m. West, f. James holler, stanley r. Crouch; Brooks/Cole, 
Cengage Learning, 2014. 
(41) Mores, D.; Stavitski, E.; Kox, M. H. F.; Kornatowski, J.; Olsbye, U.; Weckhuysen, B. M. 
Space- and time-resolved in-situ spectroscopy on the coke formation in molecular sieves: 
Methanol-to-olefin conversion over h-zsm-5 and h-sapo-34. Chem - Eur J 2008, 14, 11320-
11327. 
(42) van Vreeswijk, S. H.; Monai, M.; Oord, R.; Schmidt, J. E.; Vogt, E. T. C.; Poplawsky, J. 
D.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Nano-scale insights regarding coke formation in zeolite ssz-13 subject 
to the methanol-to-hydrocarbons reaction. Catal Sci Technol 2022, 12, 1220-1228. 
(43) Verkleij, S. P.; Whiting, G. T.; Parres Esclapez, S.; Li, S.; Mertens, M. M.; Janssen, M.; 
Bons, A.-J.; Burgers, M.; Weckhuysen, B. M. High-pressure operando uv-vis micro-

98 
 
 
spectroscopy of coke formation in zeolite-based catalyst extrudates during the transalkylation 
of aromatics. ChemCatChem 2020, 12, 5465-5475. 
(44) Creutz, S. E.; Peters, J. C. Spin-state tuning at pseudo-tetrahedral d6 ions: Spin crossover 
in [bp3]feii–x complexes. Inorg Chem 2016, 55, 3894-3906. 
(45) Safin, F.; Maslov, V.; Gromova, Y.; Korsakov, I.; Kolesova, E.; Dubavik, A.; Cherevkov, 
S.; Gun’ko, Y. K. Investigation of magnetic circular dichroism spectra of semiconductor 
quantum rods and quantum dot-in-rods. In Nanomaterials, 2020; Vol. 10. 
(46) Lee, S.; You, Y.; Ohkubo, K.; Fukuzumi, S.; Nam, W. Highly efficient cycloreversion of 
photochromic dithienylethene compounds using visible light-driven photoredox catalysis. 
Chem Sci 2014, 5, 1463-1474. 
(47) Fujiwara, T.; Harada, J.; Ogawa, K. Solid-state thermochromism studied by variable-
temperature diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. A new perspective on the chromism of 
salicylideneanilines. J Phys Chem B 2004, 108, 4035-4038. 
(48) Kuchison, A. M.; Wolf, M. O.; Patrick, B. O. Photophysical and electrochemical 
properties of ru(ii) complexes containing tridentate bisphosphino-oligothiophene ligands. 
Dalton Trans 2011, 40, 6912-6921. 
(49) Ekanayake, D. M.; Pham, D.; Probst, A. L.; Miller, J. R.; Popescu, C. V.; Fiedler, A. T. 
Electronic structures and spectroscopic signatures of diiron intermediates generated by o2 
activation of nonheme iron(ii)–thiolate complexes. Dalton Trans 2021, 50, 14432-14443. 
(50) O'Connor, D. B.; Goldbeck, R. A.; Hazzard, J. H.; Kliger, D. S.; Cusanovich, M. A. Time-
resolved absorption and magnetic circular dichroism spectroscopy of cytochrome c3 from 
desulfovibrio. Biophys J 1993, 65, 1718-1726. 
(51) Robert, A. G.; David, S. K. Monitoring protein dynamics with time-resolved cd and mcd 
spectroscopy. In Proc.SPIE, 1993; Vol. 1890, pp 32-39. DOI: 10.1117/12.145257. 
(52) Cao, J.; Ye, L.; He, D.; Zheng, X.; Mukamel, S. Magnet-free time-resolved magnetic 
circular dichroism with pulsed vector beams. J Phys Chem Lett 2022, 13, 11300-11306. 
(53) Rodger, A.; Carey, M. J. Stopped-flow circular dichroism. In Spectrophotometry and 
Spectrofluorimetry: A Practical Approach; Gore, M., Ed.; Oxford University Press, 2000; p 0. 
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780199638130.003.0014. 
(54) Morgenroth, M.; Scholz, M.; Lenzer, T.; Oum, K. Ultrafast uv–vis transient absorption 
and circular dichroism spectroscopy of a polyfluorene copolymer showing large chiral 
induction. J Phys Chem C 2020, 124, 10192-10200. 
(55) Oppermann, M.; Bauer, B.; Rossi, T.; Zinna, F.; Helbing, J.; Lacour, J.; Chergui, M. 
Ultrafast broadband circular dichroism in the deep ultraviolet. Optica 2019, 6, 56-60. 
(56) Oppermann, M.; Spekowius, J.; Bauer, B.; Pfister, R.; Chergui, M.; Helbing, J. Broad-
band ultraviolet cd spectroscopy of ultrafast peptide backbone conformational dynamics. J 
Phys Chem Lett 2019, 10, 2700-2705. 
(57) Scholz, M.; Morgenroth, M.; Cho, M. J.; Choi, D. H.; Oum, K.; Lenzer, T. Ultrafast 
broadband transient absorption and circular dichroism reveal relaxation of a chiral copolymer. 
J Phys Chem Lett 2019, 10, 5160-5166. 
(58) Iyer, S. R.; Tidemand, K. D.; Babicz, J. T., Jr.; Jacobs, A. B.; Gee, L. B.; Haahr, L. T.; 
Yoda, Y.; Kurokuzu, M.; Kitao, S.; Saito, M.; et al. Direct coordination of pterin to fe(ii) 
enables neurotransmitter biosynthesis in the pterin-dependent hydroxylases. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 2021, 118,  
(59) Gibson, Q. H. [6] rapid mixing: Stopped flow. In Methods enzymol, Kustin, K. Ed.; Vol. 
16; Academic Press, 1969; pp 187-228. 
(60) Gomez-Hens, A.; Perez-Bendito, D. The stopped-flow technique in analytical chemistry. 
Anal Chim Acta 1991, 242, 147-177. 

99 
 
 
(61) Zhang, J.; Zhu, B.; Zhang, L.; Yu, J. Femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy 
investigation into the electron transfer mechanism in photocatalysis. Chem Commun 2023, 59, 
688-699. 
(62) Maiuri, M.; Garavelli, M.; Cerullo, G. Ultrafast spectroscopy: State of the art and open 
challenges. J Am Chem Soc 2020, 142, 3-15. 
(63) Srinivasan, P. D.; Patil, B. S.; Zhu, H.; Bravo-Suárez, J. J. Application of modulation 
excitation-phase sensitive detection-drifts for in situ/operando characterization of 
heterogeneous catalysts. React Chem Eng 2019, 4, 862-883. 
(64) Urakawa, A.; Bürgi, T.; Baiker, A. Sensitivity enhancement and dynamic behavior 
analysis by modulation excitation spectroscopy: Principle and application in heterogeneous 
catalysis. Chem Eng Sci 2008, 63, 4902-4909. 
(65) Müller, P.; Hermans, I. Applications of modulation excitation spectroscopy in 
heterogeneous catalysis. Ind Eng Chem Res 2017, 56, 1123-1136. 
(66) Springer handbook of advanced catalyst characterization; Springen Cham, 2023. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-07125-6. 
(67) Liu, P.; Zhou, X.; Li, Y.; Li, M.; Yu, D.; Liu, J. The application of principal component 
analysis and non-negative matrix factorization to analyze time-resolved optical waveguide 
absorption spectroscopy data. Anal Methods 2013, 5, 4454-4459. 
(68) Bray, R. C. Sudden freezing as a technique for the study of rapid reactions. Biochem J 
1961, 81, 189-193. 
(69) Myrick, M. L.; Simcock, M. N.; Baranowski, M.; Brooke, H.; Morgan, S. L.; McCutcheon, 
J. N. The kubelka-munk diffuse reflectance formula revisited. Appl Spectrosc Rev 2011, 46, 
140-165. 
(70) Kortüm, G. Reflectance spectroscopy; 1969. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-88071-1. 
(71) Landi, S.; Segundo, I. R.; Freitas, E.; Vasilevskiy, M.; Carneiro, J.; Tavares, C. J. Use and 
misuse of the kubelka-munk function to obtain the band gap energy from diffuse reflectance 
measurements. Solid State Commun 2022, 341,  
(72) William, E. V. Inversion methods from kubelka–munk analysis. J Opt A - Pure Appl Opt 
2002, 4, 452. 
(73) Murphy, A. B. Optical properties of an optically rough coating from inversion of diffuse 
reflectance measurements. Appl Opt 2007, 46, 3133-3143. 
(74) Tauc, J.; Grigorovici, R.; Vancu, A. Optical properties and electronic structure of 
amorphous germanium. Phys Status Solidi B 1966, 15, 627-637. 
(75) Raciti, R.; Bahariqushchi, R.; Summonte, C.; Aydinli, A.; Terrasi, A.; Mirabella, S. 
Optical bandgap of semiconductor nanostructures: Methods for experimental data analysis. J 
Appl Phys 2017, 121, 234304. 
(76) Liu, P.; Longo, P.; Zaslavsky, A.; Pacifici, D. Optical bandgap of single- and multi-layered 
amorphous germanium ultra-thin films. J Appl Phys 2016, 119, 014304. 
(77) Yu, P.; Cardona, M. Fundamentals of semiconductors: Physics and materials properties; 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010. 
(78) Makuła, P.; Pacia, M.; Macyk, W. How to correctly determine the band gap energy of 
modified semiconductor photocatalysts based on uv–vis spectra. J Phys Chem Lett 2018, 9, 
6814-6817. 
(79) Brik, M. G.; Srivastava, A. M.; Popov, A. I. A few common misconceptions in the 
interpretation of experimental spectroscopic data. Opt Mater 2022, 127, 112276. 
(80) O'Leary, S. K.; Lim, P. K. On determining the optical gap associated with an amorphous 
semiconductor: A generalization of the tauc model. Solid State Commun 1997, 104, 17-21. 

100 
 
 
(81) Jubu, P. R.; Obaseki, O. S.; Yam, F. K.; Stephen, S. M.; Avaa, A. A.; McAsule, A. A.; 
Yusof, Y.; Otor, D. A. Influence of the secondary absorption and the vertical axis scale of the 
tauc’s plot on optical bandgap energy. J Opt 2022,  
(82) Schwarting, M.; Siol, S.; Talley, K.; Zakutayev, A.; Phillips, C. Automated algorithms for 
band gap analysis from optical absorption spectra. Mater Discov 2017, 10, 43-52. 
(83) Mullerova, J.; Sutta, P. On some ambiguities of the absorption edge and optical band gaps 
of amorphous and polycrystalline semiconductors. Commun - Sci Lett Univ Zilina 2017, 19, 9-
15. 
(84) Cody, G. D.; Brooks, B. G.; Abeles, B. Optical absorption above the optical gap of 
amorphous silicon hydride. Sol Energy Mater 1982, 8, 231-240. 
(85) Davis, E. A.; Mott, N. F. Conduction in non-crystalline systems v. Conductivity, optical 
absorption and photoconductivity in amorphous semiconductors. Philos Mag 1970, 22, 0903-
0922. 
(86) Zanatta, A. R. Revisiting the optical bandgap of semiconductors and the proposal of a 
unified methodology to its determination. Sci Rep 2019, 9, 11225. 
(87) Chibotaru, L. F.; Hendrickx, M. F. A.; Clima, S.; Larionova, J.; Ceulemans, A. Magnetic 
anisotropy of [mo(cn)7]4- anions and fragments of cyano-bridged magnetic networks. J Phys 
Chem A 2005, 109, 7251-7257. 
(88) Hendrickx, M. F. A.; Mironov, V. S.; Chibotaru, L. F.; Ceulemans, A. Assignment of the 
electronic spectra of [mo(cn)8]4- and [w(cn)8]4- by ab initio calculations. Inorg Chem 2004, 
43, 3142-3150. 
(89) Beale, A. M.; van der Eerden, A. M. J.; Kervinen, K.; Newton, M. A.; Weckhuysen, B. M. 
Adding a third dimension to operando spectroscopy: A combined uv-vis, raman and xafs setup 
to study heterogeneous catalysts under working conditions. Chem Commun 2005, 3015-3017. 
(90) O'Brien, M. G.; Beale, A. M.; Jacques, S. D. M.; Di Michiel, M.; Weckhuysen, B. M. 
Spatiotemporal multitechnique imaging of a catalytic solid in action: Phase variation and 
volatilization during molybdenum oxide reduction. ChemCatChem 2009, 1, 99-102. 
(91) Capocasa, G.; Sessa, F.; Tavani, F.; Monte, M.; Olivo, G.; Pascarelli, S.; Lanzalunga, O.; 
Di Stefano, S.; D’Angelo, P. Coupled x-ray absorption/uv–vis monitoring of fast oxidation 
reactions involving a nonheme iron–oxo complex. J Am Chem Soc 2019, 141, 2299-2304. 
(92) Sakaguchi, M.; Kimura, T.; Nishida, T.; Tosha, T.; Sugimoto, H.; Yamaguchi, Y.; 
Yanagisawa, S.; Ueno, G.; Murakami, H.; Ago, H.; et al. A nearly on-axis spectroscopic system 
for simultaneously measuring uv-visible absorption and x-ray diffraction in the spring-8 
structural genomics beamline. J Synchrotron Rad 2016, 23, 334-338. 
(93) Makita, H.; Simon, P. S.; Kern, J.; Yano, J.; Yachandra, V. K. Combining on-line 
spectroscopy with synchrotron and x-ray free electron laser crystallography. Curr Opin Struct 
Biol 2023, 80, 102604. 
(94) Pfanzagl, V.; Beale, J. H.; Michlits, H.; Schmidt, D.; Gabler, T.; Obinger, C.; Djinović-
Carugo, K.; Hofbauer, S. X-ray–induced photoreduction of heme metal centers rapidly induces 
active-site perturbations in a protein-independent manner. J Biol Chem 2020, 295, 13488-
13501. 
(95) Fushimi, R.; Gleaves, J. Recent advances in dynamic chemical characterization using 
temporal analysis of products. Curr Opin Chem Eng 2018, 21, 10-21. 
(96) Abdel-Mageed, A. M.; Chen, S.; Fauth, C.; Häring, T.; Bansmann, J. Fundamental aspects 
of ceria supported au catalysts probed by in situ/operando spectroscopy and tap reactor studies. 
ChemPhysChem 2021, 22, 1302-1315. 
(97) Ovsitser, O.; Cherian, M.; Kondratenko, E. V. In-situ uv/vis and transient isotopic analysis 
of the role of oxidizing agent in the oxidative dehydrogenation of propane over silica-supported 
vanadia catalysts. J Phys Chem C 2007, 111, 8594-8602. 

101 
 
 
(98) Srinivasan, P. D.; Zhu, H.; Bravo-Suárez, J. J. In situ uv–vis plasmon resonance 
spectroscopic assessment of oxygen and hydrogen adsorption location on supported gold 
catalysts. Molecular Catalysis 2021, 507,  
(99) Tang, J.; Albrecht, A. C. Raman spectroscopy vol. 2; Plenum, 1970. 
(100) Snyder, B. E. R.; Bols, M. L.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F.; Solomon, E. I. Iron and 
copper active sites in zeolites and their correlation to metalloenzymes. Chem Rev 2018, 118, 
2718-2768. 
(101) Vogiatzis, K. D.; Polynski, M. V.; Kirkland, J. K.; Townsend, J.; Hashemi, A.; Liu, C.; 
Pidko, E. A. Computational approach to molecular catalysis by 3d transition metals: Challenges 
and opportunities. Chem Rev 2019, 119, 2453-2523. 
(102) Nakamura, I.; Yamamoto, Y. Transition-metal-catalyzed reactions in heterocyclic 
synthesis. Chem Rev 2004, 104, 2127-2198. 
(103) Mahyuddin, M. H.; Staykov, A.; Shiota, Y.; Miyanishi, M.; Yoshizawa, K. Roles of 
zeolite confinement and cu–o–cu angle on the direct conversion of methane to methanol by 
[cu2(μ-o)]2+-exchanged aei, cha, afx, and mfi zeolites. ACS Catal 2017, 7, 3741-3751. 
(104) Farrusseng, D.; Tuel, A. Perspectives on zeolite-encapsulated metal nanoparticles and 
their applications in catalysis. New J Chem 2016, 40, 3933-3949. 
(105) Védrine, J. C.; Fechete, I. Heterogeneous partial oxidation catalysis on metal oxides. 
Comptes Rendus Chimie 2016, 19, 1203-1225. 
(106) Kung, H. H.; Ko, E. I. Preparation of oxide catalysts and catalyst supports — a review 
of recent advances. Chem Eng J Biochem Eng J 1996, 64, 203-214. 
(107) Li, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Qian, K.; Huang, W. Metal–support interactions in metal/oxide 
catalysts and oxide–metal interactions in oxide/metal inverse catalysts. ACS Catal 2022, 12, 
1268-1287. 
(108) Védrine, J. C. Importance, features and uses of metal oxide catalysts in heterogeneous 
catalysis. Chinese J Cat 2019, 40, 1627-1636. 
(109) Linic, S.; Christopher, P.; Xin, H.; Marimuthu, A. Catalytic and photocatalytic 
transformations on metal nanoparticles with targeted geometric and plasmonic properties. Acc 
Chem Res 2013, 46, 1890-1899. 
(110) Sápi, A.; Rajkumar, T.; Kiss, J.; Kukovecz, Á.; Kónya, Z.; Somorjai, G. A. Metallic 
nanoparticles in heterogeneous catalysis. Catal Lett 2021, 151, 2153-2175. 
(111) Shekhar, M.; Wang, J.; Lee, W. S.; Williams, W. D.; Kim, S. M.; Stach, E. A.; Miller, J. 
T.; Delgass, W. N.; Ribeiro, F. H. Size and support effects for the water-gas shift catalysis over 
gold nanoparticles supported on model al2o3 and tio2. J Am Chem Soc 2012, 134, 4700-4708. 
(112) Jha, A.; Lee, Y.-L.; Jang, W.-J.; Shim, J.-O.; Jeon, K.-W.; Na, H.-S.; Kim, H.-M.; Roh, 
H.-S.; Jeong, D.-W.; Jeon, S. G.; et al. Effect of the redox properties of support oxide over 
cobalt-based catalysts in high temperature water-gas shift reaction. Molecular Catalysis 2017, 
433, 145-152. 
(113) de Melo, C.; Jullien, M.; Battie, Y.; En Naciri, A.; Ghanbaja, J.; Montaigne, F.; Pierson, 
J. F.; Rigoni, F.; Almqvist, N.; Vomiero, A.; et al. Tunable localized surface plasmon resonance 
and broadband visible photoresponse of cu nanoparticles/zno surfaces. ACS Appl Mater 
Interfaces 2018, 10, 40958-40965. 
(114) Chaiseeda, K.; Nishimura, S.; Ebitani, K. Gold nanoparticles supported on alumina as a 
catalyst for surface plasmon-enhanced selective reductions of nitrobenzene. ACS Omega 2017, 
2, 7066-7070. 
(115) Jeon, H. B.; Tsalu, P. V.; Ha, J. W. Shape effect on the refractive index sensitivity at 
localized surface plasmon resonance inflection points of single gold nanocubes with vertices. 
Sci Rep 2019, 9, 13635. 

102 
 
 
(116) Liu, J. X.; Filot, I. A. W.; Su, Y.; Zijlstra, B.; Hensen, E. J. M. Optimum particle size for 
gold-catalyzed co oxidation. J Phys Chem C Nanomater Interfaces 2018, 122, 8327-8340. 
(117) Ha, H.; Yoon, S.; An, K.; Kim, H. Y. Catalytic co oxidation over au nanoparticles 
supported on ceo2 nanocrystals: Effect of the au–ceo2 interface. ACS Catal 2018, 8, 11491-
11501. 
(118) Saavedra, J.; Pursell, C. J.; Chandler, B. D. Co oxidation kinetics over au/tio(2) and 
au/al(2)o(3) catalysts: Evidence for a common water-assisted mechanism. J Am Chem Soc 2018, 
140, 3712-3723. 
(119) González-Castaño, M.; R. Reina, T.; Ivanova, S.; Martínez Tejada, L. M.; Centeno, M. 
A.; Odriozola, J. A. O2-assisted water gas shift reaction over structured au and pt catalysts. 
Appl Catal B Env 2016, 185, 337-343. 
(120) Plata, J. J.; Romero-Sarria, F.; Amaya Suarez, J.; Marquez, A. M.; Laguna, O. H.; 
Odriozola, J. A.; Fdez Sanz, J. Improving the activity of gold nanoparticles for the water-gas 
shift reaction using tio(2)-y(2)o(3): An example of catalyst design. Phys Chem Chem Phys 
2018, 20, 22076-22083. 
(121) Rodriguez, J. A.; Senanayake, S. D.; Stacchiola, D.; Liu, P.; Hrbek, J. The activation of 
gold and the water-gas shift reaction: Insights from studies with model catalysts. Acc Chem 
Res 2014, 47, 773-782. 
(122) Strunk, J.; Kähler, K.; Xia, X.; Comotti, M.; Schüth, F.; Reinecke, T.; Muhler, M. Au/zno 
as catalyst for methanol synthesis: The role of oxygen vacancies. Appl Catal A Gen 2009, 359, 
121-128. 
(123) Hartadi, Y.; Widmann, D.; Behm, R. J. Co2 hydrogenation to methanol on supported au 
catalysts under moderate reaction conditions: Support and particle size effects. ChemSusChem 
2015, 8, 456-465. 
(124) Wu, Y. Y.; Mashayekhi, N. A.; Kung, H. H. Au–metal oxide support interface as catalytic 
active sites. Catal Sci Technol 2013, 3, 2881-2891. 
(125) Vilhelmsen, L. B.; Hammer, B. Identification of the catalytic site at the interface 
perimeter of au clusters on rutile tio2(110). ACS Catal 2014, 4, 1626-1631. 
(126) Wang, X.; Rosspeintner, A.; Ziarati, A.; Zhao, J.; Burgi, T. Insight into the transient 
inactivation effect on au/tio(2) catalyst by in-situ drift and uv-vis spectroscopy. Nat Commun 
2022, 13, 5458. 
(127) Navarro-Jaén, S.; Bobadilla, L. F.; Romero-Sarria, F.; Laguna, O. H.; Bion, N.; Odriozola, 
J. A. Evaluation of the oxygen mobility in cepo4-supported catalysts: Mechanistic implications 
on the water–gas shift reaction. J Phys Chem C 2020, 124, 16391-16401. 
(128) Wang, W.; Wang, S.; Ma, X.; Gong, J. Recent advances in catalytic hydrogenation of 
carbon dioxide. Chem Soc Rev 2011, 40, 3703-3727. 
(129) Bobadilla, L. F.; Santos, J. L.; Ivanova, S.; Odriozola, J. A.; Urakawa, A. Unravelling 
the role of oxygen vacancies in the mechanism of the reverse water–gas shift reaction by 
operando drifts and ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy. ACS Catal 2018, 8, 7455-7467. 
(130) Kim, H. Y.; Henkelman, G. Co oxidation at the interface of au nanoclusters and the 
stepped-ceo2(111) surface by the mars-van krevelen mechanism. J Phys Chem Lett 2013, 4, 
216-221. 
(131) Ziemba, M.; Weyel, J.; Hess, C. Elucidating the mechanism of the reverse water–gas 
shift reaction over au/ceo2 catalysts using operando and transient spectroscopies. Appl Catal B 
Env 2022, 301,  
(132) Castleton, C. W.; Kullgren, J.; Hermansson, K. Tuning lda+u for electron localization 
and structure at oxygen vacancies in ceria. J Chem Phys 2007, 127, 244704. 

103 
 
 
(133) Schilling, C.; Hess, C. Real-time observation of the defect dynamics in working au/ceo2 
catalysts by combined operando raman/uv–vis spectroscopy. J Phys Chem C 2018, 122, 2909-
2917. 
(134) Rao, Y.; Antonelli, D. M. Mesoporous transition metal oxides: Characterization and 
applications in heterogeneous catalysis. J Mater Chem 2009, 19,  
(135) Tian, Z.-R.; Tong, W.; Wang, J.-Y.; Duan, N.-G.; Krishnan, V. V.; Suib, S. L. Manganese 
oxide mesoporous structures: Mixed-valent semiconducting catalysts. Science 1997, 276, 926-
930. 
(136) Bensalem, A.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Schoonheydt, R. A. In situ diffuse reflectance 
spectroscopy of supported chromium oxide catalysts:  Kinetics of the reduction process with 
carbon monoxide. J Phys Chem B 1997, 101, 2824-2829. 
(137) Weckhuysen, B. M.; Verberckmoes, A. A.; Debaere, J.; Ooms, K.; Langhans, I.; 
Schoonheydt, R. A. In situ uv–vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy — on line activity 
measurements of supported chromium oxide catalysts: Relating isobutane dehydrogenation 
activity with cr-speciation via experimental design. J Mol Catal A: Chem 2000, 151, 115-131. 
(138) Argyle, M. D.; Chen, K.; Resini, C.; Krebs, C.; Bell, A. T.; Iglesia, E. In situ uv-visible 
assessment of extent of reduction during oxidation reactions on oxide catalysts. Chem Commun 
(Camb) 2003, 2082-2083. 
(139) Burcham, L. J.; Deo, G.; Gao, X.; Wachs, I. E. In situ ir, raman, and uv-vis drs 
spectroscopy of supported vanadium oxide catalysts during methanol oxidation. Top Catal 
2000, 11, 85-100. 
(140) Schumacher, L.; Pfeiffer, J.; Shen, J.; Gutmann, T.; Breitzke, H.; Buntkowsky, G.; 
Hofmann, K.; Hess, C. Collaborative mechanistic effects between vanadia and titania during 
the oxidative dehydrogenation of propane investigated by operando and transient 
spectroscopies. ACS Catal 2023, 13, 8139-8160. 
(141) Yun, D.; Zhao, Y.; Abdullahi, I.; Herrera, J. E. The effect of interstitial nitrogen in the 
activity of the vox/n-tio2 catalytic system for ethanol partial oxidation. J Mol Catal A: Chem 
2014, 390, 169-177. 
(142) Wachs, I. E.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Structure and reactivity of surface vanadium oxide 
species on oxide supports. Appl Catal A Gen 1997, 157, 67-90. 
(143) He, Y.; Rui, Z.; Ji, H. In situ drifts study on the catalytic oxidation of toluene over 
v2o5/tio2 under mild conditions. Catal Commun 2011, 14, 77-81. 
(144) Godiksen, A. L.; Rasmussen, S. B. Identifying the presence of [v=o]2+ during scr using 
in-situ raman and uv vis spectroscopy. Catal Today 2019, 336, 45-49. 
(145) Busca, G.; Centi, G.; Marchetti, L.; Trifiro, F. Chemical and spectroscopic study of the 
nature of a vanadium oxide monolayer supported on a high-surface-area tio2 anatase. Langmuir 
2002, 2, 568-577. 
(146) Yun, D.; Song, Y.; Herrera, J. E. Electronic structure changes introduced by nitrogen on 
the n-doped vox/tio2 system: Consequences on partial oxidation catalysis. Molecular Catalysis 
2018, 448, 122-134. 
(147) Gao, X.; Bare, S. R.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Wachs, I. E. In situ spectroscopic investigation 
of molecular structures of highly dispersed vanadium oxide on silica under various conditions. 
J Phys Chem B 1998, 102, 10842-10852. 
(148) Weckhuysen, B. M.; Keller, D. E. Chemistry, spectroscopy and the role of supported 
vanadium oxides in heterogeneous catalysis. Catal Today 2003, 78, 25-46. 
(149) Argyle, M. D.; Chen, K.; Resini, C.; Krebs, C.; Bell, A. T.; Iglesia, E. Extent of reduction 
of vanadium oxides during catalytic oxidation of alkanes measured by in-situ uv−visible 
spectroscopy. J Phys Chem B 2004, 108, 2345-2353. 

104 
 
 
(150) Mhamane, N. B.; Chetry, S.; Ranjan, R.; Raja, T.; Gopinath, C. S. Sustainable co2 
reduction on in2o3 with exclusive co selectivity: Catalysis and in situ valence band 
photoelectron spectral investigations. ACS Sustain Chem Eng 2022, 10, 3521-3531. 
(151) Dang, S.; Qin, B.; Yang, Y.; Wang, H.; Cai, J.; Han, Y.; Li, S.; Gao, P.; Sun, Y. 
Rationally designed indium oxide catalysts for co2 hydrogenation to methanol with high 
activity and selectivity. Sci Adv 2020, 6, eaaz2060. 
(152) Ziemba, M.; Radtke, M.; Schumacher, L.; Hess, C. Elucidating co(2) hydrogenation over 
in(2) o(3) nanoparticles using operando uv/vis and impedance spectroscopies. Angew Chem Int 
Ed Engl 2022, 61, e202209388. 
(153) Snyder, B. E. R.; Vanelderen, P.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F.; Solomon, E. I. Second-
sphere effects on methane hydroxylation in cu-zeolites. J Am Chem Soc 2018, 140, 9236-9243. 
(154) Plessers, D.; Bols, M. L.; Rhoda, H. M.; Heyer, A. J.; Solomon, E. I.; Sels, B. F.; 
Schoonheydt, R. A. Single site spectroscopy of transition metal ions and reactive oxygen 
complexes in zeolites. In Comprehensive inorganic chemistry iii, 2023; pp 148-164. 
(155) Dinh, K. T.; Sullivan, M. M.; Serna, P.; Meyer, R. J.; Dincă, M.; Román-Leshkov, Y. 
Viewpoint on the partial oxidation of methane to methanol using cu- and fe-exchanged zeolites. 
ACS Catal 2018, 8, 8306-8313. 
(156) Ravi, M.; Ranocchiari, M.; van Bokhoven, J. A. The direct catalytic oxidation of methane 
to methanol-a critical assessment. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2017, 56, 16464-16483. 
(157) Beale, A. M.; Gao, F.; Lezcano-Gonzalez, I.; Peden, C. H.; Szanyi, J. Recent advances 
in automotive catalysis for nox emission control by small-pore microporous materials. Chem 
Soc Rev 2015, 44, 7371-7405. 
(158) Zhang, R.; Liu, N.; Lei, Z.; Chen, B. Selective transformation of various nitrogen-
containing exhaust gases toward n2 over zeolite catalysts. Chem Rev 2016, 116, 3658-3721. 
(159) Xin, Y.; Li, Q.; Zhang, Z. Zeolitic materials for denox selective catalytic reduction. 
ChemCatChem 2018, 10, 29-41. 
(160) Notté, P. P. The alphoxtm process or the one‐step hydroxylation of benzene into phenol 
by nitrous oxide. Understanding and tuning the zsm‐5 catalyst activities. Top Catal 2000, 13, 
387-394. 
(161) Panov, G. I.; Sheveleva, G. A.; Kharitonov, A. S.; Romannikov, V. N.; Vostrikova, L. 
A. Oxidation of benzene to phenol by nitrous oxide over fe-zsm-5 zeolites. Appl Catal A Gen 
1992, 82, 31-36. 
(162) Snyder, B. E. R.; Bols, M. L.; Rhoda, H. M.; Vanelderen, P.; Bottger, L. H.; Braun, A.; 
Yan, J. J.; Hadt, R. G.; Babicz, J. T., Jr.; Hu, M. Y.; et al. Mechanism of selective benzene 
hydroxylation catalyzed by iron-containing zeolites. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018, 115, 
12124-12129. 
(163) Woertink, J. S.; Smeets, P. J.; Groothaert, M. H.; Vance, M. A.; Sels, B. F.; Schoonheydt, 
R. A.; Solomon, E. I. A [cu2o]2+ core in cu-zsm-5, the active site in the oxidation of methane 
to methanol. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009, 106, 18908-18913. 
(164) Vanelderen, P.; Snyder, B. E.; Tsai, M. L.; Hadt, R. G.; Vancauwenbergh, J.; Coussens, 
O.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F.; Solomon, E. I. Spectroscopic definition of the copper active 
sites in mordenite: Selective methane oxidation. J Am Chem Soc 2015, 137, 6383-6392. 
(165) Rhoda, H. M.; Plessers, D.; Heyer, A. J.; Bols, M. L.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F.; 
Solomon, E. I. Spectroscopic definition of a highly reactive site in cu-cha for selective methane 
oxidation: Tuning a mono-mu-oxo dicopper(ii) active site for reactivity. J Am Chem Soc 2021, 
143, 7531-7540. 
(166) Heyer, A. J.; Plessers, D.; Braun, A.; Rhoda, H. M.; Bols, M. L.; Hedman, B.; Hodgson, 
K. O.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F.; Solomon, E. I. Methane activation by a mononuclear 

105 
 
 
copper active site in the zeolite mordenite: Effect of metal nuclearity on reactivity. J Am Chem 
Soc 2022, 144, 19305-19316. 
(167) Plessers, D.; Heyer, A. J.; Rhoda, H. M.; Bols, M. L.; Solomon, E. I.; Schoonheydt, R. 
A.; Sels, B. F. Tuning copper active site composition in cu-mor through co-cation modification 
for methane activation. ACS Catal 2023, 13, 1906-1915. 
(168) Bols, M. L.; Hallaert, S. D.; Snyder, B. E. R.; Devos, J.; Plessers, D.; Rhoda, H. M.; 
Dusselier, M.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Pierloot, K.; Solomon, E. I.; Sels, B. F. Spectroscopic 
identification of the alpha-fe/alpha-o active site in fe-cha zeolite for the low-temperature 
activation of the methane c-h bond. J Am Chem Soc 2018, 140, 12021-12032. 
(169) Snyder, B. E. R.; Bottger, L. H.; Bols, M. L.; Yan, J. J.; Rhoda, H. M.; Jacobs, A. B.; Hu, 
M. Y.; Zhao, J.; Alp, E. E.; Hedman, B.; et al. Structural characterization of a non-heme iron 
active site in zeolites that hydroxylates methane. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2018, 115, 4565-
4570. 
(170) Bols, M. L.; Snyder, B. E. R.; Rhoda, H. M.; Cnudde, P.; Fayad, G.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; 
Van Speybroeck, V.; Solomon, E. I.; Sels, B. F. Coordination and activation of nitrous oxide 
by iron zeolites. Nat Catal 2021, 4, 332-340. 
(171) Bols, M. L.; Rhoda, H. M.; Snyder, B. E. R.; Solomon, E. I.; Pierloot, K.; Schoonheydt, 
R. A.; Sels, B. F. Advances in the synthesis, characterisation, and mechanistic understanding 
of active sites in fe-zeolites for redox catalysts. Dalton Trans 2020, 49, 14749-14757. 
(172) Bols, M. L.; Devos, J.; Rhoda, H. M.; Plessers, D.; Solomon, E. I.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; 
Sels, B. F.; Dusselier, M. Selective formation of alpha-fe(ii) sites on fe-zeolites through one-
pot synthesis. J Am Chem Soc 2021, 143, 16243-16255. 
(173) Bols, M. L. The alpha-fe and alpha-o sites in fe zeolites. KU Leuven, Leuven, 2019. 
(174) Sushkevich, V. L.; Palagin, D.; Ranocchiari, M.; van Bokhoven, J. A. Selective anaerobic 
oxidation of methane enables direct synthesis of methanol. Science 2017, 356, 523-527. 
(175) Koishybay, A.; Shantz, D. F. Water is the oxygen source for methanol produced in partial 
oxidation of methane in a flow reactor over cu-ssz-13. J Am Chem Soc 2020, 142, 11962-11966. 
(176) Dummer, N. F.; Willock, D. J.; He, Q.; Howard, M. J.; Lewis, R. J.; Qi, G.; Taylor, S. 
H.; Xu, J.; Bethell, D.; Kiely, C. J.; Hutchings, G. J. Methane oxidation to methanol. Chem Rev 
2023, 123, 6359-6411. 
(177) Newton, M. A.; Knorpp, A. J.; Sushkevich, V. L.; Palagin, D.; van Bokhoven, J. A. 
Active sites and mechanisms in the direct conversion of methane to methanol using cu in 
zeolitic hosts: A critical examination. Chem Soc Rev 2020, 49, 1449-1486. 
(178) Ikuno, T.; Grundner, S.; Jentys, A.; Li, G.; Pidko, E.; Fulton, J.; Sanchez-Sanchez, M.; 
Lercher, J. A. Formation of active cu-oxo clusters for methane oxidation in cu-exchanged 
mordenite. J Phys Chem C 2019, 123, 8759-8769. 
(179) Kulkarni, A. R.; Zhao, Z.-J.; Siahrostami, S.; Nørskov, J. K.; Studt, F. Cation-exchanged 
zeolites for the selective oxidation of methane to methanol. Catal Sci Technol 2018, 8, 114-
123. 
(180) Zhao, Z.-J.; Kulkarni, A.; Vilella, L.; Nørskov, J. K.; Studt, F. Theoretical insights into 
the selective oxidation of methane to methanol in copper-exchanged mordenite. ACS Catal 
2016, 6, 3760-3766. 
(181) Wang, G.; Huang, L.; Chen, W.; Zhou, J.; Zheng, A. Rationally designing mixed cu-
(mu-o)-m (m = cu, ag, zn, au) centers over zeolite materials with high catalytic activity towards 
methane activation. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2018, 20, 26522-26531. 
(182) Mahyuddin, M. H.; Tanaka, T.; Shiota, Y.; Staykov, A.; Yoshizawa, K. Methane partial 
oxidation over [cu2(μ-o)]2+ and [cu3(μ-o)3]2+ active species in large-pore zeolites. ACS Catal 
2018, 8, 1500-1509. 

106 
 
 
(183) Vanelderen, P.; Vancauwenbergh, J.; Tsai, M. L.; Hadt, R. G.; Solomon, E. I.; 
Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F. Spectroscopy and redox chemistry of copper in mordenite. 
Chemphyschem 2014, 15, 91-99. 
(184) Ravi, M.; Sushkevich, V. L.; Knorpp, A. J.; Newton, M. A.; Palagin, D.; Pinar, A. B.; 
Ranocchiari, M.; van Bokhoven, J. A. Misconceptions and challenges in methane-to-methanol 
over transition-metal-exchanged zeolites. Nat Catal 2019, 2, 485-494. 
(185) Latimer, A. A.; Kakekhani, A.; Kulkarni, A. R.; Nørskov, J. K. Direct methane to 
methanol: The selectivity–conversion limit and design strategies. ACS Catal 2018, 8, 6894-
6907. 
(186) Bond, G. C. The use of kinetics in evaluating mechanisms in heterogeneous catalysis. 
Cat Rev - Sci Eng 2008, 50, 532-567. 
(187) Tsai, M. L.; Hadt, R. G.; Vanelderen, P.; Sels, B. F.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Solomon, E. I. 
[cu2o]2+ active site formation in cu-zsm-5: Geometric and electronic structure requirements 
for n2o activation. J Am Chem Soc 2014, 136, 3522-3529. 
(188) Smeets, P. J.; Hadt, R. G.; Woertink, J. S.; Vanelderen, P.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. 
F.; Solomon, E. I. Oxygen precursor to the reactive intermediate in methanol synthesis by cu-
zsm-5. J Am Chem Soc 2010, 132, 14736-14738. 
(189) Wiberg, K. B. The deuterium isotope effect. Chem Rev 2002, 55, 713-743. 
(190) Ipek, B.; Wulfers, M. J.; Kim, H.; Göltl, F.; Hermans, I.; Smith, J. P.; Booksh, K. S.; 
Brown, C. M.; Lobo, R. F. Formation of [cu2o2]2+ and [cu2o]2+ toward c–h bond activation 
in cu-ssz-13 and cu-ssz-39. ACS Catal 2017, 7, 4291-4303. 
(191) Han, L.; Cai, S.; Gao, M.; Hasegawa, J. Y.; Wang, P.; Zhang, J.; Shi, L.; Zhang, D. 
Selective catalytic reduction of no(x) with nh(3) by using novel catalysts: State of the art and 
future prospects. Chem Rev 2019, 119, 10916-10976. 
(192) Paolucci, C.; Khurana, I.; Parekh, A. A.; Li, S.; Shih, A. J.; Li, H.; Di Iorio, J. R.; 
Albarracin-Caballero, J. D.; Yezerets, A.; Miller, J. T.; et al. Dynamic multinuclear sites 
formed by mobilized copper ions in no (x) selective catalytic reduction. Science 2017, 357, 
898-903. 
(193) Villamaina, R.; Liu, S.; Nova, I.; Tronconi, E.; Ruggeri, M. P.; Collier, J.; York, A.; 
Thompsett, D. Speciation of cu cations in cu-cha catalysts for nh3-scr: Effects of sio2/alo3 ratio 
and cu-loading investigated by transient response methods. ACS Catal 2019, 9, 8916-8927. 
(194) Hun Kwak, J.; Zhu, H.; Lee, J. H.; Peden, C. H.; Szanyi, J. Two different cationic 
positions in cu-ssz-13? Chem Commun (Camb) 2012, 48, 4758-4760. 
(195) Negri, C.; Signorile, M.; Porcaro, N. G.; Borfecchia, E.; Berlier, G.; Janssens, T. V. W.; 
Bordiga, S. Dynamic cuii/cui speciation in cu-cha catalysts by in situ diffuse reflectance uv–
vis-nir spectroscopy. Appl Catal A Gen 2019, 578, 1-9. 
(196) Negri, C.; Selleri, T.; Borfecchia, E.; Martini, A.; Lomachenko, K. A.; Janssens, T. V. 
W.; Cutini, M.; Bordiga, S.; Berlier, G. Structure and reactivity of oxygen-bridged diamino 
dicopper(ii) complexes in cu-ion-exchanged chabazite catalyst for nh(3)-mediated selective 
catalytic reduction. J Am Chem Soc 2020, 142, 15884-15896. 
(197) Lei, H.; Chen, D.; Yang, J.-y.; Khetan, A.; Jiang, J.; Peng, B.; Simon, U.; Ye, D.; Chen, 
P. Revealing the formation and reactivity of cage-confined cu pairs in catalytic nox reduction 
over cu-ssz-13 zeolites by in situ uv–vis spectroscopy and time-dependent dft calculation. Env 
Sci Technol 2023,  
(198) Li, H.; Paolucci, C.; Khurana, I.; Wilcox, L. N.; Goltl, F.; Albarracin-Caballero, J. D.; 
Shih, A. J.; Ribeiro, F. H.; Gounder, R.; Schneider, W. F. Consequences of exchange-site 
heterogeneity and dynamics on the uv-visible spectrum of cu-exchanged ssz-13. Chem Sci 2019, 
10, 2373-2384. 

107 
 
 
(199) Borfecchia, E.; Lomachenko, K. A.; Giordanino, F.; Falsig, H.; Beato, P.; Soldatov, A. 
V.; Bordiga, S.; Lamberti, C. Revisiting the nature of cu sites in the activated cu-ssz-13 catalyst 
for scr reaction. Chem Sci 2015, 6, 548-563. 
(200) Paolucci, C.; Verma, A. A.; Bates, S. A.; Kispersky, V. F.; Miller, J. T.; Gounder, R.; 
Delgass, W. N.; Ribeiro, F. H.; Schneider, W. F. Isolation of the copper redox steps in the 
standard selective catalytic reduction on cu-ssz-13. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2014, 53, 11828-
11833. 
(201) Gao, F.; Mei, D.; Wang, Y.; Szanyi, J.; Peden, C. H. Selective catalytic reduction over 
cu/ssz-13: Linking homo- and heterogeneous catalysis. J Am Chem Soc 2017, 139, 4935-4942. 
(202) Greenaway, A. G.; Marberger, A.; Thetford, A.; Lezcano-Gonzalez, I.; Agote-Aran, M.; 
Nachtegaal, M.; Ferri, D.; Krocher, O.; Catlow, C. R. A.; Beale, A. M. Detection of key 
transient cu intermediates in ssz-13 during nh(3)-scr deno (x) by modulation excitation ir 
spectroscopy. Chem Sci 2020, 11, 447-455. 
(203) Giordanino, F.; Borfecchia, E.; Lomachenko, K. A.; Lazzarini, A.; Agostini, G.; Gallo, 
E.; Soldatov, A. V.; Beato, P.; Bordiga, S.; Lamberti, C. Interaction of nh3 with cu-ssz-13 
catalyst: A complementary ftir, xanes, and xes study. J Phys Chem Lett 2014, 5, 1552-1559. 
(204) Liu, C.; Kubota, H.; Amada, T.; Toyao, T.; Maeno, Z.; Ogura, M.; Nakazawa, N.; Inagaki, 
S.; Kubota, Y.; Shimizu, K.-i. Selective catalytic reduction of no over cu-afx zeolites: 
Mechanistic insights from in situ/operando spectroscopic and dft studies. Catal Sci Technol 
2021, 11, 4459-4470. 
(205) Solomon, E. I.; Heppner, D. E.; Johnston, E. M.; Ginsbach, J. W.; Cirera, J.; Qayyum, 
M.; Kieber-Emmons, M. T.; Kjaergaard, C. H.; Hadt, R. G.; Tian, L. Copper active sites in 
biology. Chem Rev 2014, 114, 3659-3853. 
(206) Solomon, E. I.; Ginsbach, J. W.; Heppner, D. E.; Kieber-Emmons, M. T.; Kjaergaard, C. 
H.; Smeets, P. J.; Tian, L.; Woertink, J. S. Copper dioxygen (bio)inorganic chemistry. Faraday 
Discuss 2011, 148, 11-39. 
(207) Solomon, E. I.; Chen, P.; Metz, M.; Lee, S.-K.; Palmer, A. E. Oxygen binding, activation, 
and reduction to water by copper proteins. Angew Chem Int Ed 2001, 40, 4570-4590. 
(208) Liu, C.; Kubota, H.; Amada, T.; Kon, K.; Toyao, T.; Maeno, Z.; Ueda, K.; Ohyama, J.; 
Satsuma, A.; Tanigawa, T.; et al. In situ spectroscopic studies on the redox cycle of nh3−scr 
over cu−cha zeolites. ChemCatChem 2020, 12, 3050-3059. 
(209) Zhang, Y.; Zhang, J.; Wang, H.; Yang, W.; Wang, C.; Peng, Y.; Chen, J.; Li, J.; Gao, F. 
Selective catalytic reduction of nox with nh3 over cu/ssz-13: Elucidating dynamics of cu active 
sites with in situ uv–vis spectroscopy and dft calculations. J Phys Chem C 2022, 126, 8720-
8733. 
(210) Paolucci, C.; Parekh, A. A.; Khurana, I.; Di Iorio, J. R.; Li, H.; Albarracin Caballero, J. 
D.; Shih, A. J.; Anggara, T.; Delgass, W. N.; Miller, J. T.; et al. Catalysis in a cage: Condition-
dependent speciation and dynamics of exchanged cu cations in ssz-13 zeolites. J Am Chem Soc 
2016, 138, 6028-6048. 
(211) Godiksen, A.; Isaksen, O. L.; Rasmussen, S. B.; Vennestrøm, P. N. R.; Mossin, S. Site-
specific reactivity of copper chabazite zeolites with nitric oxide, ammonia, and oxygen. 
ChemCatChem 2018, 10, 366-370. 
(212) Oda, A.; Shionoya, H.; Hotta, Y.; Takewaki, T.; Sawabe, K.; Satsuma, A. Spectroscopic 
evidence of efficient generation of dicopper intermediate in selective catalytic reduction of no 
over cu-ion-exchanged zeolites. ACS Catal 2020, 10, 12333-12339. 
(213) Elwell, C. E.; Gagnon, N. L.; Neisen, B. D.; Dhar, D.; Spaeth, A. D.; Yee, G. M.; Tolman, 
W. B. Copper-oxygen complexes revisited: Structures, spectroscopy, and reactivity. Chem Rev 
2017, 117, 2059-2107. 

108 
 
 
(214) Halfen, J. A.; Mahapatra, S.; Wilkinson, E. C.; Kaderli, S.; Young, V. G., Jr.; Que, L., 
Jr.; Zuberbuhler, A. D.; Tolman, W. B. Reversible cleavage and formation of the dioxygen o-
o bond within a dicopper complex. Science 1996, 271, 1397-1400. 
(215) Chen, J.; Huang, W.; Bao, S.; Zhang, W.; Liang, T.; Zheng, S.; Yi, L.; Guo, L.; Wu, X. 
A review on the characterization of metal active sites over cu-based and fe-based zeolites for 
nh(3)-scr. RSC Adv 2022, 12, 27746-27765. 
(216) Colombo, M.; Nova, I.; Tronconi, E. A comparative study of the nh3-scr reactions over 
a cu-zeolite and a fe-zeolite catalyst. Catal Today 2010, 151, 223-230. 
(217) Grossale, A.; Nova, I.; Tronconi, E. Study of a fe–zeolite-based system as nh3-scr 
catalyst for diesel exhaust aftertreatment. Catal Today 2008, 136, 18-27. 
(218) Liu, Q.; Bian, C.; Ming, S.; Guo, L.; Zhang, S.; Pang, L.; Liu, P.; Chen, Z.; Li, T. The 
opportunities and challenges of iron-zeolite as nh3-scr catalyst in purification of vehicle 
exhaust. Appl Catal A Gen 2020, 607,  
(219) Li, J.; Chang, H.; Ma, L.; Hao, J.; Yang, R. T. Low-temperature selective catalytic 
reduction of nox with nh3 over metal oxide and zeolite catalysts—a review. Catal Today 2011, 
175, 147-156. 
(220) Pérez Vélez, R.; Ellmers, I.; Huang, H.; Bentrup, U.; Schünemann, V.; Grünert, W.; 
Brückner, A. Identifying active sites for fast nh3-scr of no/no2 mixtures over fe-zsm-5 by 
operando epr and uv–vis spectroscopy. J Catal 2014, 316, 103-111. 
(221) Martin, N.; Vennestrom, P. N. R.; Thogersen, J. R.; Moliner, M.; Corma, A. Fe-
containing zeolites for nh(3) -scr of no(x) : Effect of structure, synthesis procedure, and 
chemical composition on catalytic performance and stability. Chemistry 2017, 23, 13404-
13414. 
(222) Brandenberger, S.; Kröcher, O.; Tissler, A.; Althoff, R. The state of the art in selective 
catalytic reduction of noxby ammonia using metal‐exchanged zeolite catalysts. Cat Rev - Sci 
Eng 2008, 50, 492-531. 
(223) Kim, J.; Jentys, A.; Maier, S. M.; Lercher, J. A. Characterization of fe-exchanged bea 
zeolite under nh3 selective catalytic reduction conditions. J Phys Chem C 2013, 117, 986-993. 
(224) Yu, T.; Li, Z.; Jones, W.; Liu, Y.; He, Q.; Song, W.; Du, P.; Yang, B.; An, H.; Farmer, 
D. M.; et al. Identifying key mononuclear fe species for low-temperature methane oxidation. 
Chem Sci 2021, 12, 3152-3160. 
(225) Chen, J.; Peng, G.; Zheng, W.; Zhang, W.; Guo, L.; Wu, X. Excellent performance of 
one-pot synthesized fe-containing mcm-22 zeolites for the selective catalytic reduction of nox 
with nh3. Catal Sci Technol 2020, 10, 6583-6598. 
(226) Pérez-Ramírez, J.; Groen, J. C.; Brückner, A.; Kumar, M. S.; Bentrup, U.; Debbagh, M. 
N.; Villaescusa, L. A. Evolution of isomorphously substituted iron zeolites during activation: 
Comparison of fe-beta and fe-zsm-5. J Catal 2005, 232, 318-334. 
(227) Yasumura, S.; Qian, Y.; Kato, T.; Mine, S.; Toyao, T.; Maeno, Z.; Shimizu, K.-i. In 
situ/operando spectroscopic studies on the nh3–scr mechanism over fe–zeolites. ACS Catal 
2022, 12, 9983-9993. 
(228) Kovarik, L.; Washton, N. M.; Kukkadapu, R.; Devaraj, A.; Wang, A.; Wang, Y.; Szanyi, 
J.; Peden, C. H. F.; Gao, F. Transformation of active sites in fe/ssz-13 scr catalysts during 
hydrothermal aging: A spectroscopic, microscopic, and kinetics study. ACS Catal 2017, 7, 
2458-2470. 
(229) Hallaert, S. D.; Bols, M. L.; Vanelderen, P.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. F.; Pierloot, K. 
Identification of alpha-fe in high-silica zeolites on the basis of ab initio electronic structure 
calculations. Inorg Chem 2017, 56, 10681-10690. 
(230) Hallaert, S. D. The reactive α-fe and α-o sites in fe-containing zeolites as a biomimetic 
catalyst for methane hydroxylation: A theoretical insight. KU Leuven, Leuven, 2019. 

109 
 
 
(231) Snyder, B. E. R.; Bols, M. L.; Rhoda, H. M.; Plessers, D.; Schoonheydt, R. A.; Sels, B. 
F.; Solomon, E. I. Cage effects control the mechanism of methane hydroxylation in zeolites. 
Science 2021, 373, 327-331. 
(232) Li, W.; Guo, Z.; Yang, J.; Li, Y.; Sun, X.; He, H.; Li, S.; Zhang, J. Advanced strategies 
for stabilizing single-atom catalysts for energy storage and conversion. Electrochemical 
Energy Reviews 2022, 5, 9. 
(233) Kaiser, S. K.; Chen, Z.; Faust Akl, D.; Mitchell, S.; Pérez-Ramírez, J. Single-atom 
catalysts across the periodic table. Chem Rev 2020, 120, 11703-11809. 
(234) Mitchell, S.; Pérez-Ramírez, J. Single atom catalysis: A decade of stunning progress and 
the promise for a bright future. Nat Commun 2020, 11, 4302. 
(235) Sui, J.; Liu, H.; Hu, S.; Sun, K.; Wan, G.; Zhou, H.; Zheng, X.; Jiang, H.-L. A general 
strategy to immobilize single-atom catalysts in metal–organic frameworks for enhanced 
photocatalysis. Adv Mater 2022, 34, 2109203. 
(236) Kerketta, U.; Tesler, A. B.; Schmuki, P. Single-atom co-catalysts employed in titanium 
dioxide photocatalysis. In Catalysts, 2022; Vol. 12. 
(237) Shang, Q.; Tang, N.; Qi, H.; Chen, S.; Xu, G.; Wu, C.; Pan, X.; Wang, X.; Cong, Y. A 
palladium single-atom catalyst toward efficient activation of molecular oxygen for cinnamyl 
alcohol oxidation. Chinese J Cat 2020, 41, 1812-1817. 
(238) Bozbag, S. E.; Sot, P.; Nachtegaal, M.; Ranocchiari, M.; van Bokhoven, J. A.; Mesters, 
C. Direct stepwise oxidation of methane to methanol over cu–sio2. ACS Catal 2018, 8, 5721-
5731. 
(239) Wang, C.; Xu, J.; Deng, F. Mechanism of methanol‐to‐hydrocarbon reaction over 
zeolites: A solid‐state nmr perspective. ChemCatChem 2020, 12, 965-980. 
(240) Chang, C. The conversion of methanol and other o-compounds to hydrocarbons over 
zeolite catalysts. J Catal 1977, 47, 249-259. 
(241) Chang, C.; Lang, W. H. Process for manufacturing olefins. Unisted States 1976. 
(242) Wang, S.; Qin, Z.; Dong, M.; Wang, J.; Fan, W. Recent progress on mto reaction 
mechanisms and regulation of acid site distribution in the zeolite framework. Chem Catalysis 
2022, 2, 1657-1685. 
(243) Plessow, P. N.; Smith, A.; Tischer, S.; Studt, F. Identification of the reaction sequence 
of the mto initiation mechanism using ab initio-based kinetics. J Am Chem Soc 2019, 141, 
5908-5915. 
(244) Ilias, S.; Bhan, A. Mechanism of the catalytic conversion of methanol to hydrocarbons. 
ACS Catal 2012, 3, 18-31. 
(245) Wang, C.-M.; Wang, Y.-D.; Xie, Z.-K. Insights into the reaction mechanism of methanol-
to-olefins conversion in hsapo-34 from first principles: Are olefins themselves the dominating 
hydrocarbon pool species? J Catal 2013, 301, 8-19. 
(246) Sun, Q.; Xie, Z.; Yu, J. The state-of-the-art synthetic strategies for sapo-34 zeolite 
catalysts in methanol-to-olefin conversion. Natl Sci Rev 2018, 5, 542-558. 
(247) Yang, M.; Fan, D.; Wei, Y.; Tian, P.; Liu, Z. Recent progress in methanol-to-olefins (mto) 
catalysts. Adv Mater 2019, 31, e1902181. 
(248) Vora, B. V.; Marker, T. L.; Barger, P. T.; Nilsen, H. R.; Kvisle, S.; Fuglerud, T. 
Economic route for natural gas conversion to ethylene and propylene. In Natural gas 
conversion iv, Studies in surface science and catalysis, 1997; pp 87-98. 
(249) Liang, J.; Li, H.; Zhao, S.; Guo, W.; Wang, R.; Ying, M. Characteristics and performance 
of sapo-34 catalyst for methanol-to-olefin conversion. Appl Catal 1990, 64, 31-40. 
(250) Koempel, H.; Liebner, W. Lurgi's methanol to propylene (mtp®) report on a successful 
commercialisation. In Natural gas conversion viii, proceedings of the 8th natural gas 
conversion symposium, Studies in surface science and catalysis, 2007; pp 261-267. 

110 
 
 
(251) Liu, Y.; Muller, S.; Berger, D.; Jelic, J.; Reuter, K.; Tonigold, M.; Sanchez-Sanchez, M.; 
Lercher, J. A. Corrigendum: Formation mechanism of the first carbon-carbon bond and the 
first olefin in the methanol conversion into hydrocarbons. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2017, 56, 
7342. 
(252) Li, J.; Wei, Z.; Chen, Y.; Jing, B.; He, Y.; Dong, M.; Jiao, H.; Li, X.; Qin, Z.; Wang, J.; 
Fan, W. A route to form initial hydrocarbon pool species in methanol conversion to olefins 
over zeolites. J Catal 2014, 317, 277-283. 
(253) Tajima, N.; Tsuneda, T.; Toyama, F.; Hirao, K. A new mechanism for the first 
carbon−carbon bond formation in the mtg process:  A theoretical study. J Am Chem Soc 1998, 
120, 8222-8229. 
(254) Chowdhury, A. D.; Houben, K.; Whiting, G. T.; Mokhtar, M.; Asiri, A. M.; Al-Thabaiti, 
S. A.; Basahel, S. N.; Baldus, M.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Initial carbon-carbon bond formation 
during the early stages of the methanol-to-olefin process proven by zeolite-trapped acetate and 
methyl acetate. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2016, 55, 15840-15845. 
(255) Wulfers, M. J.; Jentoft, F. C. The role of cyclopentadienium ions in methanol-to-
hydrocarbons chemistry. ACS Catal 2014, 4, 3521-3532. 
(256) Dai, W.; Wang, C.; Dyballa, M.; Wu, G.; Guan, N.; Li, L.; Xie, Z.; Hunger, M. 
Understanding the early stages of the methanol-to-olefin conversion on h-sapo-34. ACS Catal 
2014, 5, 317-326. 
(257) Olsbye, U.; Svelle, S.; Lillerud, K. P.; Wei, Z. H.; Chen, Y. Y.; Li, J. F.; Wang, J. G.; 
Fan, W. B. The formation and degradation of active species during methanol conversion over 
protonated zeotype catalysts. Chem Soc Rev 2015, 44, 7155-7176. 
(258) Yarulina, I.; Chowdhury, A. D.; Meirer, F.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Gascon, J. Recent trends 
and fundamental insights in the methanol-to-hydrocarbons process. Nat Catal 2018, 1, 398-
411. 
(259) Borodina, E.; Sharbini Harun Kamaluddin, H.; Meirer, F.; Mokhtar, M.; Asiri, A. M.; 
Al-Thabaiti, S. A.; Basahel, S. N.; Ruiz-Martinez, J.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Influence of the 
reaction temperature on the nature of the active and deactivating species during methanol-to-
olefins conversion over h-sapo-34. ACS Catal 2017, 7, 5268-5281. 
(260) Van Speybroeck, V.; Hemelsoet, K.; De Wispelaere, K.; Qian, Q.; Van der Mynsbrugge, 
J.; De Sterck, B.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Waroquier, M. Mechanistic studies on chabazite-type 
methanol-to-olefin catalysts: Insights from time-resolved uv/vis microspectroscopy combined 
with theoretical simulations. ChemCatChem 2013, 5, 173-184. 
(261) Bjorgen, M.; Bonino, F.; Kolboe, S.; Lillerud, K. P.; Zecchina, A.; Bordiga, S. 
Spectroscopic evidence for a persistent benzenium cation in zeolite h-beta. J Am Chem Soc 
2003, 125, 15863-15868. 
(262) Dai, W.; Wu, G.; Li, L.; Guan, N.; Hunger, M. Mechanisms of the deactivation of sapo-
34 materials with different crystal sizes applied as mto catalysts. ACS Catal 2013, 3, 588-596. 
(263) Goetze, J.; Meirer, F.; Yarulina, I.; Gascon, J.; Kapteijn, F.; Ruiz-Martinez, J.; 
Weckhuysen, B. M. Insights into the activity and deactivation of the methanol-to-olefins 
process over different small-pore zeolites as studied with operando uv-vis spectroscopy. ACS 
Catal 2017, 7, 4033-4046. 
(264) Kiricsi, I.; Forster, H.; Tasi, G.; Nagy, J. B. Generation, characterization, and 
transformations of unsaturated carbenium ions in zeolites. Chem Rev 1999, 99, 2085-2114. 
(265) Park, J. W.; Lee, J. Y.; Kim, K. S.; Hong, S. B.; Seo, G. Effects of cage shape and size 
of 8-membered ring molecular sieves on their deactivation in methanol-to-olefin (mto) 
reactions. Appl Catal A Gen 2008, 339, 36-44. 

111 
 
 
(266) Dai, W.; Scheibe, M.; Guan, N.; Li, L.; Hunger, M. Fate of brønsted acid sites and 
benzene‐based carbenium ions during methanol‐to‐olefin conversion on sapo‐34. 
ChemCatChem 2011, 3, 1130-1133. 
(267) Qian, Q.; Vogt, C.; Mokhtar, M.; Asiri, A. M.; Al-Thabaiti, S. A.; Basahel, S. N.; Ruiz-
Martínez, J.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Combined operando uv/vis/ir spectroscopy reveals the role 
of methoxy and aromatic species during the methanol-to-olefins reaction over h-sapo-34. 
ChemCatChem 2014, 6, 3396-3408. 
(268) Goetze, J.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Spatiotemporal coke formation over zeolite zsm-5 during 
the methanol-to-olefins process as studied with operando uv-vis spectroscopy: A comparison 
between h-zsm-5 and mg-zsm-5. Catal Sci Technol 2018, 8, 1632-1644. 
(269) Goetze, J.; Yarulina, I.; Gascon, J.; Kapteijn, F.; Weckhuysen, B. M. Revealing lattice 
expansion of small-pore zeolite catalysts during the methanol-to-olefins process using 
combined operando x-ray diffraction and uv–vis spectroscopy. ACS Catal 2018, 8, 2060-2070. 
(270) Watson, M. D.; Fechtenkotter, A.; Mullen, K. Big is beautiful--"aromaticity" revisited 
from the viewpoint of macromolecular and supramolecular benzene chemistry. Chem Rev 2001, 
101, 1267-1300. 
(271) Yarulina, I.; De Wispelaere, K.; Bailleul, S.; Goetze, J.; Radersma, M.; Abou-Hamad, E.; 
Vollmer, I.; Goesten, M.; Mezari, B.; Hensen, E. J. M.; et al. Structure-performance descriptors 
and the role of lewis acidity in the methanol-to-propylene process. Nat Chem 2018, 10, 804-
812. 
(272) Le, T. T.; Qin, W.; Agarwal, A.; Nikolopoulos, N.; Fu, D.; Patton, M. D.; Weiland, C.; 
Bare, S. R.; Palmer, J. C.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Rimer, J. D. Elemental zoning enhances mass 
transport in zeolite catalysts for methanol to hydrocarbons. Nat Catal 2023, 6, 254-265. 
(273) Köhnke, K.; Wessel, N.; Esteban, J.; Jin, J.; Vorholt, A. J.; Leitner, W. 
Operandomonitoring of mechanisms and deactivation of molecular catalysts. Green Chemistry 
2022, 24, 1951-1972. 
(274) Bauer, M.; Heusel, G.; Mangold, S.; Bertagnolli, H. Spectroscopic set-up for 
simultaneous uv-vis/(q)exafs in situ and in operando studies of homogeneous reactions under 
laboratory conditions. J Synchrotron Radiat 2010, 17, 273-279. 
(275) Garland, M.; Li, C.; Guo, L. Four criteria for evaluating pure component spectral 
estimates and the subsequent identification of intermediates in homogeneous catalysis. ACS 
Catal 2012, 2, 2327-2334. 
(276) Hamann, J. N.; Hermsen, M.; Schmidt, A.-C.; Krieg, S.; Schießl, J.; Riedel, D.; Teles, J. 
H.; Schäfer, A.; Comba, P.; Hashmi, A. S. K.; Schaub, T. Selective decomposition of 
cyclohexyl hydroperoxide using homogeneous and heterogeneous crvi catalysts: Optimizing 
the reaction by evaluating the reaction mechanism. ChemCatChem 2018, 10, 2755-2767. 
(277) Seegerer, A.; Nitschke, P.; Gschwind, R. M. Combined in situ illumination-nmr-uv/vis 
spectroscopy: A new mechanistic tool in photochemistry. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2018, 57, 
7493-7497. 
(278) Puthilibai, G.; Vasudhevan, S.; Kutti Rani, S.; Rajagopal, G. Synthesis, spectroscopic 
characterization, electrochemical behaviour and antibacterial activity of ru(iii) complexes of 2-
[(4-n,n'-dimethylaminophenylimino)-methyl]-4-halophenol. Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol 
Spectrosc 2009, 72, 796-800. 
(279) Hussain, I.; Ullah, A.; Khan, A. U.; Khan, W. U.; Ullah, R.; Almoqbil A. Naser, A. A. 
S.; Mahmood, H. M. Synthesis, characterization and biological activities of hydrazone schiff 
base and its novel metals complexes. Sains Malaysiana 2019, 48, 1439-1446. 
(280) Oter, O.; Ertekin, K.; Dayan, O.; Cetinkaya, B. Photocharacterization of novel ruthenium 
dyes and their utilities as oxygen sensing materials in presence of perfluorochemicals. J 
Fluoresc 2008, 18, 269-276. 

112 
 
 
(281) Forcina, V.; García-Domínguez, A.; Lloyd-Jones, G. C. Kinetics of initiation of the third 
generation grubbs metathesis catalyst: Convergent associative and dissociative pathways. 
Faraday Discuss 2019, 220, 179-195. 
(282) Gil-Sepulcre, M.; Böhler, M.; Schilling, M.; Bozoglian, F.; Bachmann, C.; Scherrer, D.; 
Fox, T.; Spingler, B.; Gimbert-Suriñach, C.; Alberto, R.; et al. Ruthenium water oxidation 
catalysts based on pentapyridyl ligands. ChemSusChem 2017, 10, 4517-4525. 
(283) Fischer, C.; König, A.; Meißner, A.; Thede, R.; Selle, C.; Pribbenow, C.; Heller, D. 
Quantitative uv/vis spectroscopic investigations of the in situ synthesis of neutral μ-2‐chloro‐
bridged dinuclear (diphosphine)rhodium complexes. Eur J Inorg Chem 2014, 2014, 5849-5855. 
(284) Meissner, A.; Konig, A.; Drexler, H. J.; Thede, R.; Baumann, W.; Heller, D. New 
pentacoordinated rhodium species as unexpected products during the in situ generation of 
dimeric diphosphine-rhodium neutral catalysts. Chemistry 2014, 20, 14721-14728. 
(285) Meißner, A.; Preetz, A.; Drexler, H. J.; Baumann, W.; Spannenberg, A.; König, A.; 
Heller, D. In situ synthesis of neutral dinuclear rhodium diphosphine complexes 
[{rh(diphosphine)(μ2‐x)}2]: Systematic investigations. ChemPlusChem 2014, 80, 169-180. 
(286) Stambuli, J. P.; Incarvito, C. D.; Buhl, M.; Hartwig, J. F. Synthesis, structure, theoretical 
studies, and ligand exchange reactions of monomeric, t-shaped arylpalladium(ii) halide 
complexes with an additional, weak agostic interaction. J Am Chem Soc 2004, 126, 1184-1194. 
(287) Guilera, G.; Newton, M. A.; Polli, C.; Pascarelli, S.; Guino, M.; Hii, K. K. In situ 
investigation of the oxidative addition in homogeneous pd catalysts by synchronised time 
resolved uv-vis/exafs. Chem Commun (Camb) 2006, 4306-4308. 
(288) Solomon, E. I.; Neidig, M. L.; Schenk, G. 2.26 - magnetic circular dichroism of 
paramagnetic species. In Comprehensive coordination chemistry ii, McCleverty, J. A., Meyer, 
T. J. Eds.; Pergamon, 2003; pp 339-349. 
(289) Dawber, J. G. The faraday effect, magnetic rotatory dispersion and magnetic circular 
dichroism. A review. Analyst 1964, 89, 755-762. 
(290) Wolford, N. J.; Radovic, A.; Neidig, M. L. C-term magnetic circular dichroism (mcd) 
spectroscopy in paramagnetic transition metal and f-element organometallic chemistry. Dalton 
Trans 2021, 50, 416-428. 
(291) Shin, J.; Gwon, S.; Kim, S.; Lee, J.; Park, K. Correlation between the c–c cross-coupling 
activity and c-to-ni charge transfer transition of high-valent ni complexes. J Am Chem Soc 2020, 
142, 4173-4183. 
(292) Neidig, M. L.; Carpenter, S. H.; Curran, D. J.; DeMuth, J. C.; Fleischauer, V. E.; Iannuzzi, 
T. E.; Neate, P. G. N.; Sears, J. D.; Wolford, N. J. Development and evolution of mechanistic 
understanding in iron-catalyzed cross-coupling. Acc Chem Res 2019, 52, 140-150. 
(293) Daifuku, S. L.; Al-Afyouni, M. H.; Snyder, B. E. R.; Kneebone, J. L.; Neidig, M. L. A 
combined mössbauer, magnetic circular dichroism, and density functional theory approach for 
iron cross-coupling catalysis: Electronic structure, in situ formation, and reactivity of iron-
mesityl-bisphosphines. J Am Chem Soc 2014, 136, 9132-9143. 
(294) Daifuku, S. L.; Kneebone, J. L.; Snyder, B. E. R.; Neidig, M. L. Iron(ii) active species in 
iron–bisphosphine catalyzed kumada and suzuki–miyaura cross-couplings of phenyl 
nucleophiles and secondary alkyl halides. J Am Chem Soc 2015, 137, 11432-11444. 
(295) Jo, H. H.; Lin, C.-Y.; Anslyn, E. V. Rapid optical methods for enantiomeric excess 
analysis: From enantioselective indicator displacement assays to exciton-coupled circular 
dichroism. Acc Chem Res 2014, 47, 2212-2221. 
(296) Mortezaei, S.; Catarineu, N. R.; Duan, X.; Hu, C.; Canary, J. W. Redox-configurable 
ambidextrous catalysis: Structural and mechanistic insight. Chem Sci 2015, 6, 5904-5912. 

113 
 
 
(297) Fischer, C.; Beweries, T.; Preetz, A.; Drexler, H.-J.; Baumann, W.; Peitz, S.; Rosenthal, 
U.; Heller, D. Kinetic and mechanistic investigations in homogeneous catalysis using operando 
uv/vis spectroscopy. Catal Today 2010, 155, 282-288. 
(298) Beweries, T.; Fischer, C.; Peitz, S.; Burlakov, V. V.; Arndt, P.; Baumann, W.; 
Spannenberg, A.; Heller, D.; Rosenthal, U. Combination of spectroscopic methods: In situ nmr 
and uv/vis measurements to understand the formation of group 4 metallacyclopentanes from 
the corresponding metallacyclopropenes. J Am Chem Soc 2009, 131, 4463-4469. 
(299) Mansel, S.; Thomas, D.; Lefeber, C.; Heller, D.; Kempe, R.; Baumann, W.; Rosenthal, 
U. Stable rac-[1,2-ethylene-1,1‘-bis(η5-tetrahydroindenyl)]- zirconacyclopentanes. Syntheses, 
x-ray crystal structures, stability, and catalysis of ethylene polymerization. Organometallics 
1997, 16, 2886-2890. 
(300) Hopkins Leseberg, J. A.; Henke, W. C.; Douglas, J. T.; Oliver, A. G.; Sydora, O. L.; 
Blakemore, J. D. Spectroscopic interrogation of the reduction of model chromium precatalysts 
for olefin oligomerization. Organometallics 2022, 41, 2240-2251. 
(301) Grauke, R.; Schepper, R.; Rabeah, J.; Schoch, R.; Bentrup, U.; Bauer, M.; Brückner, A. 
Impact of al activators on structure and catalytic performance of cr catalysts in homogeneous 
ethylene oligomerization – a multitechnique in situ/operando study. ChemCatChem 2019, 12, 
1025-1035. 
(302) Hoover, J. M.; Ryland, B. L.; Stahl, S. S. Mechanism of copper(i)/tempo-catalyzed 
aerobic alcohol oxidation. J Am Chem Soc 2013, 135, 2357-2367. 
(303) Kumpulainen, E. T.; Koskinen, A. M. Catalytic activity dependency on catalyst 
components in aerobic copper-tempo oxidation. Chemistry 2009, 15, 10901-10911. 
(304) Rabeah, J.; Bentrup, U.; Stosser, R.; Bruckner, A. Selective alcohol oxidation by a copper 
tempo catalyst: Mechanistic insights by simultaneously coupled operando epr/uv-vis/atr-ir 
spectroscopy. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2015, 54, 11791-11794. 
(305) Walroth, R. C.; Miles, K. C.; Lukens, J. T.; MacMillan, S. N.; Stahl, S. S.; Lancaster, K. 
M. Electronic structural analysis of copper(ii)-tempo/abno complexes provides evidence for 
copper(i)-oxoammonium character. J Am Chem Soc 2017, 139, 13507-13517. 
(306) Preetz, A.; Drexler, H. J.; Fischer, C.; Dai, Z.; Borner, A.; Baumann, W.; Spannenberg, 
A.; Thede, R.; Heller, D. Rhodium-complex-catalyzed asymmetric hydrogenation: 
Transformation of precatalysts into active species. Chemistry 2008, 14, 1445-1451. 
(307) Connors, K. A. Binding constants — the measurement of molecular complex stability. 
Bunsenges Phys Chem 1987, 91, 1398-1398. 
(308) Landis, C. R.; Halpern, J. Asymmetric hydrogenation of methyl (z)-.Alpha.-
acetamidocinnamate catalyzed by [1,2-bis(phenyl-o-anisoyl)phosphino)ethane]rhodium(i): 
Kinetics, mechanism and origin of enantioselection. J Am Chem Soc 2002, 109, 1746-1754. 
(309) Berry, D. B. G.; Codina, A.; Clegg, I.; Lyall, C. L.; Lowe, J. P.; Hintermair, U. Insight 
into catalyst speciation and hydrogen co-evolution during enantioselective formic acid-driven 
transfer hydrogenation with bifunctional ruthenium complexes from multi-technique operando 
reaction monitoring. Faraday Discuss 2019, 220, 45-57. 
(310) Johnson, T. C.; Morris, D. J.; Wills, M. Hydrogen generation from formic acid and 
alcohols using homogeneous catalysts. Chem Soc Rev 2010, 39, 81-88. 
(311) Boddien, A.; Mellmann, D.; Gartner, F.; Jackstell, R.; Junge, H.; Dyson, P. J.; Laurenczy, 
G.; Ludwig, R.; Beller, M. Efficient dehydrogenation of formic acid using an iron catalyst. 
Science 2011, 333, 1733-1736. 
(312) Mellmann, D.; Barsch, E.; Bauer, M.; Grabow, K.; Boddien, A.; Kammer, A.; Sponholz, 
P.; Bentrup, U.; Jackstell, R.; Junge, H.; et al. Base-free non-noble-metal-catalyzed hydrogen 
generation from formic acid: Scope and mechanistic insights. Chemistry 2014, 20, 13589-
13602. 

114 
 
 
(313) Grabow, K.; Bentrup, U. Homogeneous catalytic processes monitored by combined in 
situ atr-ir, uv–vis, and raman spectroscopy. ACS Catal 2014, 4, 2153-2164. 
(314) Li, Y.; Molina de La Torre, J. A.; Grabow, K.; Bentrup, U.; Junge, K.; Zhou, S.; Bruckner, 
A.; Beller, M. Selective reduction of amides to amines by boronic acid catalyzed 
hydrosilylation. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2013, 52, 11577-11580. 
(315) Das, S.; Addis, D.; Knopke, L. R.; Bentrup, U.; Junge, K.; Bruckner, A.; Beller, M. 
Selective catalytic monoreduction of phthalimides and imidazolidine-2,4-diones. Angew Chem 
Int Ed Engl 2011, 50, 9180-9184. 
(316) Knöpke, L. R.; Reimann, S.; Spannenberg, A.; Langer, P.; Brückner, A.; Bentrup, U. 
Elucidating the directing effect of lewis acids on the reaction pathway in formal [3+3] 
cyclocondensation reactions: A comprehensive in situ spectroscopic study. ChemCatChem 
2011, 3, 1459-1468. 
(317) Reimann, S.; Knöpke, L. R.; Spannenberg, A.; Brückner, A.; Kühn, O.; Langer, P.; 
Bentrup, U. Identification of reaction intermediates in alcl3-mediated cyclocondensation 
reactions by simultaneous in situ atr-ftir and uv–vis spectroscopy. Tetrahedron 2013, 69, 3338-
3347. 
(318) Jones, C. W.; Tao, F.; Garland, M. V. Introduction to special issue on operando and in 
situ studies of catalysis. ACS Catal 2012, 2, 2444-2445. 
(319) Bentrup, U. Combining in situ characterization methods in one set-up: Looking with 
more eyes into the intricate chemistry of the synthesis and working of heterogeneous catalysts. 
Chem Soc Rev 2010, 39, 4718-4730. 
(320) Bruckner, A. Killing three birds with one stone--simultaneous operando epr/uv-
vis/raman spectroscopy for monitoring catalytic reactions. Chem Commun (Camb) 2005, 1761-
1763. 
(321) Davidi, D.; Noor, E.; Liebermeister, W.; Bar-Even, A.; Flamholz, A.; Tummler, K.; 
Barenholz, U.; Goldenfeld, M.; Shlomi, T.; Milo, R. Global characterization of in vivo enzyme 
catalytic rates and their correspondence to in vitro kcat measurements. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 2016, 113, 3401-3406. 
(322) Eunen, K. v.; Bakker, B. M. The importance and challenges of in vivo-like enzyme 
kinetics. Perspectives in Science 2014, 1,  
(323) Ross, M. O.; Macmillan, F.; Wang, J.; Nisthal, A.; Lawton, T. J.; Olafson, B. D.; Mayo, 
S. L.; Rosenzweig, A. C.; Hoffman, B. M. Particulate methane monooxygenase contains only 
mononuclear copper centers. Science 2019, 364, 566-570. 
(324) Banerjee, R.; Jones, J. C.; Lipscomb, J. D. Soluble methane monooxygenase. Annu Rev 
Biochem 2019, 88, 409-431. 
(325) Lee, S. K.; Nesheim, J. C.; Lipscomb, J. D. Transient intermediates of the methane 
monooxygenase catalytic cycle. J Biol Chem 1993, 268, 21569-21577. 
(326) Brazeau, B. J.; Lipscomb, J. D. Kinetics and activation thermodynamics of methane 
monooxygenase compound q formation and reaction with substrates. Biochemistry 2000, 39, 
13503-13515. 
(327) Nesheim, J. C.; Lipscomb, J. D. Large kinetic isotope effects in methane oxidation 
catalyzed by methane monooxygenase: Evidence for c-h bond cleavage in a reaction cycle 
intermediate. Biochemistry 1996, 35, 10240-10247. 
(328) Jacobs, A. B.; Banerjee, R.; Deweese, D. E.; Braun, A.; Babicz, J. T., Jr.; Gee, L. B.; 
Sutherlin, K. D.; Bottger, L. H.; Yoda, Y.; Saito, M.; et al. Nuclear resonance vibrational 
spectroscopic definition of the fe(iv)(2) intermediate q in methane monooxygenase and its 
reactivity. J Am Chem Soc 2021, 143, 16007-16029. 
(329) Ling, J.; Nestor, L. P.; Czernuszewicz, R. S.; Spiro, T. G.; Fraczkiewicz, R.; Sharma, K. 
D.; Loehr, T. M.; Sanders-Loehr, J. Common oxygen binding site in hemocyanins from 

115 
 
 
arthropods and mollusks. Evidence from raman spectroscopy and normal coordinate analysis. 
J Am Chem Soc 2002, 116, 7682-7691. 
(330) Kipouros, I.; Stanczak, A.; Ginsbach, J. W.; Andrikopoulos, P. C.; Rulisek, L.; Solomon, 
E. I. Elucidation of the tyrosinase/o(2)/monophenol ternary intermediate that dictates the 
monooxygenation mechanism in melanin biosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2022, 119, 
e2205619119. 
(331) Solomon, E. I.; Szilagyi, R. K.; DeBeer George, S.; Basumallick, L. Electronic structures 
of metal sites in proteins and models: Contributions to function in blue copper proteins. Chem 
Rev 2004, 104, 419-458. 
(332) Solomon, E. I.; Light, K. M.; Liu, L. V.; Srnec, M.; Wong, S. D. Geometric and electronic 
structure contributions to function in non-heme iron enzymes. Acc Chem Res 2013, 46, 2725-
2739. 
(333) Neese, F.; Solomon, E. I. Mcd c-term signs, saturation behavior, and determination of 
band polarizations in randomly oriented systems with spin s >/= (1)/(2). Applications to s = 
(1)/(2) and s = (5)/(2). Inorg Chem 1999, 38, 1847-1865. 
(334) Vaillancourt, F. H.; Yin, J.; Walsh, C. T. Syrb2 in syringomycin e biosynthesis is a 
nonheme feii alpha-ketoglutarate- and o2-dependent halogenase. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2005, 102, 10111-10116. 
(335) Matthews, M. L.; Krest, C. M.; Barr, E. W.; Vaillancourt, F. H.; Walsh, C. T.; Green, M. 
T.; Krebs, C.; Bollinger, J. M. Substrate-triggered formation and remarkable stability of the c-
h bond-cleaving chloroferryl intermediate in the aliphatic halogenase, syrb2. Biochemistry 
2009, 48, 4331-4343. 
(336) Srnec, M.; Wong, S. D.; Matthews, M. L.; Krebs, C.; Bollinger, J. M., Jr.; Solomon, E. 
I. Electronic structure of the ferryl intermediate in the alpha-ketoglutarate dependent non-heme 
iron halogenase syrb2: Contributions to h atom abstraction reactivity. J Am Chem Soc 2016, 
138, 5110-5122. 
(337) Srnec, M.; Iyer, S. R.; Dassama, L. M. K.; Park, K.; Wong, S. D.; Sutherlin, K. D.; Yoda, 
Y.; Kobayashi, Y.; Kurokuzu, M.; Saito, M.; et al. Nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopic 
definition of the facial triad fe(iv) horizontal lineo intermediate in taurine dioxygenase: 
Evaluation of structural contributions to hydrogen atom abstraction. J Am Chem Soc 2020, 142, 
18886-18896. 
(338) Srnec, M.; Solomon, E. I. Frontier molecular orbital contributions to chlorination versus 
hydroxylation selectivity in the non-heme iron halogenase syrb2. J Am Chem Soc 2017, 139, 
2396-2407. 
(339) Wong, S. D.; Srnec, M.; Matthews, M. L.; Liu, L. V.; Kwak, Y.; Park, K.; Bell, C. B., 
3rd; Alp, E. E.; Zhao, J.; Yoda, Y.; et al. Elucidation of the fe(iv)=o intermediate in the catalytic 
cycle of the halogenase syrb2. Nature 2013, 499, 320-323. 
(340) Long, C.; Han, J.; Guo, J.; Yang, C.; Liu, S.; Tang, Z. Operando toolbox for 
heterogeneous interface in electrocatalysis. Chem Catalysis 2021, 1, 509-522. 
(341) Corby, S.; Tecedor, M.-G.; Tengeler, S.; Steinert, C.; Moss, B.; Mesa, C. A.; Heiba, H. 
F.; Wilson, A. A.; Kaiser, B.; Jaegermann, W.; et al. Separating bulk and surface processes in 
niox electrocatalysts for water oxidation. Sustainable Energy & Fuels 2020, 4, 5024-5030. 
(342) Jiang, S. P. Solid-state electrochemistry and solid oxide fuel cells: Status and future 
prospects. Electrochemical Energy Reviews 2022, 5, 21. 
(343) Ros, C.; Carretero, N. M.; David, J.; Arbiol, J.; Andreu, T.; Morante, J. R. Insight into 
the degradation mechanisms of atomic layer deposited tio2 as photoanode protective layer. 
ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 2019, 11, 29725-29735. 
(344) Rossmeisl, J.; Qu, Z. W.; Zhu, H.; Kroes, G. J.; Nørskov, J. K. Electrolysis of water on 
oxide surfaces. J Electroanal Chem 2007, 607, 83-89. 

116 
 
 
(345) Roy, S.; Huang, Z.; Bhunia, A.; Castner, A.; Gupta, A. K.; Zou, X.; Ott, S. 
Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution from a cobaloxime-based metal-organic framework thin 
film. J Am Chem Soc 2019, 141, 15942-15950. 
(346) Lin, S.; Diercks, C. S.; Zhang, Y. B.; Kornienko, N.; Nichols, E. M.; Zhao, Y.; Paris, A. 
R.; Kim, D.; Yang, P.; Yaghi, O. M.; Chang, C. J. Covalent organic frameworks comprising 
cobalt porphyrins for catalytic co(2) reduction in water. Science 2015, 349, 1208-1213. 
(347) Bozal-Ginesta, C.; Rao, R. R.; Mesa, C. A.; Liu, X.; Hillman, S. A. J.; Stephens, I. E. L.; 
Durrant, J. R. Redox-state kinetics in water-oxidation irox electrocatalysts measured by 
operando spectroelectrochemistry. ACS Catal 2021, 11, 15013-15025. 
(348) Bozal-Ginesta, C.; Rao, R. R.; Mesa, C. A.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Hu, G.; Anton-Garcia, 
D.; Stephens, I. E. L.; Reisner, E.; Brudvig, G. W.; et al. Spectroelectrochemistry of water 
oxidation kinetics in molecular versus heterogeneous oxide iridium electrocatalysts. J Am 
Chem Soc 2022, 144, 8454-8459. 
(349) Sinha, S. B.; Shopov, D. Y.; Sharninghausen, L. S.; Stein, C. J.; Mercado, B. Q.; Balcells, 
D.; Pedersen, T. B.; Reiher, M.; Brudvig, G. W.; Crabtree, R. H. Redox activity of oxo-bridged 
iridium dimers in an n,o-donor environment: Characterization of remarkably stable ir(iv,v) 
complexes. J Am Chem Soc 2017, 139, 9672-9683. 
(350) Goldsmith, Z. K.; Harshan, A. K.; Gerken, J. B.; Voros, M.; Galli, G.; Stahl, S. S.; 
Hammes-Schiffer, S. Characterization of nife oxyhydroxide electrocatalysts by integrated 
electronic structure calculations and spectroelectrochemistry. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2017, 
114, 3050-3055. 
(351) Hisatomi, T.; Kubota, J.; Domen, K. Recent advances in semiconductors for 
photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting. Chem Soc Rev 2014, 43, 7520-7535. 
(352) Kisch, H. Semiconductor photocatalysis--mechanistic and synthetic aspects. Angew 
Chem Int Ed Engl 2013, 52, 812-847. 
(353) Wu, X.; Xie, S.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, Q.; Sels, B. F.; Wang, Y. Metal sulfide photocatalysts 
for lignocellulose valorization. Adv Mater 2021, 33, e2007129. 
(354) Wu, X.; Luo, N.; Xie, S.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, F.; Wang, Y. Photocatalytic 
transformations of lignocellulosic biomass into chemicals. Chem Soc Rev 2020, 49, 6198-6223. 
(355) Schmermund, L.; Jurkaš, V.; Özgen, F. F.; Barone, G. D.; Büchsenschütz, H. C.; Winkler, 
C. K.; Schmidt, S.; Kourist, R.; Kroutil, W. Photo-biocatalysis: Biotransformations in the 
presence of light. ACS Catal 2019, 9, 4115-4144. 
(356) Cao, N.; Xi, M.; Li, X.; Zheng, J.; Qian, L.; Dai, Y.; Song, X.; Hu, S. Recent 
developments in heterogeneous photocatalysts with near-infrared response. In Symmetry, 2022; 
Vol. 14. 
(357) Kreft, S.; Schoch, R.; Schneidewind, J.; Rabeah, J.; Kondratenko, E. V.; Kondratenko, 
V. A.; Junge, H.; Bauer, M.; Wohlrab, S.; Beller, M. Improving selectivity and activity of co2 
reduction photocatalysts with oxygen. Chem 2019, 5, 1818-1833. 
(358) Yang, S.; Hu, W.; Zhang, X.; He, P.; Pattengale, B.; Liu, C.; Cendejas, M.; Hermans, I.; 
Zhang, X.; Zhang, J.; Huang, J. 2d covalent organic frameworks as intrinsic photocatalysts for 
visible light-driven co(2) reduction. J Am Chem Soc 2018, 140, 14614-14618. 
(359) Fischer, S.; Hollmann, D.; Tschierlei, S.; Karnahl, M.; Rockstroh, N.; Barsch, E.; 
Schwarzbach, P.; Luo, S.-P.; Junge, H.; Beller, M.; et al. Death and rebirth: Photocatalytic 
hydrogen production by a self-organizing copper–iron system. ACS Catal 2014, 4, 1845-1849. 
(360) Tian, L.; Till, N. A.; Kudisch, B.; MacMillan, D. W. C.; Scholes, G. D. Transient 
absorption spectroscopy offers mechanistic insights for an iridium/nickel-catalyzed c–o 
coupling. J Am Chem Soc 2020, 142, 4555-4559. 

117 
 
 
(361) Fang, J.; Wang, Y.; Kurashvili, M.; Rieger, S.; Kasprzyk, W.; Wang, Q.; Stolarczyk, J. 
K.; Feldmann, J.; Debnath, T. Simultaneous hydrogen generation and exciplex stimulated 
emission in photobasic carbon dots. Angew Chem Int Ed 2023, n/a, e202305817. 
(362) El-Zohry, A. M.; Turedi, B.; Alsalloum, A.; Maity, P.; Bakr, O. M.; Ooi, B. S.; 
Mohammed, O. F. Ultrafast transient infrared spectroscopy for probing trapping states in 
hybrid perovskite films. Commun Chem 2022, 5, 67. 
(363) Wang, B.; Yang, S.-Z.; Chen, H.; Gao, Q.; Weng, Y.-X.; Zhu, W.; Liu, G.; Zhang, Y.; 
Ye, Y.; Zhu, H.; et al. Revealing the role of oxygen vacancies in bimetallic pbbio2br atomic 
layers for boosting photocatalytic co2 conversion. Appl Catal B Env 2020, 277, 119170. 
(364) Wu, X.; Xie, S.; Liu, C.; Zhou, C.; Lin, J.; Kang, J.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, Z.; Wang, Y. 
Ligand-controlled photocatalysis of cds quantum dots for lignin valorization under visible light. 
ACS Catal 2019, 9, 8443-8451. 
(365) Chen, G.-Z.; Chen, K.-J.; Fu, J.-W.; Liu, M. Tracking dynamic evolution of catalytic 
active sites in photocatalytic co2 reduction by in situ time-resolved spectroscopy. Rare Metals 
2020, 39, 607-609. 
(366) Hu, Y.; Zhan, F.; Wang, Q.; Sun, Y.; Yu, C.; Zhao, X.; Wang, H.; Long, R.; Zhang, G.; 
Gao, C.; et al. Tracking mechanistic pathway of photocatalytic co2 reaction at ni sites using 
operando, time-resolved spectroscopy. J Am Chem Soc 2020, 142, 5618-5626. 
(367) Coles, M. S.; Quach, G.; Beves, J. E.; Moore, E. G. A photophysical study of 
sensitization-initiated electron transfer: Insights into the mechanism of photoredox activity. 
Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 2020, 59, 9522-9526. 
(368) Wang, X.; Kafizas, A.; Li, X.; Moniz, S. J. A.; Reardon, P. J. T.; Tang, J.; Parkin, I. P.; 
Durrant, J. R. Transient absorption spectroscopy of anatase and rutile: The impact of 
morphology and phase on photocatalytic activity. J Phys Chem C 2015, 119, 10439-10447. 
(369) Xu, F.; Meng, K.; Cao, S.; Jiang, C.; Chen, T.; Xu, J.; Yu, J. Step-by-step mechanism 
insights into the tio2/ce2s3 s-scheme photocatalyst for enhanced aniline production with water 
as a proton source. ACS Catalysis 2022, 12, 164-172. 
(370) Liu, F.; Shi, R.; Wang, Z.; Weng, Y.; Che, C.-M.; Chen, Y. Direct z-scheme hetero-phase 
junction of black/red phosphorus for photocatalytic water splitting. Angew Chem Int Ed 2019, 
131, 11917-11921. 
(371) Wu, K.; Chen, Z.; Lv, H.; Zhu, H.; Hill, C. L.; Lian, T. Hole removal rate limits 
photodriven h2 generation efficiency in cds-pt and cdse/cds-pt semiconductor nanorod-metal 
tip heterostructures. J Am Chem Soc 2014, 136, 7708-7716. 
(372) Wu, K.; Rodriguez-Cordoba, W. E.; Liu, Z.; Zhu, H.; Lian, T. Beyond band alignment: 
Hole localization driven formation of three spatially separated long-lived exciton states in 
cdse/cds nanorods. ACS Nano 2013, 7, 7173-7185. 
(373) Wu, K.; Zhu, H.; Liu, Z.; Rodriguez-Cordoba, W.; Lian, T. Ultrafast charge separation 
and long-lived charge separated state in photocatalytic cds-pt nanorod heterostructures. J Am 
Chem Soc 2012, 134, 10337-10340. 
(374) Wu, K.; Du, Y.; Tang, H.; Chen, Z.; Lian, T. Efficient extraction of trapped holes from 
colloidal cds nanorods. J Am Chem Soc 2015, 137, 10224-10230. 
(375) Zou, Q.; Lu, Y. C. Solvent-dictated lithium sulfur redox reactions: An operando uv-vis 
spectroscopic study. J Phys Chem Lett 2016, 7, 1518-1525. 
(376) Patel, M. U.; Demir-Cakan, R.; Morcrette, M.; Tarascon, J. M.; Gaberscek, M.; Dominko, 
R. Li-s battery analyzed by uv/vis in operando mode. ChemSusChem 2013, 6, 1177-1181. 
(377) Ríos-Reina, R.; Azcarate, S. M. How chemometrics revives the uv-vis spectroscopy 
applications as an analytical sensor for spectralprint (nontargeted) analysis. In Chemosensors, 
2023; Vol. 11. 

118 
 
 
(378) Farahmand Nejad, M. A.; Ranjbar, S.; Parolo, C.; Nguyen, E. P.; Álvarez-Diduk, R.; 
Hormozi-Nezhad, M. R.; Merkoçi, A. Electrochromism: An emerging and promising approach 
in (bio)sensing technology. Mater Today 2021, 50, 476-498. 
(379) Raj, S. I.; Jaiswal, A.; Uddin, I. Ultrasmall aqueous starch-capped cus quantum dots with 
tunable localized surface plasmon resonance and composition for the selective and sensitive 
detection of mercury(ii) ions. RSC Advances 2020, 10, 14050-14059. 
 
6. Acknowledgements 
The following funding sources are acknowledged for supporting this work; The Flemish 
Research Fund for project grant G0A0321N to B.F.S. and for the post-doctoral fellowship 
12S1822N to X.W. The Anne T. and Robert M. Bass Stanford Graduate Fellowship to A.J.H. 
The National Institutes of Health grants R01DK031450 and R35GM145202 to E.I.S. 
7. List of abbreviations 
6MR 
6-membered ring  
8MR 
8-membered ring  
ATR 
attenuated total reflection  
BAS 
Brønsted acid sites  
BP/RP 
black/red phosphorus  
CB 
conduction band  
CBM 
conduction band minimum  
CCD 
charge coupled device  
CD 
circular dichroism  
CHHP 
cyclohexyl hydroperoxide  
COD 
cyclooctadiene  
cod 
cylooctadiene group  
coe 
cyclooctene complex  
CASPT2 
complete active space perturbation theory 2 
CT 
charge transfer  
CV 
cyclic voltammetry  
CVB 
covalent bonds  
CVE 
cumulative variance explained  
DQ 
double-quantum  
DRIFTS 
diffuse reflectance infrared fourier transform spectroscopy  
DRS 
diffuse reflectance spectroscopy  
ECCD 
Exciton-Coupled Circular Dichroism  
ee 
enantiomeric excess  
EPR 
electron paramagnetic resonance  
ESA 
excited state absorption  
EVE 
ethyl vinyl ether  
EXAFS 
extended X-ray absorption fine structure  
FMO 
frontier molecular orbitals  
FTIR 
fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy  
GC 
gas chromatography  
GSB 
ground state bleach  

119 
 
 
HAA 
hydrogen atom abstraction  
HCP 
hydrocarbon pool  
HMB+ 
hexamethylbenzenium  
HOMO 
highest occupied molecular orbitals  
HPLC 
high performance liquid chromatography  
HTS 
high-throughput screening  
IR 
infrared  
KIE 
kinetic isotope effect  
K-M 
Kubelka-Munk  
LAS 
Lewis acid sites  
LC 
liquid chromatography  
LMCT 
ligand-to-metal charge transfer  
LSPR 
localized surface plasmon resonance  
LUMO 
lowest unoccupied orbitals  
MAS 
magic angle spinning  
MCD 
magnetic circular dichroism  
MCR 
multivariate curve resolution  
MCR-ALS 
multivariate curve resolution-alternating least squares  
MES 
modulation excitation spectroscopy  
MLCT 
metal-to-ligand charge transfer  
MMAO 
modified methylaluminoxane  
MOF 
metal-organic framework  
MS 
mass spectrometry  
MTA 
methanol-to-aromatics  
MTG 
methanol-to-gasoline  
MTH 
methanol conversions to hydrocarbons  
MTM 
methane to methanol  
MTO 
methanol-to-olefins  
NMI 
N-methylimidazole  
NMR 
Nuclear magnetic resonance  
NNMF 
non-negative matrix factorization  
NPs 
nanometer particles  
NRs 
nanorods  
NRVS 
nuclear resonance vibrational spectroscopy  
OAT 
oxygen atom transfer 
OCP 
open-circuit potential  
ODH 
oxidative dehydrogenation  
OER 
oxygen evolution reaction  
PCA 
principal components analysis  
PDI 
N,N-bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-perylene-3,4,9,10-bisdicarboximide 
PP 
μ-chloro dinuclear diphosphine  
PP3 
P(CH2CH2PPh2)3  
PTZ 
Phenothiazine  
QDs 
quantum dots  
QM/MM 
quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics  
RFDR 
radio frequency driven recoupling  
RFQ 
rapid freeze quench  

120 
 
 
rR 
resonance Raman  
RWGS 
reverse water-gas shift  
SAC 
single atom catalysts  
SCR 
Selective catalytic reduction  
SE 
stimulated emission  
sMMO 
soluble methane monooxygenase  
SOC 
spin orbit coupling  
SSITKA 
steady state isotope transient kinetic analysis  
T&R 
transmission and reflectance  
TA 
transient absorption  
TAP 
transient analysis of products  
TAS 
transient absorption spectroscopy  
TBAF 
tetra-n-butylammonium fluoride  
TD-DFT 
time-dependent density-functional theory  
TEMPO 
(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl  
TMI 
transition metal ions  
TMO 
transition metal oxides  
TOF 
turnover frequency  
TON 
turnover number  
TS 
Transition state 
Ty 
tyrosinase  
UV-VIS-NIR 
ultraviolet-visible-near infrared 
VB 
valence band  
VT 
variable-temperature  
VTVH 
variable-temperature-variable-field  
WGS 
water-gas shift  
XANES 
X-ray absorption near edge structure  
XAS 
X-ray absorption spectroscopy  
XRD 
X-ray diffraction  
 
8. Biographies 
Edward I. Solomon 
Edward I. Solomon grew up in North Miami Beach, FL, received his Ph.D. at Princeton (with 
D. S. McClure), and was a postdoctoral fellow at The Ørsted Institute (with C. J. Ballhausen) 
and then at Caltech (with H. B. Gray). He was a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology until 1982, when he joined the faculty at Stanford University, where he is now the 
Monroe E. Spaght Professor of Humanities and Sciences and Professor of Photon Science at 
the SLAC National Accelerator Lab. He has been an invited professor in Argentina, Australia, 
Brazil, China, France, India, and Japan. Prof. Solomon’s research is in the fields of physical 
inorganic chemistry and bioinorganic chemistry with emphasis on the application of a wide 
range of spectroscopic methods combined with QM calculations to elucidate the electronic 
structure of transition metal sites and its contribution to physical properties and reactivity. He 
has received a wide range of medals and awards and is a member of the National Academy of 

121 
 
 
Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a fellow in the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science and the American Chemical Society. 
Alexander Heyer 
Alexander J. Heyer received his B.S. in chemistry at the University of Virginia where he 
researched proton-coupled electron transfer in Mo and W scorpionate complexes with 
Professor Dean Harman. He is now a Ph.D. student in inorganic chemistry at Stanford 
University in Professor Edward Solomon’s research group. Using both spectroscopic and 
computational methods, he studies methane oxidation in Cu and Fe zeolites, and his research 
is supported by the Anne T. and Robert M. Bass Stanford Graduate Fellowship. 
Bert F. Sels 
Bert F. Sels (1972), currently full professor at KU Leuven (Belgium), obtained his Ph.D. in 
2000 in the field of heterogeneous oxidation catalysis under the guidance of Prof. Pierre Jacobs. 
He was awarded the DSM Chemistry Award in 2000, the Incentive Award by the Belgian 
Chemical Society in 2005, and the international Green Chemistry Award in 2015. He currently 
leads the Centre for Sustainable Catalysis and Engineering (CSCE), and is active in designing 
heterogeneous catalysts for future challenges in industrial organic and environmental catalysis. 
His expertise includes heterogeneous catalysis in biorefineries, design of hierarchical zeolites 
and carbons, and the spectroscopic and kinetic study of active sites for small-molecule 
activation. He is cochair of the Catalysis Commission of the International Zeolite Association 
(IZA) and cofounder of the European Research Institute of Catalysis (ERIC). He is also a 
member of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts, member of the international advisory 
board of ChemSusChem (Wiley), and associate editor of ACS Sustainable Chemistry & 
Engineering. 
Dieter Plessers 
Dieter Plessers obtained his M.Sc. in Bioscience Engineering focused on catalytic technology 
from KU Leuven in 2017, with a Master’s thesis on the identification of the active sites in 
copper- and iron-exchanged zeolites for the selective oxidation of methane to methanol. 
Supported by a grant from the Research Foundation - Flanders (FWO), he obtained a Ph.D. at 
the Center for Sustainable Catalysis and Engineering (CSCE) under the guidance of Prof. Bert 
Sels, where he used spectroscopy and kinetic analyses to identify the copper speciation on 
copper-exchanged zeolites and quantify their reactivity in methane activation. This topic 
continues to be his primary research interest as a postdoctoral researcher in the framework of 
an FWO research grant. 
Fatima Rammal 
Fatima Rammal received in 2015 her B.Sc. in chemistry from the Lebanese university, Beirut, 
and her Master’s degree in organic and pharmaceutical chemistry in 2017 from the University 
of Paris Saclay, France. In December 2020, she obtained her Ph.D. degree in organic and 
photochemistry from the University of Caen, France, under the supervision of Dr Sami Lakhdar. 
During her research, she developed novel visible light mediated processes for the aromatization 
of polycyclic compounds, as well as for the functionalization of N-heteroarenes using several 

122 
 
 
non-activated radical precursors such as alkane, methanol, silane, and [1.1.1]propellane. Since 
February 2021, she is a postdoctoral researcher in the group of Prof. Bert Sels at the center for 
sustainable catalysis and engineering, KU Leuven, Belgium, working on the heterogeneous 
catalysis for biomass valorization and CO2 conversion. 
Jing Ma 
Jing Ma received her B.Sc. in chemical engineering from the Sichuan University in 2019. In 
2021, she obtained her M.Sc. in chemical system engineering at the University of Tokyo. In 
Tokyo she researched the influence of Al distribution in ZSM-5 zeolites on MTO reactions by 
transient kinetic methods, working with Professor Ogura Masaru and Dr. Takahiko Moteki. 
Supported by a grant from the FWO, she is currently pursuing a Ph.D. at KU Leuven under the 
guidance of Professor Bert Sels. Her research focuses on the investigation of methane oxidation 
in copper-exchanged zeolites by spectroscopic methods. 
Max L. Bols 
Max L. Bols received his B.Sc. and M.Sc. in bioscience engineering at the KU Leuven in 2015, 
doing his master’s thesis on the identification of the active site in iron zeolites for methane 
activation. Upon graduation, he started a Ph.D. with Dr. Benjamin Snyder, Prof. Bert Sels and 
Prof. Robert Schoonheydt on the synthesis, kinetics, and spectroscopic characterization of 
transition metal active sites in zeolites, supported by a FWO research grant. He continued this 
research as an FWO postdoctoral fellow, in collaboration with Prof. Edward Solomon at 
Stanford University. He is now a postdoctoral researcher at the Laboratory of Chemical 
Technology of Ghent University working on molecular modelling, spectroscopy, and kinetic 
studies for the characterization of heterogeneous catalysts. 
Robert A. Schoonheydt 
Robert A. Schoonheydt is emeritus professor of the KU Leuven, where he obtained his 
bioengineering degree in 1966 and his Ph.D. in 1970 under the guidance of Prof. Jan B. 
Uytterhoeven. He did a postdoc in the chemistry department of the Texas A&M University 
under the guidance of Jack H. Lunsford on adsorption of SO2 on MgO. His research interests 
at the KU Leuven are the surface chemistry of clay minerals and zeolites with special emphasis 
on transition metal ions and spectroscopy. Presently he is a member of an international research 
collaboration of zeolite chemists, spectroscopists, and quantum chemists on active sites in Cu- 
and Fe-zeolites for selective oxidation, NOx abatement, and electrophilic aromatic substitution 
reactions. He was dean of the Faculty of Bioscience Engineering from 1998 until 2004 and 
president of the International Association for the Study of Clays from 2001 until 2005. 
Sara Navarro-Jaén 
Sara Navarro-Jaén received her Ph.D. degree in Science and Technology of New Materials 
from the University of Seville (Spain) in 2019, under the supervision of Prof. José A. Odriozola. 
She then joined the UCCS CNRS laboratory (France) as a postdoctoral fellow in the groups of 
Dr. Andrei Khodakov and Prof. Franck Dumeignil. Since 2022 she works as a researcher at 
KU Leuven (Belgium), in the group of Prof. Bert Sels. Her research interests focus on the 
design of catalytic materials with environmental applications and the understanding of the 

123 
 
 
underlying reaction mechanisms, ranging from conversion of GHGs into fuels and chemicals 
to biomass valorization. 
Xuejiao Wu 
Xuejiao Wu received her B.Sc. degree (2015) from Xiamen University and obtained her Ph.D. 
degree (2020) from Xiamen University under the supervision of Prof. Ye Wang. She then 
carried out postdoctoral research at Prof. Bert F. Sels group at KU Leuven. Her research focuses 
on the valorization of lignocellulose, in particular by photocatalytic approaches. 
9. Abstract figure