Vol:.(1234567890)
Biological Trace Element Research (2025) 203:2216–2225
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12011-024-04289-z
REVIEW
Iron Metabolism, Calcium, Magnesium and Trace Elements: A Review
Tara Rolić1,2   · Mazyar Yazdani3   · Sanja Mandić1   · Sonia Distante3 
Received: 29 March 2024 / Accepted: 22 June 2024 / Published online: 6 July 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Iron (Fe) is fundamental to life on earth. In the human body, it is both essential and harmful if above threshold. A similar 
balance applies to other elements: calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), and trace elements including copper (Cu), zinc (Zn), 
lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), mercury (Hg), and nickel (Ni). These elements share some proteins involved in the absorption 
and transport of Fe. Cu and Cd can inhibit Fe absorption, while excess of Fe may antagonize Cu metabolism and reduce 
ceruloplasmin (Cp). Excessive Fe can hinder Zn absorption and transferrin (Trf) can bind to both Zn and Ni. Ca is able to 
inhibit the divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) in a dose-dependent manner to reduce Fe absorption and low Mg concentra-
tions can exacerbate Fe deficiency. Pb competitively inhibits Fe distribution and elevated Cd absorption reduces Fe uptake. 
Exposure to Hg is associated with higher ferritin concentrations and Ni alters intracellular Fe metabolism. Fe removal by 
phlebotomy in hemochromatosis patients has shown to increase the levels of Cd and Pb and alter the concentrations of trace 
elements in some types of anemia. Yet, the effects of chronic exposure of most trace elements remain poorly understood.
Introduction
Iron (Fe) is abundant in the human body and is a vital ele-
ment for sustaining life. Its function spans across various 
biological processes, from oxygen transport in cells to aid-
ing DNA synthesis [1]. Maintaining a precise balance in Fe 
metabolism is essential for human well-being, necessitat-
ing regulation at multiple levels. Central to this regulatory 
framework is intestinal Fe absorption which is tightly con-
trolled by a number of proteins such as divalent metal trans-
porter 1 (DMT1), ferroportin (FPN1), transferrin (Trf), and 
transferrin receptors (TrfR). Ferroxidases such as duodenal 
cytochrome B (DCYTB), ceruloplasmin (Cp), and hephaes-
tin are coordinated by hepcidin (Hep) to ensure efficient Fe 
acquisition and utilization. As one dives deeper into Fe 
metabolism, the intricate relationships between Fe, calcium 
(Ca), magnesium (Mg), and trace elements become apparent 
[2]. There are many avenues still to explore for investigating 
the interactions of Fe with other elements during absorption 
and distribution. The impacts on different organs still need 
exploration. In this review, we refer to elements Fe, calcium 
(Ca), and magnesium (Mg), and trace elements according to 
the definition of Thomas [3].
Adequate intake of Ca, Mg, and trace elements, including 
copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn), is essential for human health [4]. 
These elements not only support basic physiological func-
tions but offer insights into disease states when measured in 
diagnostic settings. Some of these non-essential elements 
can pose significant health risks due to their interference 
with Fe regulatory mechanisms when they are present in the 
body. For instance, lead (Pb), cadmium (Cd), mercury (Hg), 
and nickel (Ni) which are categorized as non-essential trace 
elements. These elements can enter the body through occu-
pational exposure or environmental contaminants including 
factors influenced by lifestyle choices such as diet and smok-
ing [5]. Understanding the impact of these trace elements on 
Fe metabolism and overall health is crucial for developing 
effective strategies to mitigate their adverse effects. How-
ever, extensive research on how trace elements interact and 
influence health is still lacking [6, 7].
The historical narrative surrounding Fe and its impact on 
human health is diverse with evidence for its significance 
dating back to ancient civilizations [8, 9]. Clinical manifes-
tations of altered Fe homeostasis, e.g., changes in skin color, 
have been documented throughout history [8]. Notably, the 
influence of Fe on health and disease has been recognized 
since Egyptian, Greek, and Roman times. In the seventeenth 
 *	 Sonia Distante 
	
sdistant@ous-hf.no
1	
Faculty of Medicine, University of Osijek, Osijek, Croatia
2	
Osijek University Hospital Centre (Klinički bolnički centar 
Osijek), Osijek, Croatia
3	
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway

2217
Iron Metabolism, Calcium, Magnesium and Trace Elements: A Review﻿	
century, a condition described as “green disease” (chlorosis) 
was treated with Fe supplements [9]. During the nineteenth 
century, a common ailment affecting young women was 
described as being characterized by lethargy, decreased work 
capacity, paleness, and amenorrhea. Interestingly, young 
women working in copper factories did not develop chloro-
sis. With contemporary knowledge regarding the interplay 
between Fe and Cu, exposure to Cu-salts in the workplace 
seems to have positively influenced Fe homeostasis. Nev-
ertheless, distinguishing Cu deficiency from Fe deficiency 
anemia can be challenging [8].
Understanding of the essential role of Fe in hemoglobin 
synthesis and oxygen transport began to emerge in the early 
twentieth century. In the same century, a condition named 
“bronze diabetes” was described, in diabetic patients with 
pronounced skin pigmentation [10]. Hemochromatosis (from 
the Greek words “blood & color”) was described in 1865 by 
a French physician. The association of its phenotype with Fe 
overload was established in 1890 by a German pathologist, 
deepening the understanding of the relationship between Fe 
and health [11].
This review aims to evaluate the biological interaction 
with Fe of Ca, Mg, and selected trace elements (Cu, Zn, Pb, 
Cd, Hg, and Ni) and their roles in certain diseases. Unrave-
ling the complexities of these interactions may enhance the 
understanding of how they affect human health.
Iron
Biochemical Properties
Fe is an essential transitional element in biological systems 
and exists in two oxidative states: (1) ferric ­(Fe3+) ion act-
ing as an electron acceptor; (2) ferrous ­(Fe2+) ion, acting 
as an electron donor. This flexibility renders Fe pivotal in 
catalyzing redox reactions acting as a cofactor in numer-
ous enzymes. Examples include Fe-sulfur clusters and 
heme groups found in hemoglobin, myoglobin, cytochrome, 
myeloperoxidase, and nitric oxide synthetases [12]. Conse-
quently, Fe plays an indispensable role in fundamental cellu-
lar functions and overall biological processes. These encom-
pass oxygen transport, aerobic respiration, intermediary and 
xenobiotic metabolism, nucleic acids replication and repair, 
innate and acquired immunity, and cell signaling pathways. 
Fe is predominantly chaperoned by proteins, enabling cells 
to harness its benefits while mitigating its potential harmful 
effects [13].
The average total amount of Fe in the human body is 
40–50 mg/kg in adults, with the majority incorporated into 
hemoglobin (approximately 2.5 g). The remaining Fe is 
stored in ferritin, primarily located in the liver, bone mar-
row, and spleen. Humans efficiently conserve and recycle 
Fe primarily through erythrophagocytosis in reticuloen-
dothelial macrophages with a recycling rate exceeding 80% 
[14, 15]. Both Fe deficiency and excess are associated with 
significant pathophysiological conditions. Fe balance is 
tightly controlled at a systemic level through the regulation 
of bioavailable Fe absorption. Unlike other elements, there 
is no physiological regulatory mechanism for excreting Fe. 
Intestinal absorption of bioavailable Fe determines Fe con-
centration in the body, with all unabsorbed Fe remaining in 
the intestine and potentially contributing to oncogenic pro-
cesses. The amount of Fe in feces is ten times higher than in 
most tissues [16]. In this regulation process, several proteins 
play key roles. For instance, Trf binds ­Fe3+ to reduce its 
toxicity and facilitate blood transport while ferritin serves 
as a storage center and can release Fe when it is needed in 
the organism.
Intestinal Absorption
Absorption of dietary Fe is a variable and dynamic process 
and serves as an initial point for the regulation of Fe balance. 
Normally, 1–2 mg of Fe is absorbed daily from the diet in 
the duodenum, and an equal amount of Fe is lost through 
shedding of gastrointestinal cells and epithelial desquama-
tion. In general, humans absorb only 5 to 35% of ingested Fe, 
depending on various interactions between food compounds 
and the source of Fe. Bioavailable Fe refers to the portion of 
Fe absorbed from the diet that is accessible for use by cells 
in the body [2, 13, 17–19].
Heme Fe (predominantly from animal sources) is con-
sidered the most available source of Fe with an absorption 
rate of 10–70%. Mechanistically, heme Fe is transmitted 
across the apical membrane through heme carrier protein 
1 (HCP1) into enterocytes, where heme oxygenase releases 
Fe while catabolizing heme to biliverdin [19]. Non-heme 
Fe (mostly derived from plants) has an absorption ratio of 
10–20% [20]. Its absorption is limited to the duodenum, 
whilst heme-Fe can be absorbed in other parts of the intes-
tine [21]. Non-heme Fe is primarily in the ferric form, pos-
ing an entry obstacle that is overcome by reduction to ­Fe2+ 
by Fe reductase (DCYTB), influenced by factors such as pH 
(Fig. 1). The ­Fe2+ then enters the enterocyte through DMT1 
or Zrt-Irt-like protein 14 (ZIP14) at the apical membrane.
Upon entry to cells, Fe can be used for protein and nucle-
otide synthesis, mitochondrial pathways regulating tran-
scription via iron responsive element (IRE) binding proteins, 
stored in ferritin or released into the blood. The export of 
Fe is mediated by FPN1, often aided by hephaestin or Cp. 
Hephaestin is a ferroxidase that oxidizes ­Fe2+ to ­Fe3+ after 
Fe passes the basolateral membrane to bind Trf [21]. Once 
bound to Trf, Fe can enter the blood and be delivered to all 
cells, primarily through endocytosis of the transferrin recep-
tor (TrfR 1/2). Ferroportin is the only known Fe exporter and 

2218
	
T. Rolić et al.
is critical in regulating Fe homeostasis at the cellular level 
by post-translational regulation [21, 22].
If Fe storage is replete in the body, the liver will pro-
duce Hep which is a key player in controlling Fe absorption 
from absorptive enterocytes, Fe-recycling macrophages, and 
hepatocytes. Hep binds to FPN1 and induces its internaliza-
tion and degradation in lysosomes, resulting in all absorbed 
Fe remaining in the cell and being unavailable for circula-
tion. This is a defensive and immune response of the body 
to conserve Fe for physiological needs and make it unavail-
able for microorganisms. Several factors can stimulate or 
inhibit this process and errors in this regulation can lead 
to Fe deficiency or Fe overload and be associated by Fe-
related diseases [22, 23]. Hep also downregulates both TfR1 
and DMT1 through a yet unknown mechanism [24]. Thus, 
higher Hep expression inhibits dietary Fe absorption and Fe 
release from recycling macrophages and other body stores 
[14]. In contrast, a decrease in Hep concentrations promotes 
Fe availability. The interaction between Hep and FPN1 is 
one aspect of system regulation, other aspects include cyto-
solic iron-responsible and regulatory proteins (IRP-IRE), 
hypoxia-responsive pathways (HIF), and erythropoietin 
signaling. These types of Fe regulation are beyond the scope 
of this review and can be found elsewhere [11, 13, 25].
Fig. 1   The absorption process of iron (Fe) at the enterocyte level. 
Heme-Fe is absorbed via the hem carrier protein 1 (HCP-1), while 
non-heme Fe is absorbed through the divalent metal transporter 1 
(DMT1) after conversion of ­Fe3+ to ­Fe2+ by duodenal cytochrome 
B (DCYTB). Fe can either be stored in ferritin or exported into the 
bloodstream by ferroportin (FPN1), the sole known Fe-exporter, 
which is regulated by Hepcidin (Hep) through downregulation. 
Hephaestin and ceruloplasmin (Cp) facilitate the oxidation of ­Fe2+ 
to ­Fe3+ for binding to transferrin (Trf). Cells dependent on Fe have 
transferrin receptors on their surface, allowing them to uptake Fe 
from Trf. Cp also binds copper (Cu) and transports it to cells. Cu 
enters the enterocyte via the Copper transporter 1 (CRT1). Magne-
sium (Mg) and calcium (Ca) enter the enterocyte through specific 
transporters (TRPM6 and TRPV6), and both elements are exported 
into the blood through ATP-ase activity. Zinc (Zn) is imported via 
ZIP transporter(s), while efflux is via Zn transporter (ZnT) (created 
with BioRender.com)

2219
Iron Metabolism, Calcium, Magnesium and Trace Elements: A Review﻿	
Metabolism and Homeostasis
While all cells have the capability to import, export, or store 
Fe, certain cells are specialized for specific Fe-related func-
tions. These include erythroblasts for Fe uptake, enterocytes 
and macrophages for Fe export, and hepatocytes for Fe stor-
age [14]. Fe metabolism and homeostasis exemplify a com-
plex circular economy governed by dietary absorption and 
regulated by hormones, the expression of relevant proteins 
and Fe discharge from macrophages. Anemia is a significant 
global public health concern affecting approximately one-
third of the world’s population [26]. Children, adolescents, 
women of reproductive age, and the elderly are particu-
larly vulnerable. Diagnosis of anemia relies on measuring 
hemoglobin concentration, using cut-off values < 130 g/L 
for males and < 120 g/L for non-pregnant females, though 
these thresholds are subject to debate due to ethnic differ-
ences [26]. Fe deficiency ranks among the top three causes 
of anemia worldwide, contributing to up to 50% of all cases. 
Deficiencies in vitamins, Cu and Mg can also lead to anemia 
due to their specific roles in hemoglobin and red blood cell 
production. Valuable insights can be obtained by exploring 
the interplay of elements including Zn, Cu, Mg, and Ca in 
anemia. Studies have found deficiencies in these elements 
in anemic children compared to non-anemic individuals 
[27]. Serum ferritin concentration is the most commonly 
used parameter to diagnose Fe deficiency. However, ferri-
tin concentration can be affected by obesity, inflammation, 
chronic alcohol intake, liver or kidney disease, and cancer. 
Furthermore, discrepancies in ferritin measurement methods 
may hinder result interpretation.
Despite the clinical significance of elements in Fe-related 
pathologies, new biomarkers such as soluble transferrin 
receptors (sTrfR), Hep, and non-transferrin bound iron 
(NTBI) are not routinely measured due to limited sensitiv-
ity, specificity, and standardization. Standardized sampling 
practices are important as serum Fe concentrations meas-
ured by spectrophotometric methods can vary up to 70% 
daily within individuals. [28]. Reduced Fe recycling from 
macrophages, as observed in inflammation, can lead to ane-
mia. Fe deficiency initially presents clinically as anemia [1]. 
True Fe deficiency is defined by diminished total Fe stores 
but reduced circulating Fe concentration can cause anemia 
due to functional Fe deficiency. This impairs erythropoie-
sis despite adequate or elevated Fe stores [13]. Functional 
Fe deficiency is a hallmark of anemia of chronic disease or 
anemia of inflammation associated with many chronic con-
ditions. Inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 acti-
vate the JAK/STAT3 signal pathway leading to induction of 
Hep transcription [13, 19]. Consequently Hep reduces FPN1 
expression, inhibiting dietary Fe absorption and Fe recycling 
in macrophages contributing to limited Fe bioavailability for 
microorganisms or oxidative stress in chronic inflammation 
[23, 29].
Iron deficiency is common in chronic kidney disease due 
to the decreased Fe absorption caused by elevated Hep con-
centrations. Increased serum Hep in kidney diseases is partly 
due to reduced clearance of Hep as indicated by the inverse 
correlation of Hep with estimated glomerular filtration rate. 
As chronic kidney disease progresses, the kidneys fail to 
produce sufficient erythropoietin. This means that Fe cannot 
be released from stores rapidly enough to meet the demands 
for erythropoiesis, leading to functional Fe deficiency [13, 
30, 31]. Conversely, Fe overload often occurs when errors 
take place in the Hep-FPN1 axis leading to FPN1 resistance 
to Hep and causing hemochromatosis. Hereditary hemochro-
matosis is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by 
excessive Fe absorption and tissue deposition, potentially 
leading to severe complications such as cirrhosis and liver 
cancer. Assessing body Fe stores is crucial and consistently 
elevated ferritin concentrations combined with Trf satura-
tion over 45% are indicative of primarily hemochromatosis. 
Mutations in the Hep regulatory and transmembrane pro-
tease serine 6 (TMPRSS6) genes, result in Fe-refractory-Fe 
deficiency anemia due to the inability to suppress Hep pro-
duction in the liver [13, 14, 31]. Individuals with this disease 
do not respond to oral Fe supplementation and only partially 
respond to parenteral Fe supplementation. This is because of 
Hep-mediated FPN1 degradation, which mobilizes Fe from 
parenteral preparations [13]. Hep regulates FPN1 expression 
in macrophages, it is upregulated by heme and downregu-
lated by inflammatory cytokines [14, 22].
The Interplay Between Iron and Other Elements
The dynamic interaction between Fe and other elements 
primarily occurs in the small intestine, with the duodenum 
and jejunum serving as crucial sites for absorption. The 
efficiency of element absorption is a complex process and 
it is influenced by various factors. These include the chemi-
cal form of the element, dietary composition, intestinal pH, 
the physiological condition of the individual, and the pres-
ence of other minerals, elements, inhibitors, and enhancers. 
The mechanisms involved in the absorption of elements are 
passive transport (e.g., Zn), active transport (e.g., Ca), or a 
combination of both. Research suggests that there may be 
competition from other elements for the intestinal Fe absorp-
tion pathway (Fig. 1). Notably Cu and Cd have been identi-
fied as significant inhibitors of ­Fe2+ uptake, whereas Hg and 
Pb do not cause such an effect [32].
Humans and animals have developed intricate mecha-
nisms for both absorbing and excreting essential trace ele-
ments as well as Ca and Mg. Disruption in homeostasis 
resulting in inadequate balance (deficiency or excess) can 
profoundly affect human health. The interaction between 

2220
	
T. Rolić et al.
Fe, Ca, and Mg with other trace elements is orchestrated by 
some key proteins, especially DMT1 and DCYTB. The for-
mer has been implicated in the intestinal transport of Fe, Cu, 
Zn, and Cd, whereas the latter is able to change the oxida-
tion state of both Fe and Cu ions [19, 27, 33]. For example, 
a main player in Fe export FPN1 may be influenced by Cu. 
Cu is actively involved in the function of hephaestin, a ­Fe2+ 
oxidase [8, 19]. Understanding the nuanced roles of these 
proteins and the broader interaction between Fe, Ca, Mg, 
and trace elements is essential not only for advancing our 
understanding of human physiology but also for addressing 
public health concerns.
In non-anemic adolescents, Choi et al. found that Fe con-
centrations correlated inversely (negatively) with Pb and Cu. 
In contrast, Pb correlated positively with Zn and correla-
tion with Fe concentration was not observed for Zn and Cd 
[34]. The absorption of both Mg and Ca was found to be 
closely related to Fe in β-thalassemic patients compared to 
a control group. Mg was found to be high in thalassemic 
patients, whilst Ca was lower compared to the control group 
[35]. These three elements can compete for absorption in 
the intestinal, especially when they are consumed in large 
quantities. Whilst consumption of Ca has a reciprocal rela-
tionship with Mg absorption, the mechanism by which they 
interact individually or synergistically with Fe metabolism 
is still not fully understood [36]. Bolann and coauthors in 
their study showed that venipuncture in hemochromatosis 
patients led to changes in trace element metabolism, includ-
ing increased the absorption of potentially toxic elements 
[37].
Essential Elements: Copper, Zinc, Calcium, 
Magnesium
Cu and Fe share some physicochemical properties and their 
interactions have been previously acknowledged [8]. Cu may 
positively impact the absorption, transport, and utilization 
of Fe, whilst Fe may antagonize Cu metabolism. When Fe 
stores are depleted, Cu is redistributed to crucial tissues 
involved in regulating Fe balance, such as the intestine, 
liver, and blood. Cu may enhance Fe transport in enterocytes 
and increase the synthesis of Cp in hepatocytes, which is a 
significant circulating ferroxidase capable of releasing Fe 
from stores. Aceruloplasminemia is a rare genetic disease 
characterized by a gene mutation that reduces or abolishes 
Cp production, leading to Fe accumulation in tissues [33]. 
Interestingly, Cu depletion impairs the biosynthesis of Cp 
resulting in a similar Fe overload phenotype seen in acerulo-
plasminemia. Cu influences DNA binding activity, hypoxia-
inducing factor (HIF) binding and modulates intestinal Fe 
homeostasis [8]. The regulation of Cu metabolism responds 
to physiological demand in the organism. Metallothionein, a 
protein binding both Cu and Zn with a higher affinity for Cu, 
plays a role in this regulation process. Depleted Cu concen-
trations are common in conditions such as hemochromatosis 
or when taking high doses of Fe supplements [8]. Notably 
in cases of Fe deficiency, Cu promotes Fe absorption in the 
intestine however compared to intestinal Fe absorption, less 
is known about the regulation of Cu absorption.
Absorption of Cu starts in the duodenum where Cupric 
ion ­(Cu2+) from the diet needs to be reduced prior to absorp-
tion (to cuprous ion ­(Cu+)) by DYCTB and hephaestin, 
among other cupric reductases. ­Cu+ is then transported into 
enterocytes through specific transporters such as Cu trans-
porter 1 (CTR1) [38]. In Fe depletion, DMT1 can transport 
Cu, especially when little or no competing Fe ions are avail-
able for DMT1 in the intestine when Cu becomes a plausible 
ligand for this transporter. In the liver, Cu can be utilized, 
stored (as metallothionein), or incorporated into Cp. Similar 
to Fe, Cu is transported to the liver by binding to proteins 
(e.g., albumin) or amino acids (e.g., histidine). Ceruloplas-
min and hephaestin share significant homology to each other 
and both incorporate Cu into their active sites and possess 
the capability to oxidize Fe [19].
Deficiency of Cu leads to defective Fe absorption with 
concomitant impaired erythropoiesis. The impact of Cu 
on hemoglobin synthesis is unclear but it is assumed that 
Cu may facilitate Fe import or utilization in mitochondria 
[8]. Moreover, Cu stimulates the synthesis of the biologi-
cally active form of Hep (Hep-25), which exhibits a high 
affinity for Cu binding [39]. Cu treatment of hepatoma cells 
through transactivation of the Hep antimicrobial peptide 
gene (HAMP) showed changes in the activity and expression 
of DMT1 (including its internalization) after Hep signal-
ing, similar to the regulation of Hep-FPN1 interaction [39]. 
Recently, the Cu-binding properties of Hep-25 were har-
nessed in a novel detection assay for human Hep in serum 
[40]. Additionally, Cu may boost the antimicrobial and bac-
tericidal properties of Hep-25 and influence FPN1 [41]. A 
deficit of Cu increases Zn absorption, whilst high supple-
mental Zn intake hinders intestinal Cu absorption, which 
concomitantly could induce severe Cu deficiency [8, 34].
Zn is a cofactor of 300 enzymes and plays a crucial role in 
nucleic acid metabolism, cell replication, tissue repair, and 
growth [42]. It also influences production, storage, and secre-
tion of hormones and is ubiquitously present in all tissues, with 
the highest concentrations found in muscle, bone, and liver 
[43]. Zn has a critical role in heme synthesis (α-aminolevulinic 
dehydratase) and erythropoiesis [44, 45]. Its absorption occurs 
across the intestinal lining through specific a Zn transporter 
family (ZIP) including ZIP4, ZIP5, and ZIP14 which has been 
shown to transport both Fe and Zn in hepatocytes [8, 13, 43]. 
Zn is not a substrate for DMT1, and intestinal interactions are 
mediated by non-DMT1 mechanism [43]. The body maintains 
a stable concentration of Zn across a broad spectrum of dietary 

2221
Iron Metabolism, Calcium, Magnesium and Trace Elements: A Review﻿	
intake, suggesting the presence of an effective homeostatic 
mechanism in the organism to maintain balance [46].
Zn is stored as metallothionein and proteins includ-
ing albumin (60%), α2-macroglobulin, and Trf (10%) are 
responsible for transporting Zn in the blood [43]. Transferrin 
transports both Fe and Zn, meaning that excessive Fe can 
compete with Zn absorption in the intestine and that Zn con-
centration increases when Fe concentration decreases [47]. 
Zn deficiency is associated with both reduced Fe absorp-
tion and elevated accumulation of Fe in tissue [43]. In a 
case–control study, Abdelheim and co-authors found that 
Zn concentrations were lower in subjects with Fe deficiency 
compared to a healthy control group. The same study pro-
posed joint supplementation of Zn and Fe, particularly in 
patients with severe gut epithelial dysfunction.
Biomarkers for Zn deficiency have not been established 
to date [43]. In vivo studies suggested the possible role of 
FPN1 in exporting Zn and of Trf in binding Zn. Interest-
ingly, excess accumulation of Fe may reduce Zn absorption 
and high concentrations of Zn may reduce Fe absorption [8, 
34, 47]. Experimental animal models and in vitro studies 
on Zn deficiency documented Fe deficiency anemia as well 
as distribution/accumulation of Fe in tissues via induction 
of DMT1 and FPN1 triggering Fe uptake. Moreover, cross-
sectional studies in humans revealed a positive association 
between Zn and hemoglobin, red blood cell indices, and fer-
ritin. Biomarkers of Fe were higher in Zn replete subjects 
compared to Zn-deficient subjects. It has been suggested 
that an underlying Zn deficiency could induce Fe deficiency 
by blocking intestinal absorption and Fe mobilization from 
tissues [43]. Although Zn deficiency alone does not result in 
anemia, it can coexist with Fe deficiency. Excess Zn intake 
interferes with Cu uptake and may result in a Cu deficiency 
that eventually leads to anemia [45].
Zn is a key modulator of Fe absorption and tissue dis-
tribution. Compromised Zn status leads to a reduction in 
pancreatic Zn content, which in turn reduces intestinal Fe 
absorption through decreased expression of DMT1 and 
FPN1. In terms of mechanisms, the overall impact of Zn 
deficiency is linked to the onset of Fe deficiency, caused by 
a combination of diminished absorption in the intestines and 
reduced mobilization of Fe from storage [43]. Additionally, 
Zn may influence Fe homeostasis by regulating Hep expres-
sion in the liver through activation of the hemojuvelin-bone 
morphogenetic-SMAD (HJV-BMP-SMAD) pathway. A 
Zn-dependent enzyme called matriptase-2 (TMPRSS6) 
regulates the levels of HJV by proteolytic degradation. It is 
hypothesized that inhibition of matriptase-2 activity under 
low Zn concentrations may induce Hep production [43]. 
Intestinal Zn absorption reduces intestinal absorption of Ca 
and Cu, and Ca, Fe, and Cu have a negative impact on Zn 
absorption [34, 42]. Some trace elements (e.g., Pb and Zn) 
may share the intestinal Fe absorption pathway [2].
Ca is absorbed in the small intestine through a transcel-
lular active transport process mediated by Ca channels and 
an electrochemical gradient, as well as through a passive 
paracellular process facilitated by tight junctions between 
enterocytes [8, 48, 49] (Fig. 1). Ca channels play an essen-
tial role in maintaining the steady state intracellular level 
of Ca. Despite being a divalent ion, Ca is absorbed by an 
independent cellular mechanism (TRPV6) and it is not an 
appropriate ligand for DMT1 [49]. Numerous studies have 
investigated the effect of Ca on Fe absorption, revealing a Ca 
dose-dependent relationship. This is because Ca is the only 
element capable of inhibiting both heme and non-heme Fe 
absorption, while other inhibitors of Fe affect only non-heme 
Fe absorption [2, 49–51]. The negative effect of Ca on Fe 
absorption has been examined in single and multiple meal 
studies but experimental and epidemiological data from 
these studies have not always been consistent, primarily due 
to study heterogeneity.
In their review and meta-analysis, Abioye and co-authors 
concluded that Ca supplementation in the short term has 
a negative effect on Fe status but the magnitude of this 
effect is unlikely to be biologically significant [50]. Two 
key mechanisms of action have been proposed for Ca and 
Fe interactions: (1) the luminal Ca internalization of DMT1 
and (2) the interference of Ca with the transfer of Fe across 
the enterocyte basolateral membrane [49, 50]. Interestingly, 
higher Ca intake had no impact on hemoglobin concentra-
tions [50]. The inhibitory effect depends on the coexistence 
of Fe and Ca in the intestine during fasting, so if possible 
Ca and Fe supplements should be taken separately [49]. It 
remains unclear whether there is a threshold level of Ca 
beyond which it can exert inhibitory effects on Fe absorp-
tion. The specific value of the Ca threshold and the potential 
factors influencing it are still unknown. Nevertheless, a ran-
domized controlled trial by Keum et al., concluded that high 
doses of Ca supplements could reduce the risk of adenomas 
progressing to colorectal cancer, and the effect would extend 
with continued Ca intake [52].
Mg is widely acknowledged as a cofactor for numerous 
enzymes. Its critical role in hemoglobin synthesis means that 
deficiency in Mg can disrupt erythrocyte energy metabo-
lism and the inflammatory process, leading to the devel-
opment of anemia. This concept was further supported by 
evidence showing that Mg supplementation improved ane-
mia in thalassemic mice and diminished erythrocyte mem-
brane transport abnormalities in patients with sickle cell 
disease [53]. Mg is known to be an important coenzyme 
of glutathione peroxidase involved in hemoglobin synthesis 
based on experiments on animals [54]. In the intestine, Mg 
is absorbed through specific transporters like TRPM6 (tran-
sient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M mem-
ber 6) or through passive non-specific diffusion between 
cells (Fig. 1). Intake of Mg is inversely associated with 

2222
	
T. Rolić et al.
inflammation, and decreased Mg concentrations in serum 
correlate with inflammation, increased production of free 
radicals, and decreased Fe serum concentrations. In a cross 
sectional study among healthy Chinese adults, intake of Mg 
was inversely associated with risk of anemia. The mecha-
nism by which Mg modifies Fe status is unknown however 
a lower risk of anemia was observed in individuals with 
highest Fe and Mg intakes suggesting Fe and Mg may jointly 
affect the risk of anemia [55].
Animal models also demonstrated that Fe deficiency 
increased the intestinal absorption of Mg and Ca [56, 57]. 
In athletes, hemoglobin concentrations and red blood cell 
count increased following consumption of Mg supplements 
[53]. Deficiency of Fe can lead to an increase in intestinal 
Mg absorption and certain Mg salts can raise pH or bind 
Fe and therefore negatively affect intestinal Fe absorption 
[53, 58]. In an interventional study conducted among female 
students, Milinkovic and co-authors suggested that short-
term supplementation with Mg could have a beneficial effect 
on Fe biomarkers such as transferrin saturation [53]. An 
in vitro study showed that Fe absorption can be inhibited by 
Mg, however, the combination of Fe supplements with Mg 
was not considered a clinical problem. In a case report, Mg 
overuse led to Fe deficiency anemia which was refractory 
to long-term Fe supplements [59]. Mg deficiency has been 
shown to be closely related to a higher rate of anemia occur-
rence, especially among women and older subjects [54].
Non‑essential Trace Elements: Lead, 
Cadmium, Mercury, Nickel
Non-essential, xenobiotic, or toxic elements are commonly 
present in detectable concentrations within the human 
body. They typically infiltrate organisms by mimicking 
essential elements and exploiting their inherent transport 
systems. These elements gain entry through environmen-
tal, occupational, or intentional exposure, often resulting 
in toxicity and the development of pathological conditions 
[60, 61].
Pb present in measurable concentrations in the human 
body typically results from dietary ingestion. Plants have 
the ability to absorb Pb from contaminated soil and water 
(with regional variation); Pb can then transfer from plants 
to animals and humans. Pb is a harmful trace element and 
can affect Fe metabolism, especially in Fe deficiency dis-
ease. In children, Pb can lead to anemia and impair cogni-
tive development [2, 62]. Upon absorption in the intestine 
via DMT1, Pb inhibits Fe uptake and can also interfere 
with Fe-dependent metabolic processes such as heme bio-
synthesis [27]. Fe deficit increases the absorption of Pb, 
whereas a high dietary Fe reduces Pb absorption in the 
intestine [27]. A study by Yazdani et al. found that Pb 
concentrations in hemochromatosis patients were raised 
after venipuncture therapy [63]. Similarly, another study 
involving hemochromatosis patients revealed increased Cd 
concentrations after venipuncture, compared to healthy 
subjects [64].
Cd is among the most widespread toxic elements. With 
properties similar to Ca, Cd can disrupt metabolism, lead-
ing to elevated Ca concentrations in urine. Cd has similar 
properties to Ca and therefore can disrupt its metabolism 
and cause elevated Ca concentration in urine. Cd toxic-
ity is increased in the presence of Ca deficiency and Cd 
absorption also reduces concentrations of Fe, Cu, and Zn 
[42]. One well-known characteristic of Cd is its accumula-
tion in the kidneys, where its long half-life causes it to act 
as a potential. Smokers in particular, are exposed to Cd due 
to its presence in tobacco plants that, directly absorb Cd 
from the soil [65]. Animal studies suggest that Cd decreases 
Fe concentrations by suppressing the expression of DMT1, 
FPN1, DCYTB, and Hep at mRNA level [42]. While Cd 
may inhibit Fe absorption in the intestine, the interactions 
between Cd and Fe remain unclear. In the case of Fe defi-
ciency where DMT1 and FPN1 are upregulated, Cd absorp-
tion is increased [62]. Furthermore, Cd can induce various 
forms of anemia: (1) Fe deficiency anemia by competing 
with duodenal Fe absorption; (2) hemolytic anemia by 
deforming peripheral blood cells; (3) renal induced anemia 
by reducing erythropoietin production. Although Cd is able 
to bind to DMT1, this protein is not the sole transporter of 
Cd in the intestine. In a study using Caco-2 cells (a type 
of colorectal carcinoma cell line), Cd was found to inhibit 
the expression of the DMT1 gene, leading to decreased Fe 
concentrations in serum and resulting in anemia by suppress-
ing Fe transport in the intestine. Cd may also inhibit genes 
related to the transport of both non-heme and heme Fe [66].
Similar to Cd, Hg serves no physiological function in 
the body. However, both elements have a high affinity for 
protein sulfhydryl groups and can be readily transported in 
the bloodstream [42].
Environmental Hg contamination primarily affects fish, 
shellfish, and other seafood, making dietary intake a com-
mon route of exposure and potentially leading to carci-
nogenic effects in humans. Methylmercury, is efficiently 
absorbed by the intestine (up to 95%) and predominantly 
bound to hemoglobin (> 90%), it can readily traverse the 
blood–brain barrier and accumulate in the brain. Addition-
ally, Hg can contribute to the generation of reactive oxygen 
species within cells. In a study by Zabinski and colleagues, 
workers exposed to Hg exhibited higher ferritin concentra-
tions compared to control groups [67]. Consistent with these 
findings, a positive correlation between Hg and ferritin was 
observed by Barany et al. [62]. However, Iturri and col-
leagues concluded that Hg did not significantly inhibit Fe 
uptake in mouse models [32].

2223
Iron Metabolism, Calcium, Magnesium and Trace Elements: A Review﻿	
Ni is considered essential for proper function of some 
organisms as it is known to enhance hormonal activity and 
is involved in lipid metabolism [68]. However, epidemio-
logical in vivo and in vitro studies have also demonstrated 
its carcinogenic effect [69]. Absorption can occur through 
environmental and occupational exposures via the respira-
tory tract, digestive system, and skin. Occupational expo-
sure to Ni through inhalation in factory workers has been 
linked to higher rates of lung and nasal cancers [69]. Ni is 
transported into the body and cells through Ca channels and 
DMT1. It specifically impacts on Ca homeostasis and mim-
ics a hypoxia response, eventually leading cells to undergo 
carcinogenic transformation [69]. Ni can prevent the bind-
ing of Fe to Trf and in addition to competing for Fe uptake, 
Ni may alter Fe metabolism by increasing Fe IRP-1 bind-
ing activity and reducing Fe availability at the intracellular 
level [70]. Untreated and unrecognized Fe deficiency anemia 
may result in heightened sensitivity to Ni toxicity [71]. As 
described in a case report by Divya et al. a patient’s symp-
toms of urticaria were correlated with the consumption of 
green leafy vegetables, chocolates and nuts (i.e., foods rich 
in Ni). After proper Fe therapy, urticaria reduced and hemo-
globin concentrations improved in the patient [72].
Conclusion and Future Perspectives
Iron, similar to “Janus”, the two-faced Roman god can 
be toxic as it is essential. Disturbed Fe homeostasis may 
result in long-term consequences. This review considers 
the complex interplay and regulation of Fe with Ca, Mg, 
and selected trace elements, reflecting on the importance 
of Fe in selected diseases. The intestinal absorption and 
regulatory mechanisms governing systematic Fe homeosta-
sis in relation to other elements, especially divalent ions, 
remain insufficiently explained. Numerous proteins includ-
ing DMT1 (which imports ­Fe2+, Cu, Pb, and Ni), Cp, Hep, 
hephaestin (Cu is important in the structure), and Trf (binds 
­Fe3+, Ni, and Zn) play crucial roles in mediating interac-
tions among elements. Disruption in the absorption or tis-
sue distribution of one element can change the homeostasis 
of other(s). Anemia, hemochromatosis, kidney disease, and 
carcinogenesis are among the diseases associated with dis-
rupted Fe homeostasis, yet descriptions of the involvement 
of other elements in these conditions are scarce. Deficiencies 
in Cu, Mg, and Zn can lead to anemia due to their specific 
roles in hemoglobin synthesis. Depletion of Cp results in the 
accumulation of Fe in tissues. Hemochromatosis patients, 
who can experience complications such as liver cirrhosis 
and cancer if untreated, can also display elevated Pb and Cd 
concentrations when treated with bloodlettings. In kidney 
diseases, elevated Hep reduces Fe absorption and contrib-
utes to the development of anemia of chronic disease. Cd 
exposure and possible accumulation may complicate kidney 
disease. The interplay of elements forms a vicious circle 
in the onset of various diseases, making it challenging to 
discern cause and effect. The interaction of Fe with other 
elements is of particular concern in vulnerable populations, 
such as children and adolescents exposed to Pb and women 
of reproductive age exposed to Cd. Accordingly, any imbal-
ance in Fe concentration and resulting disease should be 
viewed as a complex mechanism involving other elements 
and proteins. Today, many laboratories can measure most 
of these elements and proteins and thus give a better insight 
into the causes of the Fe imbalance. With such a comprehen-
sive approach, it would be possible to achieve more effec-
tive treatment of the patient with improved and longer-term 
results.
Future research should focus on a thorough understanding 
of the proteins involved in intestinal absorption and tissue 
distribution of elements (DMT1, FPN1, Cp, Hep, hephaes-
tin, Trf, and ferritin) and their interaction. Considering the 
diverse binding affinities of different elements to proteins, 
diverse sample types (full blood, serum, plasma, and urine) 
should be differentiated when measuring protein and ele-
ment concentrations. Additionally, the approach to therapy, 
whether through dietary intake or supplements, is crucial 
in the treatment of long-term anemic patients (suggesting 
Ca and Mg supplementation). This review looks at a given 
limited number of elements influencing Fe metabolism, pos-
sible Fe interactions with other not here mentioned elements 
is an interesting topic for future research.
Abbreviations  DCYTB: Duodenal cytochrome B; DMT1: Divalent 
metal transporter 1; Ca: Calcium; Cd: Cadmium; Cp: Ceruloplas-
min; CTR​: Copper transporter; Cu: Copper; Fe: Iron; FPN1: Fer-
roportin; HAMP: Hepcidin antimicrobial peptide gene; HJV-BMP-
SMAD: Hemojuvelin-bone morphogenetic-SMAD; HCP1: Heme 
carrier protein 1; Hep: Hepcidin; Hg: Mercury; HIF: Hypoxia-respon-
sive pathway; IRE: Iron responsive element; IRP: Iron responsive pro-
tein; Mg: Magnesium; Ni: Nickel; NTBI: Non-transferrin bound iron; 
Pb: Lead; TMPRSS6: Transmembrane protease serine 6, matriptase-2; 
sTrfR: Soluble transferrin receptors; Trf: Transferrin; TrfR: Transfer-
rin receptor; TRPM6: Transient receptor potential cation channel sub-
family M member 6, magnesium channel; TRPV6: Transient recep-
tor potential vanilloid-6, calcium channel; ZIP: Zrt-Irt-like protein; 
Zn: Zinc; ZnT: Zinc transporter
Acknowledgements  The review stems from a collaborative effort 
enabled by the EFLM LabX program, which serves as a professional 
exchange platform for laboratory medicine professionals under the 
European Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine 
(EFLM). The authors express heartfelt appreciation to the EFLM for 
their invaluable support, as well as to Oslo University Hospital and 
Osijek University Hospital for their active involvement in the program. 
The authors thank  Daniel Charles Turnock, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry, York Hospital NHS, Wigginton, UK for reading the 
manuscript and providing valuable feedback.
Author contributions  T. R., M. Y., S. M., and S. D. designed and con-
ceptualized. T. R. wrote the main text with cooperation of M. Y., S. M., 
and S. D. and prepared the figure. M. Y., S. M., and S. D. edited and 

2224
	
T. Rolić et al.
crticaly reviewed the main text. All authors (T. R., M. Y., S. M., and S. 
D.) reviewed and approved final version of the manuscript.
Funding  Open access funding provided by University of Oslo (incl 
Oslo University Hospital).
Declarations 
Competing Interests  The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
	 1.	 Silvestri L, Pettinato M, Furiosi V, Bavuso Volpe L, Nai A, Pagani 
A (2023) Managing the dual nature of iron to preserve health. Int 
J Mol Sci 24:3995
	 2.	 Abbaspour N, Hurrell R, Kelishadi R (2014) Review on iron and 
importance for human health. J Res Med Sci 19:164–174
	 3.	 Thomas L (2023) Clinical laboratory diagnostics. Available online 
from: https://​www.​clini​cal-​labor​atory-​diagn​ostics.​com/​index.​
html. Accessed 20 Oct 2023
	 4.	 Sousa C, Vinha AF, Moutinho C, Matos C (2019) Trace miner-
als in human health: iron, zinc, copper, manganese and fluorine. 
IJSRM Human 13:57–80
	 5.	 Chen QY, DesMarais T, Costa M (2019) Metals and mechanisms 
of carcinogenesis. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 59:537–554
	 6.	 Rawee P, Kremer D, Nolte IM, Leuvenink HGD, Touw DJ, De 
Borst MH et al (2023) Iron deficiency and nephrotoxic heavy met-
als: a dangerous interplay? Int J Mol Sci 24:5315
	 7.	 Savarese G, von Haehling S, Butler J, Cleland JGF, Ponikowski 
P, Anker SD (2023) Iron deficiency and cardiovascular disease. 
Eur Heart J 44:14–27
	 8.	 Doguer C, Ha JH, Collins JF (2018) Intersection of iron and cop-
per metabolism in the mammalian intestine and liver. Compr 
Physiol 8:1433–1461
	 9.	 Fox PL (2003) The copper-iron chronicles: the story of an intimate 
relationship. Biometals 16:9–40
	10.	 Hanot V (1896) Diabete bronze. Br Med J 25:206–207
	11.	 Pantopoulos K (2004) Iron metabolism and the IRE/IRP regula-
tory system: an update. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1012:1–13
	12.	 Ploumi C, Kyriakakis E, Tavernarakis N (2019) Dynamics of iron 
homeostasis in health and disease: molecular mechanisms and 
methods for iron determination. In: Thermodynamics and Bio-
physics of Biomedical Nanosystems. Demetzos, Pippa. Springer 
Nature Singapore Pte Ltd., Series in BioEngineering
	13.	 Dev S, Babitt JL (2017) Overview of iron metabolism in health 
and disease. Hemodial Int 21(Suppl 1):S6-20
	14.	 Camaschella C, Nai A, Silvestri L (2020) Iron metabolism and 
iron disorders revisited in the hepcidin era. Haematologica 
105:260–272
	15.	 Knutson M, Wessling-Resnick M (2003) Iron metabolism in the 
reticuloendothelial system. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 38:61–88
	16.	 Banjari I, Hjartaker A (2018) Dietary sources of iron and vitamin 
B12: Is this the missing link in colorectal carcinogenesis? Med 
Hypotheses 116:105–110
	17.	 Hallberg L, Hulthen L (2000) Prediction of dietary iron absorp-
tion: an algorithm for calculating absorption and bioavailability 
of dietary iron. Am J Clin Nutr 71:1147–1160
	18.	 Silva B, Faustino P (2015) An overview of molecular basis of iron 
metabolism regulation and the associated pathologies. Biochim 
Biophys Acta 1852:1347–1359
	19.	 Yiannikourides A, Latunde-Dada GO (2019) A short review of 
iron metabolism and pathophysiology of iron disorders. Medicines 
6:85 (Basel)
	20.	 Fuqua BK, Vulpe CD, Anderson GJ (2012) Intestinal iron absorp-
tion. J Trace Elem Med Biol 26:115–119
	21.	 Anderson GJ, Frazer DM (2017) Current understanding of iron 
homeostasis. Am J Clin Nutr 106(Suppl 6):S1559–S1566
	22.	 Nemeth E, Tuttle MS, Powelson J, Vaughn MB, Donovan A, 
McVey Ward D et al (2004) Hepcidin regulates cellular iron efflux 
by binding to ferroportin and inducing its internalization. Science 
306:2090–2093
	23.	 Nemeth E, Ganz T (2009) The role of hepcidin in iron metabo-
lism. Acta Haematol 122:78–86
	24.	 Du F, Qian C, Qian ZM, Wu XM, Xie H, Yung WH et al (2011) 
Hepcidin directly inhibits transferrin receptor 1 expression in 
astrocytes via a cyclic AMP-protein kinase A pathway. Glia 
59:936–945
	25.	 Anderson CP, Shen M, Eisenstein RS, Leibold EA (2012) Mam-
malian iron metabolism and its control by iron regulatory proteins. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 1823:1468–1483
	26.	 World Health Organization (2001) Iron deficiency anaemia; 
assessment, prevention and control: WHO; [Available online 
from: https://​www.​who.​int/​publi​catio​ns/m/​item/​iron-​child​ren-​
6to23--​archi​ved-​iron-​defic​iency-​anaem​ia-​asses​sment-​preve​ntion-​
and-​contr​ol.] Accessed 16 Oct 2023
	27.	 Babu SS, Reddy YS, Jayapal V, Kumar B (2022) Lead (Pb), cad-
mium (Cd) and essential element levels and their interactions: a 
hospital based case control study in anemic children. Clin Case 
Rep Int 6:1273
	28.	 EFLM Biological Variation Database (n.d.) European Federa-
tion of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine. [Available 
online from: https://​biolo​gical​varia​tion.​eu/​search?​query=​Iron2​
024. ] Accessed 16 Oct 2023
	29.	 Loreal O, Cavey T, Bardou-Jacquet E, Guggenbuhl P, Ropert M, 
Brissot P (2014) Iron, Hep, and the metal connection. Front Phar-
macol 5:128
	30.	 Ganz T, Nemeth E (2016) Iron balance and the role of hepcidin 
in chronic kidney disease. Semin Nephrol 36:87–93
	31.	 Ganz T, Nemeth E (2012) The hepcidin-ferroportin system as a 
therapeutic target in anemias and iron overload disorders. Hema-
tology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2011:538–542
	32.	 Iturri S, Nunez MT (1988) Effect of copper, cadmium, mercury, 
manganese and lead on Fe2+ and Fe3+ absorption in perfused 
mouse intestine. Digestion 59:671–675
	33.	 De Domenico I, McVey Ward D, Kaplan J (2008) Regulation of 
iron acquisition and storage: consequences for iron-linked disor-
ders. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9:72–81
	34.	 Choi JW, Ki KS (2005) Relationships of lead, copper, zinc, and 
cadmium levels versus hematopoiesis and iron parameters in 
healthy adolescents. Ann Clin Lab Sci 35:428–434
	35.	 Sahin A, Er EO, Oz E, Yildirmak ZY, Bakirdere S (2021) Sodium, 
magnesium, calcium, manganese, iron, copper, and zinc in 
serums of beta thalassemia major patients. Biol Trace Elem Res 
199:888–894

2225
Iron Metabolism, Calcium, Magnesium and Trace Elements: A Review﻿	
	36.	 Rosanoff A, Dai Q, Shapses SA (2016) Essential nutrient inter-
actions: does low or suboptimal magnesium status interact with 
vitamin D and/or calcium status? Adv Nutr 7:25–43
	37.	 Bolann BJ, Distante S, Morkrid L, Ulvik RJ (2015) Bloodletting 
therapy in hemochromatosis: Does it affect trace element homeo-
stasis? J Trace Elem Med Biol 31:225–229
	38.	 Nose Y, Kim BE, Thiele DJ (2006) Ctr1 drives intestinal copper 
absorption and is essential for growth, iron metabolism, and neo-
natal cardiac function. Cell Metab 4(3):235–244
	39.	 Balesaria S, Ramesh B, McArdle H, Bayele HK, Srai SK (2010) 
Divalent metal-dependent regulation of hepcidin expression by 
MTF-1. FEBS Lett 584:719–725
	40.	 Konz T, Alonso-Garcia J, Montes-Bayon M, Sanz-Medel A (2013) 
Comparison of copper labeling followed by liquid chromatogra-
phy-inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry and immuno-
chemical assays for serum hepcidin-25 determination. Anal Chim 
Acta 799:1–7
	41.	 Tselepis C, Ford SJ, McKie AT, Vogel W, Zoller H, Simpson 
RJ et al (2010) Characterization of the transition-metal-binding 
properties of hepcidin. Biochem J 427:289–296
	42.	 Ciosek Z, Kot K, Rotter I (2023) Iron, zinc, copper, cadmium, 
mercury, and bone tissue. Int J Environ Res Public Health 20:2197
	43.	 Kondaiah P, Yaduvanshi PS, Sharp PA, Pullakhandam R (2019) 
Iron and zinc homeostasis and interactions: does enteric zinc 
excretion cross-talk with intestinal iron absorption? Nutrients 
11:1885
	44.	 Abdelhaleim AF, Abdo Soliman JS, Amer AY, Abdo Soliman JS 
(2019) Association of zinc deficiency with iron deficiency ane-
mia and its symptoms: results from a case-control study. Cureus 
11:e3811
	45.	 Jeng SS, Chen YH (2022) Association of zinc with anemia. Nutri-
ents 14:4918
	46.	 Vallee BL, Falchuk KH (1993) The biochemical basis of zinc 
physiology. Physiol Rev 73(1):79–118
	47.	 Bhattacharya PT, Misra SR, Hussain M (2016) Nutritional aspects 
of essential trace elements in oral health and disease: an extensive 
review. Scientifica 2016:5464373 (Cairo)
	48.	 Bronner F (2003) Mechanisms of intestinal calcium absorption. J 
Cell Biochem 88(387):93
	49.	 Lynch SR (2000) The effect of calcium on iron absorption. Nutr 
Res Rev 13:141–158
	50.	 Abioye AI, Okuneye TA, Odesanya AO, Adisa O, Abioye AI, 
Soipe AI et al (2021) Calcium intake and iron status in human 
studies: a systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of 
randomized trials and crossover studies. J Nutr 151:1084–1101
	51.	 Hallberg L, Rossander-Hulthen L, Brune M, Gleerup A (1993) 
Inhibition of haem-iron absorption in man by calcium. Br J Nutr 
69:533–540
	52.	 Keum N, Lee DH, Greenwood DC, Zhang X, Giovannucci 
EL (2015) Calcium intake and colorectal adenoma risk: dose-
response meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. Int J 
Cancer 136:1680–1687
	53.	 Milinkovic N, Zekovic M, Dodevska M, Dordevic B, Radosavlje-
vic B, Ignjatovic S et al (2022) Magnesium supplementation and 
iron status among female students: the intervention study. J Med 
Biochem 41:316–326
	54.	 Huang J, Xu J, Ye P, Xin X (2023) Association between magne-
sium intake and the risk of anemia among adults in the United 
States. Front Nutr 10:1046749
	55.	 Shi Z, Hu X, He K, Yuan B, Garg M (2008) Joint association of 
magnesium and iron intake with anemia among Chinese adults. 
Nutrition 24:977–984
	56.	 Gomez-Ayala AE, Lisbona F, Lopez-Aliaga I, Pallares I, Barri-
onuevo M, Hartiti S et al (1998) The absorption of iron, calcium, 
phosphorus, magnesium, copper and zinc in the jejunum-ileum 
of control and iron-deficient rats. Lab Anim 32:72–79
	57.	 Sanchez-Morito N, Planells E, Aranda P, Llopis J (2000) Influ-
ence of magnesium deficiency on the bioavailability and tissue 
distribution of iron in the rat. J Nutr Biochem 11:103–108
	58.	 Disch G, Classen HG, Haubold W, Spatling L (1994) Interac-
tions between magnesium and iron. In vitro studies. Arzneimit-
telforschung 44:647–650
	59.	 Sugimoto H, Yamada U (2019) Iron deficiency anemia induced 
by magnesium overuse: a case report. Biopsychosoc Med 13:18
	60.	 Farina M, Avila DS, da Rocha JB, Aschner M (2013) Metals, oxi-
dative stress and neurodegeneration: a focus on iron, manganese 
and mercury. Neurochem Int 62:575–594
	61.	 Martinez-Finley EJ, Chakraborty S, Fretham SJ, Aschner M 
(2012) Cellular transport and homeostasis of essential and non-
essential metals. Metallomics 4:593–605
	62.	 Barany E, Bergdahl IA, Bratteby LE, Lundh T, Samuelson G, 
Skerfving S et al (2005) Iron status influences trace element levels 
in human blood and serum. Environ Res 98:215–223
	63.	 Yazdani M, Distante S, Morkrid L, Ulvik RJ, Bolann BJ (2023) 
Bloodlettings in hemochromatosis result in increased blood lead 
(Pb) concentrations. Biol Trace Elem Res 201:3193–3201
	64.	 Akesson A, Stal P, Vahter M (2000) Phlebotomy increases cad-
mium uptake in hemochromatosis. Environ Health Perspect 
108:289–291
	65.	 Moshtaghie AA, Taghikhani M, Sandughchin M (1994) Cadmium 
interaction with iron metabolism, in vitro and in vivo studies. Med 
J Islamic World Acad Sci 7:145–150
	66.	 Fujiwara Y, Lee JY, Banno H, Imai S, Tokumoto M, Hasegawa 
T et al (2020) Cadmium induces iron deficiency anemia through 
the suppression of iron transport in the duodenum. Toxicol Lett 
332:130–139
	67.	 Zabiński  Z, Rutowski J, Moszczyński P, Dabrowski Z (2006) Red 
cell system and selected red cell enzymes in men occupationally 
exposed to mercury vapours. Przegl Lek 63(Suppl 7):74–83
	68.	 Zdrojewicz Z, Popowicz E, Winiarski J (2016) Nickel - role 
in human organism and toxic effects. Pol Merkur Lekarski 
41:115–118
	69.	 Davidson T, Chen H, Garrick MD, D’Angelo G, Costa M (2005) 
Soluble nickel interferes with cellular iron homeostasis. Mol Cell 
Biochem 279:157–162
	70.	 Chen H, Davidson T, Singleton S, Garrick MD, Costa M (2005) 
Nickel decreases cellular iron level and converts cytosolic aco-
nitase to iron-regulatory protein 1 in A549 cells. Toxicol Appl 
Pharmacol 206(3):275–287
	71.	 Tallkvist J, Bowlus CL, Lonnerdal B (2003) Effect of iron treat-
ment on nickel absorption and gene expression of the divalent 
metal transporter (DMT1) by human intestinal Caco-2 cells. Phar-
macol Toxicol 92:121–124
	72.	 Divya VC, Karthikeyan BS (2017) Enhanced nickel sensitivity in 
iron deficiency anemia. Indian J Public Health 61:215
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.