arXiv:cond-mat/0607344v3  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  24 Sep 2007
Evolutionary games on graphs
Gy¨orgy Szab´o a G´abor F´ath b
aResearch Institute for Technical Physics and Materials Science, P.O. Box 49, H-1525 Budapest, Hungary
bResearch Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics, P.O. Box 49, H-1525 Budapest, Hungary
Abstract
Game theory is one of the key paradigms behind many scientiﬁc disciplines from biology to behavioral sciences to
economics. In its evolutionary form and especially when the interacting agents are linked in a speciﬁc social network
the underlying solution concepts and methods are very similar to those applied in non-equilibrium statistical physics.
This review gives a tutorial-type overview of the ﬁeld for physicists. The ﬁrst four sections introduce the necessary
background in classical and evolutionary game theory from the basic deﬁnitions to the most important results.
The ﬁfth section surveys the topological complications implied by non-mean-ﬁeld-type social network structures in
general. The next three sections discuss in detail the dynamic behavior of three prominent classes of models: the
Prisoner’s Dilemma, the Rock-Scissors-Paper game, and Competing Associations. The major theme of the review is
in what sense and how the graph structure of interactions can modify and enrich the picture of long term behavioral
patterns emerging in evolutionary games.
Key words: Game theory, graphs, networks, evolution
PACS: 02.50.Le, 89.65.-s, 87.23.Kg, 05.65.+b, 87.23.Ge
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Rational game theory
7
2.1
Games, payoﬀs, strategies
8
2.2
Nash equilibrium and social dilemmas
9
2.3
Potential and zero-sum games
10
2.4
NEs in two-player matrix games
11
2.5
Multi-player games
14
2.6
Repeated games
14
3
Evolutionary games: population dynamics
18
3.1
Population games
18
3.2
Evolutionary stability
20
3.3
Replicator dynamics
24
3.4
Other game dynamics
30
4
Evolutionary games: agent-based dynamics
32
4.1
Synchronized update
33
4.2
Random sequential update
34
4.3
Microscopic update rules
35
4.4
From micro to macro dynamics in population games
39
4.5
Potential games and the kinetic Ising model
41
4.6
Stochastic stability
43
Email addresses: szabo@mfa.kfki.hu (Gy¨orgy Szab´o), fath@szfki.hu (G´abor F´ath).
Preprint submitted to Elsevier
26 November 2024

5
The structure of social graphs
45
5.1
Lattices
46
5.2
Small worlds
47
5.3
Scale-free graphs
49
5.4
Evolving networks
50
6
Prisoner’s Dilemma
51
6.1
Axelrod’s Tournaments
52
6.2
Emergence of cooperation for stochastic reactive strategies
53
6.3
Mean-ﬁeld solutions
57
6.4
Prisoner’s Dilemma in ﬁnite populations
58
6.5
Spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma with synchronized update
59
6.6
Spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma with random sequential update
63
6.7
Two-strategy Prisoner’s Dilemma game on a chain
69
6.8
Prisoner’s Dilemma on social networks
71
6.9
Prisoner’s Dilemma on evolving networks
73
6.10 Spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma with three strategies
76
6.11 Tag-based models
79
7
Rock-Scissors-Paper games
81
7.1
Simulations on the square lattice
82
7.2
Mean-ﬁeld approximation
84
7.3
Pair approximation and beyond
85
7.4
One-dimensional models
86
7.5
Global oscillations on some structures
88
7.6
Rotating spiral arms
91
7.7
Cyclic dominance with diﬀerent invasion rates
94
7.8
Cyclic dominance for Q > 3 states
95
8
Competing Associations
100
8.1
A four-species cyclic predator-prey model with local mixing
100
8.2
Defensive alliances
102
8.3
Cyclic dominance between associations in a six-species predator-prey model
103
9
Conclusions and outlook
106
A
Games
107
A.1
Battle of the Sexes
107
A.2
Chicken game
108
A.3
Coordination game
108
A.4
Hawk-Dove game
108
A.5
Matching Pennies
109
A.6
Minority game
109
A.7
Prisoner’s Dilemma
109
A.8
Public Good game
110
A.9
Quantum Penny Flip
110
A.10 Rock-Scissors-Paper game
111
A.11 Snowdrift game
111
A.12 Stag Hunt game
111
A.13 Ultimatum game
112
B
Strategies
112
B.1
Pavlovian strategies
112
B.2
Tit-for-Tat
112
B.3
Win stay lose shift
113
B.4
Stochastic reactive strategies
113
C
Generalized mean-ﬁeld approximations
113
1. Introduction
Game theory is the unifying paradigm behind many scientiﬁc disciplines. It is a set of analytical tools
and solution concepts, which provide explanatory and predicting power in interactive decision situations,
when the aims, goals and preferences of the participating players are potentially in conﬂict. It has successful
applications in such diverse ﬁelds as evolutionary biology and psychology, computer science and operations
research, political science and military strategy, cultural anthropology, ethics and moral philosophy, and
economics. The cohesive force of the theory stems from its formal mathematical structure which allows the
2

practitioners to abstract away the common strategic essence of the actual biological, social or economic
situation. Game theory creates a uniﬁed framework of abstract models and metaphors, together with a
consistent methodology, in which these problems can be recast and analyzed.
The appearance of game theory as an accepted physics research agenda is a relatively late event. It required
the mutual reinforcing of two important factors: the opening of physics, especially statistical physics, towards
new interdisciplinary research directions, and the suﬃcient maturity of game theory itself in the sense that
it had started to tackle into complexity problems, where the competence and background experience of the
physics community could become a valuable asset. Two new disciplines, socio- and econophysics were born,
and the already existing ﬁeld of biological physics got a new impetus with the clear mission to utilize the
theoretical machinery of physics for making progress in questions whose investigation were traditionally
connected to the social sciences, economics, or biology, and were formulated to a large extent using classical
and evolutionary game theory (Sigmund, 1993; Ball, 2004; Nowak, 2006a). The purpose of this review is
to present the fruits of this interdisciplinary collaboration in one speciﬁcally important area, namely in
the case when non-cooperative games are played by agents whose connectivity pattern (social network) is
characterized by a nontrivial graph structure.
The birth of game theory is usually dated to the seminal book of von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944).
This book was indeed the ﬁrst comprehensive treatise with a wide enough scope. Note however, that as for
most scientiﬁc theories, game theory also had forerunners much earlier on. The French economist Augustin
Cournot solved a quantity choice problem under duopoly using some restricted version of the Nash equi-
librium concept as early as 1838. His theory was generalized to price rivalry in 1883 by Joseph Bertrand.
Cooperative game theory concepts appeared already in 1881 in a work of Ysidro Edgeworth. The concept of
a mixed strategy and the minimax solution for two person games were developed originally by Emile Borel.
The ﬁrst theorem of game theory was proven in 1913 by E. Zermelo about the strict determinacy in chess.
A particularly detailed account of early (and later) history of game theory is Paul Walker’s chronology of
game theory available on the Web (Walker, 1995) or William Poundstone’s book (Poundstone, 1992). You
can also consult Gambarelli and Owen (2004).
A very important milestone in the theory is John Nash’s invention of a strategic equilibrium concept for
non-cooperative games (Nash, 1950). The Nash equilibrium of a game is a proﬁle of strategies such that no
player has a unilateral incentive to deviate from this by choosing another strategy. In other words, in a Nash
equilibrium the strategies form “best responses” to each other. The Nash equilibrium can be considered as
an extension of von Neumann’s minimax solution for non-zero-sum games. Beside deﬁning the equilibrium
concept, Nash also gave a proof of its existence under rather general assumptions. The Nash equilibrium,
and its later reﬁnements, constitute the “solution” of the game, i.e., our best prediction for the outcome in
the given non-cooperative decision situation.
One of the most intriguing aspects of the Nash equilibrium is that it is not necessarily eﬃcient in terms
of the aggregate social welfare. There are many model situations, like the Prisoners Dilemma or the Tragedy
of the Commons, where the Nash equilibrium could be obviously amended by a central planner. Without
such supreme control, however, such eﬃcient outcomes are made unstable by the individual incentives of
the players. The only stable solution is the Nash equilibrium which is ineﬃcient. One of the most important
tasks of game theory is to provide guidelines (normative insight) how to resolve such social dilemmas, and
provide an explanation how microscopic (individual) agent-agent interactions without a central planner may
still generate a (spontaneous) aggregate cooperation towards a more eﬃcient outcome in many real-life
situations.
Classical (rational) game theory is based upon a number of severe assumptions about the structure of a
game. Some of these assumptions were systematically released during the history of the theory in order to
push further its limits. Game theory assumes that agents (players) have well deﬁned and consistent goals and
preferences which can be described by a utility function. The utility is the measure of satisfaction the player
derives from a certain outcome of the game, and the player’s goal is to maximize her utility. Maximization (or
minimization) principles abound in science. It is, however, worth enlightening a very important point here:
the maximization problem of game theory diﬀers from that of physics. In a physical theory the standard
situation is to have a single function (say, a Hamiltonian or a thermodynamic potential) whose extremum
condition characterizes the whole system. In game theory the number of functions to maximize is typically
3

as much as the number of interacting agents. While physics tries to optimize in a (sometimes rugged but)
ﬁxed landscape, the agents of game theory continuously restructure the landscape for each other in pursuit
of their selﬁsh individual optimum. 1
Another key assumption in the classical theory is that players are perfectly rational (hyper-rational),
and this is common knowledge. Rationality, however, seems to be an ill-deﬁned concept. There are extreme
opinions arguing that the notion of perfect rationality is not more then pure tautology: rational behavior
is the one which complies with the directives of game theory, which in turn is based on the assumption of
rationality. It is certainly not by chance that a central recurrent theme in the history of game theory is
how to deﬁne rationality. In fact, any working deﬁnition of rationality is a negative deﬁnition, not telling us
what rational agents do, but rather what they do not. For example, the usual minimal deﬁnition states that
rational players do not play strictly dominated strategies (Aumann, 1992; Gibbons, 1992). Paradoxically,
the straightforward application of this deﬁnition seems to preclude cooperation in games involving social
dilemmas like a (ﬁnitely repeated) Prisoners Dilemma or Public Good games, whereas cooperation do occur
in real social situations. Another problem is that in many games low level notions of rationality enable several,
theoretically permitted outcomes of the game. Some of these are obviously more successful predictions then
others in real-life situations. The answer of the classical theory for these shortcomings was to reﬁne the
concept of rationality and equivalently the concept of the strategic equilibrium.
The post-Nash history of game theory is mostly the history of such reﬁnements. The Nash equilibrium
concept seems to have enough predicting power in static games with complete information. The two mayor
streams of extensions are toward dynamic games and games with incomplete information. Dynamic games are
the ones where the timing of decision making plays a role. In these games the simple Nash equilibrium concept
would allow outcomes which are based on non-credible threats or promises. In order to exclude these spurious
equilibria Selten has introduced the concept of a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium, which requires Nash-type
optimality in all possible subgames (Selten, 1965). Incomplete information, on the other hand, means that
the players’ available strategy sets and associated payoﬀs (utility) are not common knowledge. 2 In order
to handle games with incomplete information the theory requires that the players hold beliefs about the
unknown parameters and these believes are consistent (rational) is some properly deﬁned sense. This has led
to the concept of Bayesian Nash equilibrium for static games and to perfect Bayesian equilibrium or sequential
equilibrium in dynamic games (Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991; Gibbons, 1992). Many other reﬁnements (Pareto
eﬃciency, risk dominance, focal outcome, etc.) with lesser domain of applicability have been proposed to
provide guidelines for equilibrium selection in the case of multiple Nash equilibria (Harsanyi and Selten,
1988). Other reﬁnements, like trembling hand perfection, still within the classical framework, opened up
the way for eroding the assumption of perfect rationality. However, this program has only reached its full
potential by the general acceptance of bounded rationality in the framework of evolutionary game theory.
Despite the undoubted success of classical game theory the paradigm has soon confronted its limitations.
In many speciﬁc cases further progress seemed to rely upon the relaxation of some of the key assumptions. A
typical example where rational game theory seems to give an inadequate answer is the “backward induction
paradox” related to repeated (iterated) social dilemmas like the Repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma. According to
game theory the only subgame perfect Nash equilibrium in the ﬁnitely repeated game is the one determined
by backward induction, i.e., when both players defect in all rounds. Nevertheless, cooperation is frequently
observed in real-life psycho-economic experiments. This result either suggests that the abstract Prisoner’s
Dilemma game is not the right model for the situation or that the players do not fulﬁll all the premises.
Indeed, there is good reason to believe that many realistic problems, in which the eﬀect of an agent’s
action depends on what other agents do are far more complex that perfect rationality of the players could
be postulated (Conlisk, 1996). The standard deductive reasoning looses its appeal when agents have non-
1 A certain class of games, the so-called potential games, can be recast into the form of a single function optimization problem.
But this is an exception rather than a rule.
2 Incomplete information diﬀers from the similar concept of imperfect information. The latter refers to the case when some
of the history of the game is unknown to the players at the time of decision making. For example Chess is a game with
perfect information because players know the whole previous history of the game, whereas the Prisoners dilemma is a game
with imperfect information due to the simultaneity of the players’ decisions. Nevertheless, both are games with complete
information.
4

negligible cognitive limitations, there is a cost of gathering information about possible outcomes and payoﬀs,
the agents do not have consistent preferences, or the common knowledge of the players’ rationality fails to
hold. A possible way out is inductive reasoning, i.e., a trial-and-error approach, in which agents continuously
form hypotheses about their environment, build strategies accordingly, observe their performance in practice,
and verify or discard their assumptions based on empirical success rates. In this approach the outcome
(solution) of a problem is determined by the evolving mental state (mental representation) of the constituting
agents. Mind necessarily becomes an endogenous dynamic variable of the model. This kind of bounded
rationality may explain that in many situations people respond instinctively, play according to heuristic
rules and social norms rather then adopting the strategies indicated by rational game theory.
Bounded rationality becomes a natural concept when the goal of the theory is to understand animal
behavior. Individuals in an animal population do not make conscious decisions about strategy, even though
the incentive structure of the underlying formal game they “play” is identical to the ones discussed under the
assumption of perfect rationality in classical game theory. In most cases the applied strategies are genetically
coded and maintained during the whole life-cycle, the strategy space is constrained (e.g., mixed strategies
may be excluded), or strategy adoption or change is severely restricted by biologically predetermined learning
rules or mutation rates. The success of a strategy applied is measured by biological ﬁtness, which is usually
related with reproductive success.
Evolutionary game theory is an extension of the classical paradigm towards bounded rationality. There
is however, another aspect of the theory which was swept under the rug in the classical approach, but gets
special emphasis in the evolutionary version, namely dynamics. Dynamical issues were mostly neglected
classically, because the assumption of perfect rationality made such questions irrelevant. Full deductive
rationality allows the players to derive and construct the equilibrium solution instantaneously. In this spirit,
when dynamic methods were still applied, like Brown’s ﬁctitious play (Brown, 1951), they only served
as a technical aid for deriving the equilibrium. Bounded rationality, on the other hand, is inseparable
from dynamics. Contrary to perfect rationality, bounded rationality is always deﬁned in a positive way,
postulating what boundedly rational agents do. These behavioral rules are dynamic rules, specifying how
much of the game’s earlier history is taken into consideration (memory), how long agents would think ahead
(short-sightedness, myope), how they search for available strategies (search space), how they switch for more
successful ones (adaptive learning), and what all these mean at the population level in terms of frequencies
of strategies.
The idea of bounded rationality has the most obvious relevance in biology. It is not too surprising that
early applications of the evolutionary perspective of game theory appeared in the biology literature. It is
customary to cite R. A. Fisher’s analysis on the equality of the sex ratio (Fisher, 1930) as one of the initial
works with such ideas, and R. C. Lewontin’s early paper which was probably the ﬁrst to make a formal
connection between evolution and game theory (Lewontin, 1961). However, the real onset of the theory can
be dated to two seminal books in the early 80s: J. Maynard Smith’s “Evolution and the Theory of Games”
(Maynard Smith, 1982), which introduced the concept of evolutionary stable strategies, and R. Axelrod’s
“The Evolution of Cooperation” (Axelrod, 1984), which opened up the ﬁeld for economics and the social
sciences. Whereas biologists have used game theory to understand and predict certain outcomes of organic
evolution and animal behavior, the social sciences community welcomed the method as a tool to understand
social learning and “cultural evolution”, a notion referring to changes in human beliefs, values, behavioral
patterns and social norms.
There is a static and a dynamic perspective of evolutionary game theory. Maynard Smith’s deﬁnition of
the evolutionary stability of a Nash equilibrium is a static concepts which does not require solving time-
dependent dynamic equations. In simple terms evolutionary stability means that a rare mutant cannot
successfully invade the population. The condition for evolutionary stability can be checked directly without
incurring complex dynamic issues. The dynamic perspective, on the other hand, operates by explicitly
postulating dynamical rules. These rules can be prescribed as deterministic rules at the population level
for the rate of change of strategy frequencies or as microscopic stochastic rules at the agent level (agent-
based dynamics). Since bounded rationality may have diﬀerent forms, there are many diﬀerent dynamical
rules one can consider. The most appropriate dynamics depends on the speciﬁcity of the actual biological
or socio-economical situation under study. In biological applications the Replicator dynamics is the most
5

natural choice, which can be derived by assuming that payoﬀs are directly related to reproductive success.
Socio-economic applications may require other adjustment or learning rules. Both the static and dynamic
perspective of evolutionary game theory provide a basis for equilibrium selection when the classical form of
the game has multiple Nash equilibria.
Once the dynamics is speciﬁed the major concern is the long run behavior of the system: ﬁxed points,
cycles, and their stability, chaos, etc., and the connection between static concept (Nash equilibrium, evolu-
tionary stability) and dynamic predictions. The connection is far from being trivial, but at least for normal
form games with a huge class of “reasonable” population-level dynamics the Folk theorem of evolutionary
game theory holds, asserting that stable rest points are Nash equilibria. Moreover, in games with only two
strategies evolutionary stability is practically equivalent to dynamic stability. In general, however, it turns
out that a static, equilibrium-based analysis is insuﬃcient to provide enough insight into the long-run be-
havior of payoﬀmaximizing agents with general adaptive learning dynamics (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 2003).
Dynamic rules of bounded rationality should not necessarily reproduce perfect rationality results.
As was argued above, the mission of evolutionary game theory was to remedy three key deﬁciencies of the
classical theory: (1) bounded rationality, (2) the lack of dynamics, and (3) equilibrium selection in the case
of multiple Nash equilibria. Although this mission was accomplished rather successfully, there was a series
of weaknesses remaining. Evolutionary game theory in its early form considered population dynamics on the
aggregate level. The state variables whose dynamics are followed are variables averaged over the population
such as the relative strategy abundances. Behavioral rules, on the other hand, control the system on the
microscopic, agent level. Agent decisions are frequently asynchronous, discrete and may contain stochastic
elements. Moreover, agents may have diﬀerent individual preferences, payoﬀs, strategy options (heterogeneity
in agent types) or be locally connected to well-deﬁned other agents (structural heterogeneity).
In large populations these microscopic ﬂuctuations usually average out and produce smooth macroscopic
behavior for the aggregate quantities. Even though the underlying microscopic rules can be rather diﬀerent,
there is a wide class of models where the standard population level dynamics, e.g., the replicator dynamics,
can indeed be microscopically justiﬁed. In these situations the mean-ﬁeld analysis, assuming an inﬁnite,
homogeneous population with unbiased random matching, can provide a good qualitative description. In
other cases, however, the emerging aggregate level behavior may easily diﬀer even qualitatively from the
naive mean-ﬁeld analysis. Things can go awry especially when the population is largely heterogeneous in
agent types and/or when the topology of the interaction graph is nontrivial.
Although the importance of heterogeneity and structural issues was recognized long time ago (F¨ollmer,
1974), the systematic investigation of these questions is still in the forefront of research. The challenge
is high, because heterogeneity in both agent types and connectivity structure breaks down the symmetry
of agents, and thus requires a dramatic change of perspective in the description of the system from the
aggregate level to the agent level. The resulting huge increase in the relevant system variables makes most
standard analytical techniques, operating with diﬀerential equations, ﬁxed points, etc., largely inapplicable.
What remains is agent based modeling, meaning extensive numerical simulations and analytical techniques
going beyond the traditional mean-ﬁeld level. Although we fully acknowledge the relevance and signiﬁcance
of the type heterogeneity problem, this Review will mostly concentrate on structural issues, i.e., we will
assume that the population we consider consists of identical players (or at least the number of diﬀerent
player roles is small), and the players’ only asymmetry stems from their unequal interaction neighborhoods.
It is well-known that real-life interaction networks can possess a rather complex topology, which is far
from the traditional mean-ﬁeld case. On one hand, there is a large class of situations where the interaction
graph is determined by the geographical location of the participating agents. Biological games are good
examples. The typical structure is two-dimensional. It can be modeled by a regular two-dimensional (2D)
lattice or a graph with nodes in 2D and an exponentially decaying probability of distant links. On the
other hand, games, motivated by economic or social situations, are typically played on scale free or small
word networks, which have rather peculiar statistical properties (Albert and Barab´asi, 2002). Of course, a
fundamental geographic embedding cannot be ruled out either. Hierarchical structures are also possible with
several levels. In many cases the inter-agent connectivity is not rigid but can continuously evolve in time.
In the simplest spatial evolutionary games agents are located on the sites of a lattice and play repeatedly
with their neighbors. Individual income arises from two-person games played with neighbors, thereby the
6

total income depends on the distribution of strategies within the neighborhood. From time to time agents
are allowed to modify their strategies in order to increase their utility. Following the basic Darwinian
selection idea, in many models the agents adopt (learn) one of the neighboring strategies that has provided
a higher income. Similar models are widely and fruitfully used in diﬀerent areas of science to determine
macroscopic behavior from microscopic interactions. Apparently, many aspects of these models seem to be
similar to many-particle systems, that is, one can observe diﬀerent phases and phase transitions when the
model parameters are tuned. The striking analogies inspired many physicists to contribute to the deeper
understanding of the ﬁeld by successfully adopting approaches and tools from statistical physics.
Evolutionary games can also exhibit behaviors which do not appear in typical equilibrium physical systems.
These aspects require the methods of non-equilibrium statistical physics, where such complications have been
investigated for a long time. In evolutionary games the interactions are frequently asymmetric, the time-
reversal symmetry is broken for the microscopic steps, and many diﬀerent (evolutionarily) stable states can
coexist by forming frozen or self-organizing patterns.
In spatial models the short-range interactions limit the number of agents who can aﬀect the behavior of
a given player in ﬁnding her best solution. This process can be disturbed fundamentally if the number of
possible strategies exceeds the number of neighbors. Such a situation can favor the formation of diﬀerent
strategy associations that can be considered as complex agents with proper spatio-temporal structure, and
whose competition will determine the ﬁnal stationary state. In other words, spatial evolutionary games
provide a mathematical framework for studying the emergence of structural complexity that characterizes
living material.
Very recently the research of evolutionary games has interfered with the extensive investigation of net-
works, because the actual social networks characterizing human interactions possess highly nontrivial topo-
logical properties. The ﬁrst results clearly demonstrated that the topological features of these networks can
inﬂuence signiﬁcantly their behavior. In many cases “games on graphs“ diﬀer qualitatively from their coun-
terparts deﬁned in a well-mixed (mean-ﬁeld) population. The thorough mathematical investigation of these
phenomena requires an extension of the traditional tools of non-equilibrium statistical physics. Evolutionary
games lead to dynamical regimes much richer and subtle than those attainable with traditional equilibrium
or non-equilibrium statistical physics models. We need revolutionary new concepts and methods for the
characterization of the emerging complex, self-organizing patterns.
The setup of this review is as follows. The next three Sections summarize the basic concepts and methods
of rational and evolutionary game theory. Our aim was to cut the material into a digestible size, and
give a tutorial type introduction to the ﬁeld, which is traditionally outside the standard curriculum of
physicists. Admittedly, many highly relevant and interesting aspects have been left out. The focus is on
non-cooperative matrix games (normal form games) with complete information. These are the games whose
network extensions have received the most attention in the literature so far. Section 5 is devoted to the
structure of realistic social networks on which the games can be played. Sections 6 to 8 review the dynamic
properties of three prominent families of games: the Prisoner’s Dilemma, the Rock-Scissors-Paper game, and
Competing Associations. These games show a number of interesting phenomena, which occur due to the
topological peculiarities of the underlying social network, and nicely illustrate the need to go beyond the
mean-ﬁeld approximation for a quantitative description. We discuss open questions and provide an outlook
for future research areas in Sec. 9. There are three Appendices: the ﬁrst gives a concise list of the most
important games discussed in the paper, the second summarizes noteworthy strategies, and the third gives
a detailed introduction to the Generalized Mean-ﬁeld Approximation (Cluster Approximation) widely used
in the main text.
2. Rational game theory
The goal of Sections 2 to 4 is to provide a concise summary of the necessary deﬁnitions, concepts and
methods of rational (classical) and evolutionary game theory, which can serve as a background knowledge in
later sections. Most of the material presented here is treated in much more detail in standard textbooks like
Fudenberg and Tirole (1991); Gibbons (1992); Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998); Weibull (1995); Samuelson
7

(1997); Gintis (2000); Cressman (2003) and in a recent review by Hofbauer and Sigmund (2003).
2.1. Games, payoﬀs, strategies
A game is an abstract formulation of an interactive decision situation with possibly conﬂicting interests.
The normal (strategic) form representation of a game speciﬁes (1) the players of the game, (2) their feasible
actions (to be called pure strategies), and (3) the payoﬀs received by them for each possible combination
of actions (the action or strategy proﬁle) that could be chosen by the players. Let n = 1, . . . , N denote the
players; Sn = {en1, en2, . . . enQ} the set of pure strategies available to player n, with sn ∈Sn an arbitrary
element of this set; (s1, . . . , sN) a given strategy proﬁle of all players; and un(s1, . . . , sN) player n’s payoﬀ
function (utility function), i.e., the measure of her satisfaction if the strategy proﬁle (s1, . . . , sN) gets realized.
Such a game can be denoted as G = {S1, . . . , SN; u1, . . . , uN}. 3
In the case when there are only two players n = 1, 2 and the set of available strategies is discrete,
S1 = {e1, . . . , eQ}, S2 = {f1, . . . , fR} it is customary to write the game in a bi-matrix form G = (A, BT ),
which is a shorthand for the payoﬀtable 4
Player 2
f1
· · ·
fR
e1 (A11, BT
11) · · · (A1R, BT
1R)
Player 1
...
...
...
...
eQ (AQ1, BT
Q1) · · · (AQR, BT
QR)
(1)
Here the matrix Aij = u1(ei, fj) [resp., BT
ij = u2(ei, fj)] denotes Player 1’s [resp., Player 2’s] payoﬀfor the
strategy proﬁle (ei, fj). 5
Two-player normal-form games can be symmetric (so called matrix games) and asymmetric (bi-matrix
games), with symmetry referring to the roles of players. For a symmetric game players are identical in all
possible respects, they possess identical strategy options and payoﬀs, i.e., necessarily R = Q and B = A. It
does not matter for a player whether she should play in the role of Player 1 or Player 2. A symmetric normal
form game is fully characterized by the single payoﬀmatrix A, and we can formally write G = (A, AT ) =
A. The Hawk-Dove game (see Appendix A for a detailed description of games mentioned in the text), the
Coordination game or the Prisoner’s Dilemma are all symmetric games.
Player asymmetry, on the other hand, is often an important feature of the game like in male-female, buyer-
seller, owner-intruder, or sender-receiver interactions. For asymmetric games (bi-matrix games) B ̸= A, thus
both matrices should be speciﬁed to deﬁne the game, G = (A, BT ). It makes a diﬀerence whether the player
is called to act in the role of Player 1 or Player 2.
Sometimes the players change roles frequently during interactions like in the Sender-Receiver game of
communication, and a symmetrized version of the underlying asymmetric game is considered. The players
can act as Player 1 with probability p and as Player 2 with probability 1 −p. These games are called role
3 Note that this deﬁnition only refers to static, one-shot games with simultaneous decisions of the players, and complete
information. The more general case (dynamic games or games with incomplete information) is usually given in the extensive
form representation (Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991; Cressman, 2003), which, in addition to the above list, also speciﬁes: (4) when
each player has the move, (5) what are the choice alternatives at each move, and (6) what information is available for the player
at the moment of the move. Extensive form games can also be cast in normal form, but this may imply a substantial loss of
information. We do not consider extensive form games in this review.
4 It is customary to deﬁne B as the transpose of what appears in the table.
5 Not all normal form games can be written conveniently in a matrix form. The Cournot and Bertrand games are simple
examples (Gibbons, 1992; Marsili and Zhang, 1997), where the strategy space is not discrete, Sn = [0, ∞), and payoﬀs should
be treated in functional form. This is, however, only a minute technical diﬀerence, the solution concepts and methods remain
unchanged.
8

games (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998). When p = 1/2 the game is symmetric in the higher dimensional
strategy space S1 × S2, formed by the pairs of the elementary strategies.
Symmetric games, whose payoﬀmatrix is symmetric A = AT are called doubly symmetric, and can be
denoted as G = (A, A) ≡A. These games belong to the so-called partnership or potential games. See Section
2.3 for a discussion. The asymmetric game G = (A, −A) is called a zero-sum game. This is the class where
the existence of an equilibrium was ﬁrst proved in the form of the Minimax Theorem (von Neumann, 1928).
The strategies that label the payoﬀmatrices are pure strategies. In many games, however, the players
can also play mixed strategies, which are probability distributions over pure strategies. Poker is a good
example, where (good) players play according to a mixed strategy over the feasible actions of “bluﬃng” and
“no bluﬃng”. We can assume that players possess a randomizing device which can be utilized in decision
situations. Playing a mixed strategy means that in each decision instance the player come up with one of
her feasible actions with a certain pre-assigned probability. Each mixed strategy corresponds to a point p of
the mixed strategy simplex
∆Q =
(
p = (p1, . . . , pQ) ∈RQ : pq ≥0,
Q
X
q=1
pq = 1
)
,
(2)
whose corners are the pure strategies. In the two-player case of Eq. (1) a strategy proﬁle is the pair (p, q)
with p ∈∆Q, q ∈∆R, and the expected payoﬀs of player 1 and 2 can be expressed as
u1(p, q) = p · Aq,
u2(p, q) = p · BT q = q · Bp.
(3)
Note that in some games mixed strategies may not be allowed.
The timing of a normal form game is as follows: (1) players independently, but simultaneously choose one
of their feasible actions (i.e., without knowing the co-players’ choices), (2) players receive payoﬀs according
to the action proﬁle realized.
2.2. Nash equilibrium and social dilemmas
Classical game theory is based on two key assumptions: (1) perfect rationality of the players, and (2) that
this is common knowledge. Perfect rationality means that the players have well-deﬁned payoﬀfunctions,
and they are fully aware of their own and the opponents’ strategy options and payoﬀvalues. They have no
cognitive limitations in deducing the best possible way of playing whatever the complexity of the game is.
In this sense computation is costless and instantaneous. Players are capable of correctly assessing missing
information (in games with incomplete information) and process new information revealed by the play of the
opponent (in dynamic games) in terms of probability distributions. Common knowledge, on the other hand,
implies that beyond the fact that all players are rational, they all know that all players are rational, and
that all players know that all players know that all are rational, etc., ad inﬁnitum (Fudenberg and Tirole,
1991; Gibbons, 1992).
A strategy sn of player n is strictly dominated by a (pure or mixed) strategy s′
n, if for each strategy proﬁle
s−n = (s1, . . . , sn−1, sn+1, . . . , sN) of the co-players, player n is always better oﬀplaying s′
n than sn,
∀s−n :
un(s′
n, s−n) > un(sn, s−n).
(4)
According to the standard minimal deﬁnition of rationality (Aumann, 1992), rational players do not play
strictly dominated strategies. Thus strictly dominated strategies can be iteratively eliminated from the
problem. In some cases, like the Prisoner’s Dilemma, only one strategy proﬁle survives this procedure, which
is then the perfect rationality “solution” of the game. It is more common, however, that iterated elimination of
strictly dominated strategies do not solve the game, because either there are no strictly dominated strategies
at all, or more than one proﬁles survive.
A stronger solution concept, which is applicable for all games, is the concept of a Nash equilibrium. A
strategy proﬁle s∗= (s∗
1, . . . , s∗
N) of a game is said to be a Nash equilibrium (NE), iﬀ
∀n, ∀sn ̸= s∗
n :
un(s∗
n, s∗
−n) ≥un(sn, s∗
−n).
(5)
9

In other terms, each agent’s strategy s∗
n is a best response (BR) to the strategies of the co-players,
∀n :
s∗
n = BR(s∗
−n),
(6)
where
BR(s−n) ≡argmaxsnun(sn, s−n).
(7)
When the inequality above is strict, s∗is called a strict Nash equilibrium. The NE condition assures that
no player has a unilateral incentive to deviate and play another strategy, because, given the others’ choices,
there is no way she could be better oﬀ. One of the most fundamental results of classical game theory is
Nash’s theorem (Nash, 1950), which asserts that in normal-form games with a ﬁnite number of players and a
ﬁnite number of pure strategies there exists at least one NE, possibly involving mixed strategies. The proof
is based on Kakutani’s ﬁxed point theorem. An NE is called a symmetric (Nash) equilibrium if all agents
play the same strategy in the equilibrium proﬁle.
The Nash equilibrium is a stability concept, but only in a rather restricted sense: stable against single-
agent (i.e., unilateral) changes of the equilibrium proﬁle. It does not speak about what could happen if more
than one agent changed their strategies at the same time. In this latter case there are two possibilities which
classify NEs into two categories. It may happen that there exists a suitable collective strategy change that
increases some players’ payoﬀwhile not decreasing all others’. Clearly then the original NE was ineﬃcient
[sometimes called a deﬁcient equilibrium (Rapoport and Guyer, 1966)], and in theory can be emended by
the new strategy proﬁle. In all other cases the NE is such that any collective strategy change makes at least
one player worse oﬀ(or, in the degenerate case, all payoﬀs remain the same). These NEs are called Pareto
eﬃcient, and there is no obvious way for improvement.
Pareto eﬃciency can be used as an additional criterion (a so-called reﬁnement) to the NE concept to
provide equilibrium selection in cases when the NE concept alone would provide more than one solution
to the game like in some Coordination problems. For example, if a game has two NEs, the ﬁrst is Pareto
eﬃcient, the second is not, then we can say that the reﬁned strategic equilibrium concept (in this case the
Nash equilibrium concept plus Pareto eﬃciency) predicts that the outcome of the game is the ﬁrst NE.
Preferring Pareto-eﬃcient equilibria to deﬁcient equilibria becomes an inherent part of the deﬁnition of
rationality.
It may well occur that the game has a single NE, which is, however, not Pareto eﬃcient, and thus the social
welfare (the sum of the individual utilities) is not maximized in equilibrium. Two archetypical examples are
the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the Tragedy of the Commons (see later in Sec. 2.5). Such situations are called
social dilemmas, and their analysis, avoidance or possible resolution is one of the most fundamental issues
of economics and social sciences.
Another reﬁnement concept which could serve as a guideline for equilibrium selection is risk dominance
(Harsanyi and Selten, 1988). A strategy s′
n risk dominates another strategy sn, if the former has higher
expected payoﬀagainst an opponent playing all his feasible strategies with equal probability. So playing
strategy sn would have higher risk, if the opponent were, for some reason, irrational, or if were unable to
decide between more than one equally appealing NEs. The concept of risk dominance is the precursor to
stochastic stability to be discussed in the sequel. Note that Pareto eﬃciency and risk dominance may well
give contradictory advise.
2.3. Potential and zero-sum games
In general the number of utility functions to consider in a game equals to the number of players. However,
there are two special classes where a single function is enough to characterize the strategic incentives of
all players: potential games and zero-sum games. The existence of these single functions make the analysis
more transparent, and as we will see, the methods of statistical physics directly applicable.
By deﬁnition (Monderer and Shapley, 1996), if there exists a function V = V (s1, s2, . . . , sN) such that for
each player n = 1, . . . , N the utility function diﬀerences satisfy
un(s′
n; s−n) −un(sn; s−n) = V (s′
n; s−n) −V (sn; s−n),
(8)
10

then the game is called a potential game with V being its potential. If the potential exists it can be thought of
as a single, ﬁxed landscape, common for all players, in which they try to reach its maximum. In the case of the
two-player game in Eq. (1) V is a Q × R matrix, which represents a two-dimensional discretized landscape.
The concept can be trivially extended to more players, in which case the dimension of the landscape is the
number of players. For games with continuous strategy space (e.g., mixed strategies) the ﬁnite diﬀerences
in Eq. (8) can be replaced by partial derivatives and the landscape is continuous.
For potential games the existence of a Nash equilibrium, even in pure strategies, is trivial if the strategy
space (the landscape) is compact: the global maximum of V , which then necessarily exists, is a pure strategy
NE.
For a two-player game, G = (A, BT ), it is easy to formulate a simple suﬃcient condition for the existence
of a potential. If the payoﬀs are equal for the two players in all strategy conﬁgurations, i.e., A = BT = V ,
then V is a potential, as can be checked directly. These games are also called “partnership games” or
“games with common interests” (Monderer and Shapley, 1996; Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998). If the game
is symmetric, i.e., A = B this condition implies that the potential is a symmetric matrix V T = V .
There is, however, an even wider class of games for which a potential can be deﬁned. Indeed, notice that
Nash equilibria are invariant under certain rescaling of the game. Speciﬁcally, the game G′ = (A′, B′T ) is
said to be Nash-equivalent to G = (A, BT ), and denoted G ∼G′, if there exist constants α, β > 0 and cr,
dq such that
A′
qr = α Aqr + cr;
B′
rq = β Brq + dq.
(9)
According to this, the payoﬀs can be freely multiplied, and arbitrary constants can be added to columns
of Player 1’s payoﬀand the rows of Player 2’s payoﬀ– the Nash equilibria of G and G′ are the same. If
there exists a Q × R matrix V such that (A, BT ) ∼(V , V ), the game is called a rescaled potential game
(Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998).
The other class of games with a single strategy landscape is (rescaled) zero-sum games, (A, BT ) ∼
(V , −V ). Zero-sum games are only deﬁned for two players. Whereas for potential games the players try to
maximize V along their associated dimensions, for zero-sum games Player 1 is a maximizer and Player 2
is a minimizer of V along their respective strategy spaces. The existence of a Nash equilibrium in mixed
strategies (p, q) ∈∆Q ×∆R follows from Nash’s theorem, but in fact it was proved earlier by von Neumann.
Von Neumann’s Minimax Theorem asserts (von Neumann, 1928) that each zero-sum game can be associ-
ated with a value v, the optimal outcome. The payoﬀs v and −v, respectively, are the best the two players
can achieve in the game if both are rational. Denoting player 1’s expected payoﬀby u(p, q) = p · V q, the
value v satisﬁes
v = max
p min
q
u(p, q) = min
q max
p
u(p, q),
(10)
i.e., the two extremization steps can be exchanged. The minimax theorem also provides a straightforward
algorithm how to solve zero-sum games (minimax algorithm), with direct extension (at least in theory) to
dynamic zero-sum games such as Chess or Go.
2.4. NEs in two-player matrix games
A general two-player, two-strategy symmetric game is deﬁned by the matrix
A =

a
b
c
d

.
(11)
where a, b, c, d are real parameters. Such a game is Nash-equivalent to the rescaled game
A′ =

cos φ
0
0
sin φ

,
tan φ = d −b
a −c.
(12)
11

Let p1 characterize Player 1’s mixed strategy p = (p1, 1−p1), and q1 Player 2’s mixed strategy q = (q1, 1−q1).
By introducing the notation
r =
1
1 + a −c
d −b
=
1
1 + cot φ,
(13)
the following classes can be distinguished as a function of the single parameter φ:
Coordination Class [0 < φ < π/2, i.e., a −c > 0, d −b > 0]. There are two strict, pure strategy NEs, and
one non-strict, mixed strategy NE:
NE1 : p∗
1 = q∗
1 = 1;
NE2 : p∗
1 = q∗
1 = 0;
(14)
NE3 : p∗
1 = q∗
1 = r;
All the NEs are symmetric. The prototypical example is the Coordination game (see Appendix A.3 for
details).
Anti-Coordination Class [π < φ < 3π/2, i.e., a −c < 0, d −b < 0] There are two strict, pure strategy
NEs, and one non-strict, mixed strategy NE:
NE1 : p∗
1 = 1, q∗
1 = 0;
NE2 : p∗
1 = 0, q∗
1 = 1;
(15)
NE3 : p∗
1 = q∗
1 = r;
NE1 and NE2 are asymmetric, NE3 is a symmetric equilibrium. The most important games belonging to
this class are the Hawk-Dove, the Chicken, and the Snowdrift games (see Appendix A).
Pure Dominance Class [π/2 < φ < π or 3π/2 < φ < 2π, i.e., (a −c)(d −b) ≤0]. One of the pure
strategies is strictly dominated. There is only one Nash equilibrium, which is pure, strict, and symmetric:
NE1 :



p∗
1 = q∗
1 = 0
if π/2 < φ < π
p∗
1 = q∗
1 = 1 if 3π/2 < φ < 2π
(16)
The best example is the Prisoner’s Dilemma (see Appendix A.7 and later sections).
On the borderline between the diﬀerent classes games are degenerate and a new equilibrium appears or
disappears. At these points the appearing/disappearing NE is always non-strict. Figure 1 depicts the phase
diagram.
The classiﬁcation above is based on the number and type of Nash equilibria. Note that this is only a
minimal classiﬁcation, since these classes can be further divided using other properties. For instance, the
Nash-equivalency relation does not keep Pareto eﬃciency invariant. The latter is a separate issue, which
does not depend directly on the combined parameter φ. In the Coordination Class, unless a = d, only one of
the three NEs is Pareto eﬃcient: if a > d it is NE1, if a < d it is NE2. NE3 is never Pareto eﬃcient. In the
Anti-Coordination Class NE1 and NE2 are Pareto eﬃcient, NE3 is not. The only NE of the Pure Dominance
Class is Pareto eﬃcient when d ≥a for π/2 < φ < π, and when d ≤a for 3π/2 < φ < 2π. Otherwise the
NE is deﬁcient (social dilemma).
What can we say when the strategy space contains more than two pure strategies, Q > 2? It is hard to
give a complete classiﬁcation as the number of the possible classes increases exponentially with Q (Broom,
2000). A classiﬁcation based on the replicator dynamics (see later) is available for Q = 3 (Bomze, 1983,
1995; Zeeman, 1980).
What we surely know is that for any ﬁnite game which allows mixed strategies, Nash’s theorem (Nash,
1950) assures that there is at least one Nash equilibrium, possibly in mixed strategies. Nash’s theorem is
only an existence theorem, and in fact the typical number of Nash equilibria in matrix games increases
rapidly as the number of pure strategies Q increases.
12

Coordination
Class
Anti-Coordination
Class
Pure 
Dominance
Class
Pure
Dominance
Class
p1
q1
cos
0
0
sin






φ
φ
Fig. 1. Nash equilibria in 2 × 2 matrix games A′, deﬁned in Eq. (12), classiﬁed by the angle φ. Filled boxes denote strict NE,
empty boxes non-strict NE in the strategy space p1 vs q1. The 7→shows the direction of motion of the mixed strategy NE for
increasing φ.
It is customary to distinguish interior and boundary NEs with respect to the strategy simplex. An interior
NE p∗
int ∈int∆Q is a mixed strategy equilibrium with 0 < p∗
i < 1 for all i = 1, . . . , Q. A boundary NE
p∗∈bd∆Q is a mixed strategy equilibrium in which at least one of the pure strategies has zero weight, i.e.,
∃i such that p∗
i = 0. These solutions are situated on the Q −2 dimensional boundary bd∆Q of the Q −1
dimensional simplex ∆Q. Pure strategy NEs are sometimes called ”corner solutions”. As a special case of
Nash’s theorem it can be shown (Cheng et al., 2004) that a ﬁnite symmetric game always possesses at least
one symmetric equilibrium, possibly in mixed strategies.
Whereas for Q = 2 we always have a pure strategy equilibrium, this is no longer true for Q > 2. A typical
example is the Rock-Scissors-Paper game whose only NE is mixed.
In case when the payoﬀmatrix is regular, i.e., det A ̸= 0, there can be at most one interior NE. An interior
NE in a matrix game is necessarily symmetric. If this exists it necessarily satisﬁes (Bishop and Cannings,
1978)
p∗
int = 1
N A−11,
(17)
where 1 is the Q-dimensional vector with all elements equals 1, and N is a normalization factor to assure
Σi[p∗
int]i = 1. The possible location of the boundary NEs, if they exist, can be calculated similarly by
restricting (projecting) A to the appropriate boundary manifold under consideration.
When the payoﬀmatrix is singular det A = 0 the game may have an extended set of NEs, a so-called NE
component. An example for this will be given later in Section 3.2.
In case of asymmetric games (bi-matrix games) the two players have diﬀerent strategy sets and diﬀerent
payoﬀs. An asymmetric Nash equilibrium is now a pair of strategies. Each component of such a pair is
a best response to the other component. The classiﬁcation of bi-matrix games is more complicated even
for two possible strategies, Q = R = 2. The standard reference is Rapoport and Guyer (1966) who deﬁne
three major classes based on the number of players having a dominant strategy, and then deﬁne altogether
fourteen diﬀerent sub-classes within. Note, however, that they only classify bi-matrices with ordinal payoﬀs,
i.e., when the four elements of the 2x2 matrix are the numbers 1,2,3 and 4 (the rank of the utility).
A diﬀerent taxonomy based on the replicator dynamics phase portraits is given by Cressman (2003).
13

2.5. Multi-player games
There are many socially and economically important examples where the number of decision makers
involved is greater than two. Although sometimes these situations can be modeled as repeated play of
simple pair interactions, there are many cases where the most fundamental unit of the game is irreducibly
of multi-player nature. These games cannot be cast in a matrix or bi-matrix form. Still the basic solution
concept is the same: when played by rational agents the outcome should be a Nash equilibrium where no
player has an incentive to deviate unilaterally.
We brieﬂy mention one example here: the Tragedy of the Commons (Gibbons, 1992). This abstract
games exempliﬁes what has been one of the major concerns of political philosophy and economic thinking
since at least David Hume in the 18th century (Hardin, 1968): without central planning and global control,
private incentives would lead to overutilization of public resources and insuﬃcient contribution to public
goods. Clearly, models of this kind provide valuable insight into deep socioeconomic problems like pollution,
deforestation, mining, ﬁshing, climate control, or environment protection, just to mention a few.
The Tragedy of the Commons is a simultaneous move game with N players (farmers). The strategy for
farmer n is to choose a non-negative number gn ∈[0, ∞), the number of goats, assumed to be a real number
for simplicity, to graze on the village green. One goat implies a constant cost c, and a beneﬁt v(G) to the
farmer, which is a function of the total number of goats G = g1 + . . . + gN grazing on the green. However,
grass is a scarce resource. If there are many goats on the green the amount of available grass decreases.
Goats become undernourished and their value decreases. We assume that v′(G) < 0 and v′′(G) < 0. The
farmer’s payoﬀis
un = [v(G) −c] gn.
(18)
Rational game theory predicts that the emerging collective behavior is a Nash equilibrium with choices
(g∗
1, . . . , g∗
N) from which no farmer has a unilateral incentive to deviate. The ﬁrst order condition for the
coupled maximization problem ∂un/∂gn = 0 leads to
v(gn + G∗
−n) + gnv′(gn + G∗
−n) −c = 0
(19)
where G−n = g1 + . . . + gn−1 + gn+1 + . . . + gN. Summing over the ﬁrst order conditions for all players we
get an equation for the equilibrium number of total goats, G∗,
v(G∗) + 1
N G∗v′(G∗) −c = 0,
(20)
Given the function v, this can be solved (numerically) to obtain G∗.
Note, however, that the social welfare would be maximized by another value G∗∗, which maximizes the
total proﬁt Gv(G) −cG for G, i.e., satisﬁes the ﬁrst order condition (note the missing 1/N factor)
v(G∗∗) + G∗∗v′(G∗∗) −c = 0.
(21)
Comparing Eqs. (20) and (21), we ﬁnd that G∗> G∗∗, that is too many goats are grazed in the Nash
equilibrium compared to the social optimum. The resource is overutilized. The NE is not Pareto eﬃcient
(it could be easily improved by a central planner or a law ﬁxing the total number of goats at G∗∗), which
makes the problem a social dilemma.
The same kind of ineﬃciency, and the possible ways to overcome it, is studied actively by economists in
Public Good game experiments (Ledyard, 1995). See Appendix A.8 for more details on Public Good games.
2.6. Repeated games
Most of the inter-agent interactions that can be modeled by abstract games are not one-shot relationships
but occur repeatedly on a regular basis. When a one-shot game is played between the same rational players
iteratively, a single instance of this series cannot be singled out and treated separately. The whole series
14

should be analyzed as one big “supergame”. What a player does early on can eﬀect what others choose to
do later on.
Assume that the same game G (the so called stage game) is played a number of times T . G can be the
Prisoner’s Dilemma or any matrix or bi-matrix game discussed so far. The set of feasible actions and payoﬀs
in the stage game at period t (t = 1, . . . , T) are independent of t and of the former history of the game. This
does not mean, however, that actions themselves should be chosen independent of time and history. When
G is played at period t, all the game history thus far is common knowledge. We will denote this repeated
game as G(T ) and distinguish ﬁnitely repeated games T < ∞and inﬁnitely repeated games T = ∞. For
ﬁnitely repeated games the total payoﬀis simply the sum of the stage game payoﬀs
U =
T
X
t=1
ut.
(22)
For inﬁnitely repeated games discounting should be introduced to avoid inﬁnite utilities. Discounting is a
regularization method, which is, however, not a pure mathematical trick but reﬂects real economic factors.
On one hand, discounting takes into account the probability p that the repetition of the game may terminate
at any period. On the other hand, it represents the fact that the current value of a future income is less
than its nominal value. If the interest rate of the market for one period is denoted r, the overall discount
factor, representing both eﬀects reads δ = (1 −p)/(1 + r) (Gibbons, 1992). Using this, the present value of
the inﬁnite series of payoﬀs u1, u2, . . . is 6
U =
∞
X
t=1
δt−1ut.
(23)
In the following we will denote a ﬁnitely repeated game based on G as G(T ) and an inﬁnitely repeated
game as G(∞, δ), 0 < δ < 1, and consider U in Eq. (22), resp. Eq. (23), as the payoﬀof the repeated game
(supergame).
Strategies as algorithms
In one-shot static games with complete information like those we have considered in earlier subsections a
strategy is simply an action a player can choose. For repeated games (and also for other kinds of dynamic
games) the concept of a strategy becomes more complex. In these games a player’s strategy is a complete
plan of action, specifying a feasible action in any contingency in which the player may be called upon to act.
The number of possible contingencies in a repeated game is the number of possible histories the game could
have produced thus far. Thus the strategy is in fact a mathematical algorithm which determines the output
(the action to take in period t) as a function of the input (the actual time t and the history of the actions
of all players up to period t −1). In case of perfect rationality there is no limit on this algorithm. However,
bounded rationality may restrict feasible strategies to those that do not require too long memories or too
complex algorithms.
To illustrate how fast the number of feasible strategies for G(T ) increases, consider a symmetric, N-player
stage game G with action space S = {e1, e2, . . . , eQ}. Let M denote the length of the memory required by
the strategy algorithm. M = 1 if the algorithm only needs to know the actions of the players in the last
round, M = 2 if knowledge of the last two rounds is required, etc. The maximum possible memory length
at period T is T −1. Given the player’s memory, a strategy is a function QNM →Q. There are altogether
QQNM length-M strategies. Notice, however, that beyond depending on the game history a strategy may
also depend on the time t itself. For instance, actions may depend whether the stage game is played on a
weekday or on the weekend. In addition to the beginning of the game, in ﬁnitely repeated games the end of
the game can also get special treatment, and strategies can depend on the remaining time T −t. As it will
be shown shortly, this possibility can have a crucial eﬀect on the outcome of the game.
6 Although it seems reasonable to introduce a similar discounting for ﬁnitely repeated games, too, that would have no qualitative
eﬀect there.
15

In case of the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma games some standard strategies like “AllC” (M = 0) “Tit-
for-Tat” (TFT, M = 1) or “Pavlov” (M = 1) are ﬁnite-memory strategies, others like “Contrite TFT”
(Boerlijst et al., 1997; Panchanathan and Boyd, 2004) depends as input on the whole action history. How-
ever, the need for such a long-term memory can sometimes be traded oﬀfor some additional state variables
(“image score”, “standing”, etc.) (Panchanathan and Boyd, 2004; Nowak and Sigmund, 2005). For instance,
these variables can code for the “reputation” of agents, which can be utilized in decision making, especially
when the game is such that opponents are chosen randomly from the population in each round. Of course,
then a strategy should involve a rule for updating these state variables too. Sometimes these strategies
can be conveniently expressed as Finite State Machines (Finite State Automata) (Binmore and Samuelson,
1992; Lindgren, 1997).
The deﬁnition of a strategy should also prescribe how to handle errors (noise) if these have ﬁnite pos-
sibility to occur. It is customary to distinguish two kinds of errors: implementation (“trembling hand”)
errors and perception errors. The ﬁrst refers to unintended “wrong” actions like playing D accidentally in
the Prisoner’s Dilemma when C was intended. These errors usually become common knowledge for players.
Perception errors, on the other hand, arise from events when the action was correct as intended, but one
of the players (usually the opponent) interpreted it as another action. In this case players end up keeping a
diﬀerent track record of the game history.
Subgame perfect Nash equilibrium
What is the prediction of rational game theory for the outcome of a repeated game? As always the outcome
should correspond to a Nash equilibrium: no player can have a unilateral incentive to change its strategy (in
the supergame sense), since this would induce immediate deviation from that proﬁle. However, not all NEs
are equally plausible outcomes in a dynamic game such as a repeated game. There are ones which are based
on “non-credible threats and promises” (Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991; Gibbons, 1992). A stronger concept
than Nash equilibrium is needed to exclude these spurious NEs. Subgame perfection introduced by Selten
(1965) is a widely accepted criterion to solve this problem. Subgame perfect Nash equilibria are those that
pass a credibility test.
A subgame of a repeated game is a subseries of the whole series that starts at period t ≥1 and ends at the
last period T . However, there are many subgames starting at t, one for each possible history of the (whole)
game before t. Thus subgames are labeled by the starting period t and the history of the game before t.
Thus when a subgame is reached in the game the players know the history of play. By deﬁnition an NE of
the game is subgame perfect if it is an NE in all subgames (Selten, 1965).
One of the key results of rational game theory that there is no cooperation in the Finitely Repeated
Prisoner’s Dilemma. In fact the theorem is more general and states that if a stage game G has a single NE
then the unique subgame perfect NE of G(T ) is the one, in which the NE of G is played in every period. The
proof is by backward induction. In the last round of a Prisoner’s Dilemma rational players defect since the
incentive structure of the game is the same as that of G. There is no room for expecting future rewards for
cooperation or punishment for defection. Expecting defection in the last period they consider the next-to-last
period, and ﬁnd that the eﬀective payoﬀmatrix in terms of the remaining undecided T −1 period actions
is Nash equivalent to that of G (the expected payoﬀs from the last round constitutes a constant shift for
this payoﬀmatrix). The incentive structure is again similar to that of G and they defect. Considering the
next-to-next-to-last round gives similar result, etc. The induction process can be continued backward till
the ﬁrst period showing that rational players defect in all rounds.
The backward induction paradox
There is substantial evidence from experimental economics showing that human players do cooperate
in repeated interactions, especially in early periods when the end of the game is still far away. Moreover,
even in situations which are seemingly best described as single-shot Prisoner’s Dilemmas cooperation is not
infrequent. The unease of rational game theory to cope with these facts is sometimes referred to as the back-
ward induction paradox (Pettit and Sugden, 1989). Similarly, contrary to rational game theory predictions,
16

altruistic behavior is common in Public Good experiments, and “fair behavior” appears frequently in the
Dictator game or in the Ultimatum game (Forsythe et al., 1994; Camerer and Thaler, 1995).
Game theory has worked out a number of possible answers to these criticisms: players are rational but
the actual game is not what it seems to be; players are not fully rational, or rationality is not common
knowledge; etc. As for the ﬁrst, it seems at least possible that the evolutionary advantages of cooperative
behavior have exerted a selective pressure to make humans hardwired for cooperation (Fehr and Fischbacher,
2003). This would imply a genetic predisposition for the player’s utility function to take into account the
well-being of the co-player too. The pure “monetary” payoﬀis not the ultimate utility to consider in the
analysis. Social psychology distinguishes various player types from altruistic to cooperative to competitive
individuals. In the simplest setup the player’s overall utility function is Un = αun + βum, i.e., is a linear
combination of his own monetary payoﬀun and the opponent’s monetary payoﬀum, where the signs of the
coeﬃcients α and β depend on the player’s type (Brosig, 2002; Weibull, 2004). Clearly such a dependence
may redeﬁne the incentive structure of the game, and may transform a would-be social dilemma setup into
another game, where cooperation is, in fact, rational. Also in many cases the experiment, which is intended
to be a one-shot or a ﬁnitely repeated game is in fact perceived by the players – despite all contrary eﬀorts
by the experimenter – as being part of a larger, practically inﬁnite game (say, the players’ everyday life in
its full complexity) where other issues like future threats or promises, or reputation matter, and strategies
observed in the experiment are in fact rational in this supergame sense.
Contrary to what is predicted for ﬁnitely repeated games, inﬁnitely repeated games can behave diﬀerently.
Indeed, it was found that cooperation can be rational in inﬁnitely repeated games. A collection of theorems
formalizing this result is usually referred to as the Folk Theorem. 7 General results by Friedman (1971)
and later by Fudenberg and Maskin (1986) imply that if the discount factor is suﬃciently close to 1, i.e., if
players are suﬃciently patient, Pareto eﬃcient subgame perfect Nash equilibria (among many other possible
equilibria) can be reached in an inﬁnitely repeated game G(∞, δ). In case of the Prisoner’s Dilemma, for
instance, this means that cooperation can be rational if the game is inﬁnite and δ is suﬃciently large.
When restricted to the Prisoner’s Dilemma the proof is based on considering unforgiving (“trigger”)
strategies like “Grim Trigger”. Grim Trigger starts by cooperating and cooperates until the opponent defects.
From that point on it always defects. The strategy proﬁle of both players playing Grim Trigger is a subgame
perfect NE provided that δ is larger than some well deﬁned lower bound. See e.g. Gibbons’ book (Gibbons,
1992) for a readable account. Clearly, cooperation in this case stems from the fear from an inﬁnitely long
punishment phase following defection, and the temptation to defect in a given period is suppressed by the
threatening cumulative loss from this punishment. When the discount factor is small the threat diminishes,
and the cooperative behavior evaporates.
Another interesting way to explain cooperation in ﬁnitely repeated social dilemmas is to assume that play-
ers are not fully rational or that their rationality is not common knowledge. Since cooperation of boundedly
rational agents is the major theme of subsequent sections, we only discuss here the second possibility, that
is when all players are rational but this is not common knowledge. Each player knows that she is rational,
but perceives a chance that the co-players are not. This information asymmetry makes the game a diﬀerent
game, namely a ﬁnitely repeated game based on a stage game with incomplete information. As was shown
in a seminal paper by Kreps et al. (1982), such an information asymmetry is able to rescue rational game
theory, and assure cooperation even in the ﬁnitely repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma, provided that the game
is long enough or the chance of playing with a non-rational co-player is high enough, and the stage game
payoﬀs satisfy some simple inequalities. The crux of the proof is that there is an incentive for rational players
to mimic non-rational players and thus create a reputation (of being non-rational, i.e., cooperative) for which
the other’s best reply is cooperation – at least suﬃciently far from the last stage.
7 The name ”Folk Theorem” refers to the fact that some of these results were common knowledge already in the 1950s, even
though no one had published them. Although later more speciﬁc theorems were proven and published, the name remained.
17

3. Evolutionary games: population dynamics
Evolutionary game theory is the theory of dynamic adaptation and learning in (inﬁnitely) repeated games
played by boundedly rational agents. Although nowadays evolutionary game theory is understood as an
intrinsically dynamic theory, it originally started in the 70s as a novel static reﬁnement concept for Nash
equilibria. Keeping the historical order, we will ﬁrst discuss the concept of an evolutionarily stable strategy
(ESS) and its extensions. The ESS concept investigates the stability of the equilibrium under rare mutations,
and it does not require the speciﬁcation of the actual underlying game dynamics. The discussion of the various
possible evolutionary dynamics, their behavior and relation to the static concepts will follow afterwards.
In most of this section we restrict our attention to so-called “population games”. Due to a number of sim-
plifying assumptions related to the type and number of agents and their interaction network, these models
give rise to a relatively simple, aggregate level description. We delegate the analysis of games with a ﬁnite
number of players or with more complex social structure into later sections. There statistical ﬂuctuations,
stemming from the microscopic dynamics or from the structure of the social neighborhood cannot be ne-
glected. These latter models are more complex, and usually necessitate a lower level, so-called agent-based,
analysis.
3.1. Population games
A mean-ﬁeld or population game is deﬁned by the underlying two-player stage game, the set of feasible
strategies (usually mixed strategies are not allowed or are strongly restricted), and the heuristic updating
mechanism for the individual strategies (update rules). The deﬁnition tacitly implies the following simplifying
assumptions:
(i) The number of boundedly rational agents is very large, N →∞;
(ii) All agents are equivalent and have identical payoﬀmatrices (symmetric games), or agents form two
diﬀerent but internally homogeneous groups for the two roles (asymmetric games); 8
(iii) In each stage game (round) agents are randomly matched with equal probability (symmetric games),
or agents in one group are randomly matched with agents in the other group (asymmetric games),
thus the social network is the simplest possible;
(iv) Strategy updates are rare in comparison with the frequency of playing, so that the update can be
based on the average success rate of a strategy.
(v) All agents use the same strategy update rule.
(vi) Agents are myopic, i.e., their discount factor is small, δ →0.
In population games the ﬂuctuations, arising from the randomness of the matching procedure, playing mixed
strategies (if allowed), or from stochastic update rules, average out and can be neglected. For this reason
population games comprise the mean-ﬁeld level of evolutionary game theory.
These simpliﬁcations allow us to characterize the overall behavioral proﬁle of the population, and hence
the game dynamics, by a restricted number of state variables.
Matrix games
Let us consider ﬁrst a symmetric game G = (A, AT ). Assume that there are N players, n = 1, . . . , N,
each playing a pure strategy sn from the discrete set of feasible strategies sn ∈S = {e1, e2, . . . , eQ}. It is
convenient to think about strategy ei as a Q component unit vector, whose ith component is 1, the other
components are zero. Thus ei points to the ith corner of the strategy simplex ∆Q.
Let Ni denote the number of players playing strategy ei. At any moment of time, the state of the population
can be characterized by the relative frequencies (abundances, concentrations) of the diﬀerent strategies, i.e.,
by the Q dimensional state vector ρ:
8 In the asymmetric case population games are sometimes called two-population games to emphasize that there is a separate
population for each possible role in the game.
18

ρ = 1
N
N
X
n=1
sn =
Q
X
i=1
Ni
N ei
(24)
Clearly, P
i ρi = P
i Ni/N = 1, i.e., ρ ∈∆Q. Note that ρ can take any point on the simplex ∆Q even
though players are only allowed to play pure strategies (the corners of the simplex) in the game. Saying it
diﬀerently, the average strategy ρ may not be in the set of feasible strategies for a single player.
Payoﬀs can be expressed as a function of the strategy frequencies. The (normalized) expected payoﬀof
player n playing strategy sn in the population is
un(sn, ρ) = 1
N
N
X
m=1
sn · Asm = sn · Aρ,
(25)
where the sum is over all players m of the population except n, but this omission is negligible in the inﬁnite
population limit. 9 Equation (25) implies that for a given player the uniﬁed eﬀect of the other players of
the population looks as if she would play against a single representative agent who plays the population’s
average strategy as a mixed strategy.
Despite the formal similarity, ρ is not a valid mixed strategy in the game, but the population average of
pure strategies. It is not obvious at ﬁrst sight how to cope with real mixed strategies when they are allowed
in the stage game. Indeed, in case of an unrestricted S × S matrix game, there are S pure strategies and
an inﬁnite number of mixed strategies: each point on the simplex ∆S represents a possible mixed strategy
of the game. When all these mixed strategies are allowed, the state vector ρ is rather a “state functional”
over ∆S. However, in many biological and economic applications the nature of the problem forbids mixed
strategies. In this case the number of diﬀerent strategy types in the population is simply Q = S.
Even if mixed strategies are not forbidden in theory, it is frequently enough to consider one or two well-
prepared mixed strategies in addition to the pure ones, for example, to challenge evolutionary stability
(see later). In this case the number of types Q (> S) can remain ﬁnite. The general recipe is to convert the
original game which has mixed strategies to a new (eﬀective) game which only has pure strategies. Assuming
that the underlying stage game has S pure strategies, and the construction of the game allows, in addition,
a number R of well-deﬁned mixed strategies as combinations of these pure ones, we can always deﬁne an
eﬀective population game with Q = S +R strategies, which are then treated on equal footing. The new game
is associated with an eﬀective payoﬀmatrix of dimension Q × Q, and from that point on, mixed strategies
(as linear combinations of these Q strategies) are formally forbidden.
As a possible example (Cressman, 2003), consider population games based upon the S = 2 matrix game in
Eq. (11). If the population game only allows the two pure strategies e1 = (1, 0)T and e2 = (0, 1)T , the payoﬀ
matrix is that of Eq. (11), and the state vector, representing the frequencies of e1 and e2 agents, lies in
∆2. However, in the case when some mixed strategies are also allowed such as, for example, a third (mixed)
strategy e3 = (1/2, 1/2)T, i.e., playing e1 with probability 1/2 and e2 with 1/2, the eﬀective population
game becomes a game with Q = 3. The eﬀective payoﬀmatrix for the three strategies e1, e2, and e3 now
reads
A =








a
b
a + b
2
c
d
c + d
2
a + c
2
b + d
2
a + b + c + d
4








.
(26)
9 This formulation assumes that the underlying game is a two-player matrix game. In a more general setup (non-matrix games,
multi-player games) it is possible that the utility of a player cannot be written in a bilinear form containing her strategy and
the mean strategy of the population as in Eq. (25), but is a more general nonlinear function, e.g., u = s· f(¯ρ) with f nonlinear.
19

Role 1
Role 2
a,
b,
Fig. 2. Schematic connectivity structure for (a) population (symmetric) and (b) two-population (asymmetric) games. Black
and white dots represent players in diﬀerent roles.
It is also rather straightforward to formally extend the concept of a Nash equilibrium, which was only
deﬁned so far on the agent level, to the aggregate level, where only strategy frequencies are available. A
state of the population ρ∗∈∆Q is called a Nash equilibrium of the population game, iﬀ
ρ∗· Aρ∗≥ρ · Aρ∗
∀ρ ∈∆Q.
(27)
Note that NEs of a population game are always symmetric equilibria of the two-player stage game. Asym-
metric equilibria of the stage game like those appearing in the Anti-Coordination Class in Eq. (15) cannot
be interpreted at the population level.
It is not trivial that the deﬁnition in Eq. (27) is equivalent to the agent-level (microscopic) deﬁnition of
an NE, i.e., given the average strategy of the population, no player has a unilateral incentive to change her
strategy. We delegate this question to Sec. 3.2, where we discuss evolutionary stability.
Bi-matrix games
In the case of asymmetric games (bi-matrix games) G = (A, BT ) the situation is somewhat more com-
plicated. Predators only play with Prey, Owners only with Intrudes, Buyers only with Sellers. The simplest
model along the above assumptions is a two-population game, one population for each possible kind of play-
ers. In this case random matching means that a certain player of one population is randomly connected with
another player from the other population, but never with a fellow agent in the same population (see Fig.
2 for an illustration). The state of the system is characterized by two state vectors: ρ ∈∆Q for the ﬁrst
population and η ∈∆R for the second population. Obviously, symmetrized versions of asymmetric games
(role games) can be formulated as one-population games.
For two-population games the Nash equilibrium is a pair of state vectors (ρ∗, η∗) such that
ρ∗· Aη∗≥ρ · Aη∗
∀ρ ∈∆Q,
η∗· Bρ∗≥η · Bρ∗
∀η ∈∆R.
(28)
3.2. Evolutionary stability
A central problem of evolutionary game theory is the stability and robustness of strategy proﬁles in a
population. Indeed, according to the theory of “punctuated equilibrium” (Gould and Eldredge, 1993) (bio-
logical) evolution is not a continuous process, but is characterized by abrupt transition events of speciation
and extinction of relatively short duration, which separate long periods of relative tranquility and stability.
On one hand, punctuated equilibrium theory explains missing fossil records related to “intermediate” species
and the documented coexistence of freshly branched species, on the other hand it implies that most of the
biological structure and behavioral pattern we observe around us, and aim to explain, is likely to possess a
high degree of stability. In this sense a solution provided by a game theory model can only be a plausible
solution if it is “evolutionarily” stable.
Evolutionarily stable strategies
20

The ﬁrst concept of evolutionary stability was formulated by Maynard Smith and Price (1973) in the
context of symmetric population games. An evolutionarily stable strategy (ESS) is a strategy that, when
used by an entire population, is immune against invasion by a minority of mutants playing a diﬀerent
strategy. Players playing according to an ESS fares better than mutants in the population and thus in
the long run outcompete and expel invaders. An ESS persists as the dominant strategy over evolutionary
timescales, so strategies observed in the real world are typically ESSs. The ESS concept is relevant when the
mutation (biology) or experimentation (economics) rate is low. In general evolutionary stability implies an
invasion barrier, i.e., an ESS can only resist invasion until mutants reach a ﬁnite critical frequency in the
population. The ESS concept does not contain any reference to the actual game dynamics, and thus it is a
“static” concept. The only assumption it requires is that a strategy performing better must have a higher
replication (growth) rate.
In order to formulate evolutionary stability, consider a matrix game with S pure strategies and all possible
mixed strategies composed from these pure strategies, and a population in which the majority, 1 −ǫ part, of
the players play the incumbent strategy p∗∈∆S, and a minority, ǫ part, plays a mutant strategy p ∈∆S.
Both p∗and p can be mixed strategies. The average strategy of the population, which determines individual
payoﬀs in a population (mean-ﬁeld) game, is ρ = (1 −ǫ)p∗+ ǫp ∈∆S. The strategy p∗is an ESS, iﬀfor all
ǫ > 0 smaller than some appropriate invasion barrier ¯ǫ, and for any feasible mutant strategies p ∈∆S, the
incumbent strategy p∗performs strictly better in the mixed population than the mutant strategy p,
u(p∗, ρ) > u(p, ρ),
(29)
i.e.,
p∗· Aρ > p · Aρ.
(30)
If the inequality is not strict, p∗is usually called a weak ESS. The condition in Eq. (30) takes the explicit
form
p∗· A

(1 −ǫ)p∗+ ǫp

> p · A

(1 −ǫ)p∗+ ǫp

,
(31)
which can be rewritten as
(1 −ǫ)(p∗· Ap∗−p · Ap∗) + ǫ(p∗· Ap −p · Ap) > 0.
(32)
It is thus clear that p∗is an ESS, iﬀtwo conditions are satisﬁed:
(1) NE condition:
p∗· Ap∗≥p · Ap∗
for all p ∈∆N,
(33)
(2) stability condition:
if p ̸= p∗and p∗· Ap∗= p · Ap∗,
then p∗· Ap > p · Ap.
(34)
According to (1) p∗should be a symmetric Nash equilibrium of the stage game, hence the deﬁnition in Eq.
(27), and according to (2) if it is a non-strict NE, then p∗should fare better against p than p against itself.
Clearly, all strict symmetric NEs are ESSs, and all ESSs are symmetric NEs, but not the other way around
[see the upper panel in Fig. 3]. Most notably not all NEs are evolutionary stable, thus the ESS concept
provides a means for equilibrium selection. However, a game may have several ESSs or no ESS at all.
As an illustration consider the Hawk-Dove game deﬁned in Appendix A.4. The stage game belongs to the
Anti-Coordination Class in Eq. (15) and has a symmetric mixed strategy equilibrium:
p∗=


V/C
1 −V/C

,
(35)
21

Nash equilibria
Evolutionary stable strategies
Strict Nash equilibria
Nash equilibria
Evolutionary stable strategies
Strict Nash equilibria =
Symmetric
(matrix)
games
Asymmetric
(bimatrix)
games
Fig. 3. Relation between evolutionary stability (ESS) and symmetric Nash equilibria for matrix and bi-matrix games.
which is an ESS. Indeed, we ﬁnd
∀p ∈∆2 :
p · Ap∗= V
2 −V 2
2C
(36)
independent of p. Thus Eq. (33) is satisﬁed for all p with equality. Hence we should check the stability
condition Eq. (34). Parameterizing p as p = (p, 1 −p)T , we ﬁnd
p∗· Ap −p · Ap = (V −pC)2
2C
> 0,
∀p ̸= V
C ,
(37)
thus Eq. (34) is indeed satisﬁed, and p∗is an ESS. It is in fact the only ESS of the Hawk-Dove game.
An important theorem [see, e.g., Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998) or Cressman (2003)] says that a strategy
p∗is an ESS, iﬀit is locally superior, i.e., p∗has a neighborhood in ∆S such that for all p ̸= p∗in this
neighborhood
p∗· Ap > p · Ap.
(38)
In the Hawk-Dove game example, as is shown by Eq. (37), local superiority holds in the whole strategy
space, but this is not necessary in other games.
Evolutionarily stable states and sets
Even if a game has an evolutionarily stable strategy in theory, this strategy may not be feasible in practice.
For instance, Hawk and Dove behavior may be genetically coded, and this coding may not allow for a mixed
strategy. Therefore, when the Hawk-Dove game is played as a population game in which only pure strategies
are allowed, there would be no feasible ESS. Neither pure Hawk nor pure Dove, the only individual strategies
allowed, are evolutionarily stable. There is, however, a stable composition of the population with strategy
frequencies ρ∗= p∗given by Eq. (35). This state satisﬁes both the ESS conditions Eqs. (33) and (34) (with
p substituted everywhere by ρ) and the equivalent local superiority condition Eq. (38). It is customary to
call such a state an evolutionarily stable state (also abbreviated traditionally as ESS), which is the direct
extension of the ESS concept to population games with only pure strategies (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998).
The extension of the ESS concept to composite states of a population would only have a sense, if these
states had similarly strong stability properties as evolutionarily stable strategies. As we will see later in Sec.
3.3, this is almost the case, but there are some complications. Because of the extension, the ESS concept loses
some of its strength. Although it remains true that ESSs are dynamically stable, the converse loses validity:
22

1
2
3
Fig. 4. An ESset (line along the black dots) for the degenerate Hawk-Dove game Eq. (26) with a = −2, b = c = 0, d = −1.
a state should not necessarily be an ESS for being dynamically stable and thus persisting for evolutionary
times.
Up to now we have discussed the properties of ESSs, but how to ﬁnd an ESS? One possibility is to use the
Bishop-Cannings Theorem (Bishop and Cannings, 1978) which provides a necessary condition for an ESS:
If ρ∗is a mixed evolutionarily stable strategy with support I = {e1, e2, . . . , ek}, i.e., ρ∗= Pk
i=1 ρiei with
ρi > 0 ∀1 ≤i ≤k, then
u(e1; ρ∗) = u(e2; ρ∗) = . . . = u(ek; ρ∗) = u(ρ∗; ρ∗),
(39)
which leads to Eq. (17), the condition of an interior NE, when payoﬀs are linear. Bishop and Canning have
also proved that if ρ∗is an ESS with support I and η∗̸= ρ∗is another ESS with support J, then neither
support set can contain the other. Consequently, if a matrix game has an interior ESS, than it is the only
ESS.
The ESS concept has a further extension towards evolutionarily stable sets (ESset), which becomes useful
in games with singular payoﬀmatrices. An ESset is an NE component (a connected set of NEs) which is
stable in the following sense: no mutant can spread when the incumbent is using a strategy in the ESset,
and mutants using a strategy not belonging to the ESset are driven out (Balkenborg and Schlag, 1995). In
fact each point in the ESset is neutrally stable, i.e., when the incumbent and the mutant are also elements
of the set they fare just equally in the population.
As a possible example consider again the game deﬁned by the eﬀective payoﬀmatrix Eq. (26). If the basic
2-strategy game has an interior NE, p∗= (p∗
1, p∗
2)T , the 3-strategy game has a boundary NE (p∗
1, p∗
2, 0)T .
Then the line segment E = {ρ ∈∆3 : ρ1 + ρ3/2 = p∗
1} is an NE component (see Fig. 4). It is an ESset, iﬀ
the 2-strategy game belongs to the Anti-Coordination (Hawk-Dove) Class (Cressman, 2003).
Bi-matrix games
The ESS concept was originally invented for symmetric games, and later extended for asymmetric games.
In many respects the situation is easier in the latter. Bi-matrix games are two-population games, and thus
a mutant appearing in one of the populations never plays with fellow mutants in her own population.
In technical terms this means that the condition (2) in Eq. (34) is irrelevant. Condition (1) is the Nash
equilibrium condition. When the NE is not strict there exists a mutant strategy in at least one of the
populations which is just as ﬁt as the incumbent. These mutants are not driven out although they cannot
spread either. This kind of neutral stability is usually called drift in biology: the composition of the population
changes by pure chance. Strict NEs, on the other hand, are always evolutionarily stable and as was shown
by Selten (1980): In asymmetric games a strategy pair is an ESS iﬀit is a strictNE (see the lower panel in
Fig. 3).
23

Since interior NEs are never strict it follows that asymmetric games can only have ESSs on bd(∆Q ×∆R).
Again the number of ESSs can be high and there are games, e.g., the asymmetric, two-population version
of the Rock-Scissors-Paper game, where there is no ESS.
Similarly to the ESset concept for symmetric games, the concept of strict equilibrium sets (SEset) can be
introduced (Cressman, 2003). An SEset F ∈∆Q × ∆R is a set of NE strategy pairs such that (ρ, η∗) ∈F
whenever ρ · Aη∗= ρ∗· Aη∗and (ρ∗, η) ∈F whenever η · Bρ∗= η∗· Bρ∗for some (ρ∗, η∗) ∈F. Again,
mutants outside the SEset are driven out from the population, while those within the SEset cannot spread.
When mutations appear randomly, the composition of the two populations drifts within the SEset.
3.3. Replicator dynamics
A model in evolutionary game theory is made complete by postulating the game dynamics, i.e., the rules
that discribe the update of strategies in the population. Depending on the actual problem, diﬀerent kinds of
dynamics can be appropriate. The game dynamics can be continuous or discrete, deterministic or stochastic,
and within these major categories a large number of diﬀerent rules can be formulated depending on the
situation under investigation.
On the macroscopic level, by far the most studied continuous evolutionary dynamics is the replicator
dynamics. It was introduced originally by Taylor and Jonker (1978), and it has exceptional status in the
models of biological evolution. On the phenomenological level the replicator dynamics can be postulated
directly by the reasonable assumption that the per capita growth rate ˙ρi/ρi of a given strategy type is
proportional to the ﬁtness diﬀerence
˙ρi
ρi
= ﬁtness of type i −average ﬁtness.
(40)
The ﬁtness is the individual’s evolutionary success, i.e., in the game theory context the payoﬀof the game.
In population games the ﬁtness of strategy i is (Aρ)i, whereas the average ﬁtness is ρ · Aρ. This leads to
the equation
˙ρi = ρi
 (Aρ)i −ρ · Aρ

.
(41)
which is usually called the Taylor form of the replicator equation.
Under slightly diﬀerent assumptions the replicator equation takes the form
˙ρi = ρi
(Aρ)i −ρ · Aρ
ρ · Aρ
,
(42)
which is the so-called Maynard Smith form (or adjusted replicator equation). In this the driving force is the
relative ﬁtness diﬀerence. Note that the denominator is only a rescaling of the ﬂow velocity. For both forms
the simplex ∆Q is invariant and such are all of its faces: if the initial condition does not contain a certain
strategy i, i.e., ρi(t = 0) = 0 for some i, then it remains ρi(t) = 0 for all t. The replicator dynamics does
not invent new strategies, and as such it is the prototype of a wider class of dynamics called non-innovative
dynamics. Both forms of the replicator equations can be deduced rigorously from microscopic assumptions
(see later).
The replicator dynamics lends the notion of evolutionary stability, originally introduced as a static concept,
an explicit dynamic meaning. From the dynamical point of view, ﬁxed points (rest points, stationary states)
of the replicator equation play a distinguished role since a population which happens to be exactly in the
ﬁxed point at t = 0 remains there forever. Stability against ﬂuctuations is, however, a crucial issue. It is
customary to introduce the following classiﬁcation of ﬁxed points:
(a) A ﬁxed point ρ∗is stable (also called Lyapunov stable) if for all open neighborhoods U of ρ∗(whatever
small it is) there is another open neighborhood O ⊆U such that any trajectory initially inside O remains
inside U.
(b) The ﬁxed point ρ∗is unstable if it is not stable.
24

(c) The ﬁxed point ρ∗is attractive if there exists an open neighborhood U of ρ∗such that all trajectory
initially in U converges to ρ∗. The maximum possible U is called the basin of attraction of ρ∗.
(d) The ﬁxed point ρ∗is asymptotically stable (also called attractor) if it is stable and attractive. 10 In
general a ﬁxed point is globally asymptotically stable if its basin of attraction encompasses the whole space.
In the case of the replicator dynamics where bd∆Q is invariant, a state is called globally asymptotically
stable if its basin of attraction contains int∆Q.
These deﬁnition can be trivially extended from ﬁxed points to invariant sets such as a set of ﬁxed points
or limit cycles, etc.
Dynamic vs. evolutionary stability
What is the connection between dynamic stability and evolutionary stability? Unfortunately, the two
concepts do not perfectly overlap. The actual relationship is best summarized in the form of two collections
of theorems: one relating to Nash equilibria, the other to evolutionary stability. As for Nash equilibria in
matrix games under the replicator dynamics the Folk Theorem of Evolutionary Game Theory asserts:
(a) NEs are rest points.
(b) Strict NEs are attractors.
(c) If an interior orbit converges to p∗, then it is an NE.
(d) If a rest point is stable then it is an NE.
See Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998); Cressman (2003); Hofbauer and Sigmund (2003) for detailed discussions
and proofs.
None of the converse statements hold in general. For (a) there can be rest points which are not NEs. These
can only be situated on bd∆Q. It is easy to show that a boundary ﬁxed point is only an NE iﬀits transversal
eigenvalues (associated with eigenvectors of the Jacobian transverse to the boundary) are all non-positive
(Hofbauer and Sigmund, 2003). An interior ﬁxed point is trivially an NE.
As for (b), not all attractors are strict NEs. As an example consider the matrix (Hofbauer and Sigmund,
1998; Zeeman, 1980)
A71 =





0 6 −4
−3 0 5
−1 3 0




,
(43)
with the associated ﬂow diagram in Fig. 5. The rest point [1/3, 1/3, 1/3] is an attractor (the eigenvalues
have negative real parts), but being in the interior of ∆3 it is a non-strict NE.
It is easy to construct examples in which a point is an NE, but it is not a limit point of an interior orbit.
Thus the converse of (c) does not hold. For an example of dynamically unstable Nash equilibria consider
the following family of games (Cressman, 2003)
A =





0 2 −α 4
6
0
−4
−2 8 −α 0




.
(44)
These games are generalized Rock-Scissors-Paper games which have the cyclic dominance property for
2 < α < 8. Even beyond this interval, for −16 < α < 14, there is a unique symmetric interior NE,
10 Note that a ﬁxed point ρ∗can be attractive without being stable. This is the case if there are trajectories which start close
to ρ∗, but take a large excursion before converging to ρ∗(see an example later in Sec. 6.10). Being attractive is not enough to
classify as an attractor, stability is also required.
25

1
2
3
Fig. 5. Flow pattern for the game A71 in Eq. 43. Red (blue) colors indicate fast (slow) ﬂow. Black (white) circles are stable
(unstable) rest points. Figure made by the game dynamics simulation program “Dynamo” (Sandholm and Dokumaci, 2006).
p∗= [28 −2α, 20, 16 + α]/(64 −α), which is a rest point of the replicator dynamics (see Fig. 6). This rest
point is attractive for −16 < α < 6.5 but repulsive for 6.5 < α < 14.
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Fig. 6. Trajectories predicted by Eq. (44) for α = 5.5, 6.5, and 7.5 (from left to right). Pluses indicate the internal rest points.
Figures made by the “Dynamo” program Sandholm and Dokumaci (2006).
The main results for the subtle relation between the replicator dynamics and evolutionary stability can
be summarized as follows (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998; Cressman, 2003; Hofbauer and Sigmund, 2003):
(a) ESSs are attractors.
(b) interior ESSs are global attractors.
(c) For potential games a ﬁxed point is an ESS iﬀit is an attractor.
(d) For 2 × 2 matrix games a ﬁxed point is an ESS iﬀit is an attractor.
Again, the converses of (a) and (b) do not necessarily hold. To show a counterexample where an attractor
26

0
1
0
1
ρ1
ρ2
Coordination
0
1
0
1
ρ1
ρ2
Anti-Coordination
0
1
0
1
ρ1
ρ2
Pure Dominance
Fig. 7. Classiﬁcation of two-strategy (symmetric) matrix games based on the replicator dynamics ﬂow. Full circles are stable,
open circles are unstable NEs.
is not an ESS consider again the payoﬀmatrix A71 in Eq. (43) and Fig. 5. The only ESS in the game is
e1 = [1, 0, 0] on bd∆3. The NE [1/3, 1/3, 1/3] is an attractor but not evolutionarily stable. Recall that the
Bishop-Cannings theorem forbids the occurrence of interior and boundary ESSs at the same time.
Another example is Eq. (44), where the ﬁxed point p∗is only an ESS for −16 < α < 3.5 At α = 3.5 it is
neutrally evolutionarily stable. For 3.5 < α < 6.5 the ﬁxed point is dynamically stable but not evolutionarily
stable.
Classiﬁcation of matrix game phase portraits
The complete classiﬁcation of possible replicator phase portraits for two-strategy games, where ∆2 is
one-dimensional, is easy and goes along with the classiﬁcation of Nash equilibria discussed in Sec. 2.4. The
three possible classes are shown in Fig. 7. In the Coordination Class the mixed strategy NE is an unstable
ﬁxed point of the replicator dynamics. Trajectories converge to one or the other pure strategy NEs, which
are both ESSs (cf. theorem (d) above). For the Anti-Coordination Class the interior (symmetric) NE is the
global attractor thus it is the unique ESS. In case of the Pure Dominance Class there is one pure strategy
ESS, which is again a global attractor.
A similar complete classiﬁcation in the case of three-strategy matrix games is more tedious (Hofbauer and Sigmund,
2003). In the generic case there are 19 diﬀerent phase portraits for the replicator dynamics (Zeeman, 1980),
and this number rises to about ﬁfty when degenerate cases are included (Bomze, 1983, 1995). In general
Zeeman’s classiﬁcation is based on counting the Nash equilibria: there can be at most one interior NE, three
NEs on the boundary faces, and three pure strategy NEs. An NE can be stable, unstable or a saddle point,
but topological rules only allow a limited combinations of these. Four possibilities from the 19,
A8 =





0 −1 −1
1
0
1
−1 1
0




,
A72 =





0 1 −1
−1 0 1
−1 1 0




,
A101 =





0 1 1
1 0 1
1 1 0




,
A−102 =





0 −3 −1
−3 0 −1
−1 −1 0




,
are shown in Fig. 8 (other classes have been show in Figs. 5 and 6). The subscript of A denotes the Zeeman
classiﬁcation code (Zeeman, 1980). In degenerate cases extended NE components can appear.
An important result is that no isolated limit cycles exist (Zeeman, 1980). Limit cycles can exist in de-
generate cases but then they occur in non-isolated families like for the Rock-Scissor-Paper game in Eq. (44)
with α = 6.5 as shown in Fig. 6.
Isolated limit cycles can exist in four-strategy games (and above), and there numerical simulations also
indicate the possible presence of chaotic attractors (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 2003). A complete taxonomy
of all possible behaviors (topologically distinct phase portraits) for more than three strategies seems rather
27

1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Fig. 8. Some possible ﬂow diagrams for three-strategy games. Upper left: Zeeman’s code 8; upper right: 72; lower left: 101;
lower right: −102. Red (blue) colors indicate fast (slow) ﬂow. Black (white) circles are stable (unstable) rest points. Figures
made by the simulation program “Dynamo” (Sandholm and Dokumaci, 2006).
hopeless and has not yet been given.
Classiﬁcation of bi-matrix game phase portraits
The generalization of the replicator dynamics for bi-matrix games is rather straightforward
˙ρi = ρi

(Aη)i −ρ · Aη

,
˙ηi = ηi

(Bρ)i −η · Bρ

.
(45)
where ρ and η denote the state of the two populations, respectively. (The Maynard Smith form in Eq.
(42) can be generalized similarly.) The relation between dynamic and evolutionary stability is somewhat
easier for bi-matrix than for matrix games. We have already seen that ESSs are strict NEs and vice versa.
As a set-wise extension of bi-matrix evolutionary stability we have introduced SESets. It turns out that
these concepts are exactly equivalent to asymptotic stability: In bi-matrix games a set of rest points of the
bi-matrix replicator dynamics Eq. (45) is an attractor if and only if it is a SESet (Cressman, 2003).
It can also be proven that the bi-matrix replicator ﬂow is incompressible, thus there can be no interior
attractor. Consequently, ESSs, if any, are necessarily pure strategies in bi-matrix games.
As an example consider the Owner-Intruder game, the bi-matrix (two-population) version of the traditional
Hawk-Dove game. All players in this game have a tag, they are either Owners or Intruders (of, say, a
territory). Both Owners and Intruders and can play two strategies: Hawk or Dove. The payoﬀmatrix is
equal to that of the Hawk-Dove game [see Eq. (A.2)], but the social connectivity is such that Owners only
play with Intruders and vice versa, thus it is a two-population game with a connectivity structure shown
in Fig. 2(b). In fact this is the simplest possible deviation from mean-ﬁeld connectivity in the Hawk-Dove
game, and as is shown by the ﬂow diagram in the upper left part of Fig. 9 this has strong consequences.
On the (ρ, η) plane, where ρ (η) is the ratio of Owners (Intruders) playing the Hawk strategy, the interior
ﬁxed point, which was an attractor for the original Hawk-Dove game, becomes now a saddle point. Losing
stability it is no longer an ESS. Instead the replicator dynamics ﬂows towards two possible pure strategy
pairs: either all Owners play Hawk and all Intruders play Dove, i.e., (ρ∗, η∗) = (1, 0) or vice versa, i.e.,
28

(ρ∗, η∗) = (0, 1). These strategy pairs, and only these, are evolutionarily stable.
B
TL
R
B
TL
R
B
TL
R
B
TL
R
Fig. 9. Archetypes of bi-matrix phase portraits in two-population games with the replicator dynamics. The players have two
options: T or B for the row player, and L or R for the column player. Upper left: Saddle Class, upper right: Center Class, lower
left: Corner Class, lower right: a degenerate case with α = 0. Red (blue) colors indicate fast (slow) ﬂow. Black (white) circles
are stable (unstable) rest points. Figures made by the simulation program “Dynamo” (Sandholm and Dokumaci, 2006).
It is possible to give a complete classiﬁcation of the diﬀerent phase portraits of bi-matrix games where
both players have two possible pure strategies (Cressman, 2003). Since the replicator dynamics is invariant
for adding constants to the columns of the payoﬀmatrices and interchanging strategies the bi-matrix can
be parameterized as
(A, BT ) =

(a, α) (0, 0)
(0, 0) (d, δ)

.
(46)
An interior NE exists if and only if ad > 0 and αδ > 0, and reads
(ρ∗
1, η∗
1) =

δ
α + δ ,
d
a + d

.
(47)
There are three generic cases:
Saddle Class [a, d, α, δ > 0]. The interior NE is a saddle point singularity. It is not an ESS. There are
two pure strategy attractors in opposite corners (both pairs are possible), which are ESSs. The bi-matrix
Coordination game and the Owner-Intruder game belong to this class. See the upper left panel of Fig. 9
for an illustration.
Center Class [a, d > 0, α, δ < 0] There is only one NE, the interior NE. It is a center-type singularity.
There are no ESSs. On the boundary the trajectory form a heteroclinic cycle. The trajectories do not
converge to an NE. The Buyer-Seller game or the Matching Pennies are typical examples. See the upper
right part of Fig. 9.
29

Corner Class [a < 0 < d, δ > 0, α ̸= 0] There is no interior NE. All trajectories converge to a unique ESS
in the corner. The Prisoner’s Dilemma game when played as a two-population game is in this class. See
the lower left part of Fig. 9.
In addition to the three generic cases there are degenerate cases when one or more of the four parameters
are zero. None of these contains an interior singularity, but many of these contain an extended NE component
which may be, but not necessarily, a SESet. We refer the interested reader to Cressman (2003) for details.
Practically interesting games like the Centipede game of Length Two or the Chain Store game belongs to
these degenerate cases. The latter is deﬁned by the payoﬀmatrix
(A, BT ) =

(0, 4)
(0, 4)
(2, 2) (−4, −4)

,
(48)
and the associated replicator ﬂow diagram with a SESet is illustrated in the lower right panel of Fig. 9.
3.4. Other game dynamics
A large number of diﬀerent population-level dynamics is discussed in the game theory literature. These
can be either derived rigorously from microscopic (i.e., agent-based) strategy update rules in the large
population limit (see Sec. 4.4), or they are simply posited as the starting point of the analysis on the aggregate
(population, macro) level. Many of these share important properties with the replicator dynamics, others
behave quite diﬀerently. An excellent recent review on the various game dynamics is Hofbauer and Sigmund
(2003).
There are two important dimensions along which macro (aggregate) dynamics can be classiﬁed: (1) being
innovative or non-innovative, and (2) being payoﬀmonotone or non-monotone. Innovative strategies have
the potential to introduce new strategies not currently present in the population, or revive formerly extinct
ones. Non-innovative dynamics maintain (sometimes diminish) the support of the strategy space. Payoﬀ
monotonicity, on the other hand, refers to the relative speed of the change of strategy frequencies. A dynamics
is payoﬀmonotone if for any two strategies i and j,
˙ρi
ρi
> ˙ρj
ρj
⇐⇒ui(ρ) > uj(ρ),
(49)
i.e., iﬀat any time strategies with higher payoﬀproliferate more rapidly than those with lower payoﬀ. By
these deﬁnitions, the Replicator dynamics is non-innovative and payoﬀmonotone. Although some dynamics
may not share all the qualitative properties of the replicator dynamics, it can be shown that when a dynamic
is payoﬀmonotone, the Folk theorem, discussed above, remains valid (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 2003).
Best Response Dynamics
A typical innovative dynamics is the Best Response dynamics: in each moment a small fraction of the
population updates her strategy, and chooses her best response (BR) to the current state ρ of the system,
leading to the dynamical equation
˙ρ = BR(ρ) −ρ.
(50)
Usually the game is such that in a large domain of the strategy simplex the best response is a unique (and
hence pure) strategy β. Then the solution of Eq. (50) is a linear orbit
ρ(t) = (1 −e−t)β + e−tρ0,
(51)
where ρ0 is the aggregate state of the population at t = 0. The solution tends towards β, but this is only
valid up to a ﬁnite time t′, when the actual best response suddenly jumps to another strategy β′. From this
time on the solution is another linear orbit tending towards β′, again up to another singular point, and so
on. The overall trajectory is composed of linear segments.
30

The Best Response dynamics can produce qualitatively diﬀerent behavior from the Replicator equation.
As an example (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 2003), consider the trajectories for the Rock-Scissors-Paper-type
game
A =





0 −1
b
b
0 −1
−1
b
0




,
(52)
with b = 0.55, as depicted in Fig. 10. This shows the appearance of a limit cycle, the so-called Shapley
triangle (Shapley, 1964) for the Best Response dynamics, but not for the Replicator equation.
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Fig. 10. Trajectories predicted by Eqs. (41), (50) and (53) for the game Eq. (52) with b = 0.55. Upper panel: Replicator equation
with a repulsive ﬁxed point; lower left: Best Response dynamics with a stable limit cycle; lower right: Logit dynamics with
K = 0.1 showing an attractive ﬁxed point.
Logit Dynamics
A generalization of the Best Response dynamics for bounded rationality is the Logit dynamics (Smoothed
Best Response), deﬁned as (Fudenberg and Levine, 1998)
˙ρi =
exp [ui(ρ)/K]
P
j exp [uj(ρ)/K] −ρi.
(53)
In the limit when the noise parameter K →0, we get back the Best Response equation (50). Again, the
Logit dynamics may produce rather diﬀerent qualitative results than other dynamics. For the game in Eq.
(52) with b = 0.55 the system goes through a Hopf bifurcation when K is varied. There is a critical value
Kc ≈0.07 below which the interior ﬁxed point is unstable and a limit cycle develops, whereas above Kc the
ﬁxed point becomes attractive (see Fig. 10).
Adaptive Dynamics
31

All dynamics discussed so far model how strategies compete with each other on shorter time scales. Given
the initial composition of the population a possible outcome is that one of the strategies drives out all others
and prevails in the system. However, when this strategy is not an ESS it is unstable against the attack of
some superior mutants (not present originally in the population). Adaptive Dynamics (Metz et al., 1996;
Dieckmann and Metz, 1996; Geritz et al., 1997; Nowak and Sigmund, 2004) models the situation when the
mutation rate is low and possible mutants only diﬀer slightly from residents. Under these conditions the
dynamic behavior is governed by short transient periods when a successful mutant conquers the system,
separated by long periods of relative tranquility with unsuccessful invasion attempts by inferior mutations.
By each successful invasion event, whose details are not modeled, the deﬁning parameters of the prevailing
strategy change a little. The process can be modeled on longer time scales as a smooth dynamics in strategy
space. It is usually assumed that the ﬂow points into the direction of the most favorable local strategy, i.e.,
the actual monomorphic strategy s(t) of the population satisﬁes
˙s = ∂u(q, s)
∂q

q=s
(54)
where now u(q, s) is the payoﬀof a q-strategist in a homogeneous population of s-strategists. Adaptive
dynamics may not converge to a ﬁxed point (limit cycles are possible), and even if it converges, the attractor
may not be an ESS (Nowak and Sigmund, 2004). Counterintuitively, Adaptive Dynamics can lead to a
ﬁtness minimum, where a monomorphic population becomes unstable and split into two, providing a theory
of evolutionary branching and speciation (Geritz et al., 1997; Nowak and Sigmund, 2004).
4. Evolutionary games: agent-based dynamics
What we used in the former section for the description of the state of the population was a population-
level (macro-level, aggregate-level) description. This speciﬁed the state of the population and its dynamic
evolution in terms of a small number of strategy frequencies. Such a macroscopic description is adequate, if
the social network is mean-ﬁeld-like and the number of agents is very large. However, when these premises are
not fulﬁlled, a more detailed, lower-level analysis is required. Such a lower-level approach is usually termed
“agent-based”, since on this level the basic units of the theory are the individual agents themselves. The
agent-level dynamics of the system is usually deﬁned by strategy update rules, which describe how the agents
perceive their surrounding environment, what information they acquire, what believes and expectations they
form from former experience, and how this all translates into strategy updates during the game. These rules
can mimic genetically coded Darwinian selection or boundedly rational human learning, both aﬀected by
possible mistakes. When games are played on a graph, the update rule may not only concern a strategy
change alone, but a reorganization of the agent’s local network structure, too.
These update rules can also be viewed as “meta-strategies”, as they represent strategies about strategies.
The distinction between strategies and meta-strategies is somewhat arbitrary, and is only justiﬁed if there is
a hierarchic relation between them. This is usually assumed, i.e., the given update rule is utilized much more
rarely in the repeated game than the basic stage-game strategies. A strategy update has low probability
during the game. Roca et al. (2006) have discussed the signiﬁcant consequences when varying the ratio of
time scales between payoﬀrefreshment and strategy update. Also, while players can use diﬀerent strategies
in the stage games, we usually posit that all players use the same update rule in the population. Note that
these assumptions may not be justiﬁed in certain situations.
There is a huge variety of microscopic update rules deﬁned and applied in the game theory literature.
There is no general law of nature which would dictate such behavioral rules: even though we call these rules
“microscopic”, they, in fact, emerge as simpliﬁed phenomenological rules of an even more fundamental layer
of mechanisms describing the operation of the human psyche. The actual choice of the update rule depends
very much on the concrete problem under consideration.
Strategy updates in the population may be synchronized or randomly sequential in the social graph.
Some of these rules are generically stochastic, some others are deterministic, sometimes with small stochastic
components representing random mutations (experimentation). Furthermore, there exist many diﬀerent ways
32

how the strategy change is determined by the local environment. In many cases the strategy choice for a
given player depends on the payoﬀdiﬀerences of her payoﬀand her neighbors’ payoﬀs. This diﬀerence may
be determined by a one-shot game between the confronting players (see, e.g., the spatial Rock-Scissors-Paper
games), by a summation of the stage game payoﬀs over all neighbors, or perhaps these summed payoﬀs are
accumulated over some time with a weighing factor decreasing with the time elapsed. Usually the rules are
myopic, i.e., optimization is based on the current state of the population without anticipating possible future
alterations. We will mostly concentrate on memoryless (Markovian) systems, where the evolutionary rule is
determined by the current payoﬀs. A well-known exception, which we do not discuss here, is the Minority
game, which was covered in ample detail in two recent books by Challet et al. (2004) and by Coolen (2005).
In the following we consider a system with equivalent players distributed on the site of a lattice (or graph).
The player at site x follows one of the Q pure strategies characterized by a set of Q-component unit vectors,
sx =


1...
0

, · · · ,


0...
1

.
(55)
The income of player x comes from the same symmetric two-person stage game with her neighbors. In
this case her total income can be expressed as
Ux =
X
y∈Ωx
sx · Asy,
(56)
where the summation runs over agent x’s neighbors y ∈Ωx deﬁned by the connectivity structure.
For any strategy distribution {sx} the total income of the system is given as
U =
X
x
Ux =
X
x,y∈Ωx
sx · Asy .
(57)
Notice that for potential games (Aij = Aji) this formula is analogous to the (negative) energy of an Ising-
type model. In the simplest case (Q = 2), if Aij = −δij then U is equivalent to the Hamiltonian of the
ferromagnetic Ising model where spins positioned on a lattice can point upward or downward. Within the
lattice gas formalism the up and down spins are equivalent to occupied and empty sites, respectively. These
models are widely used to describe ordering processes in two-component solid solutions (Kittel, 2004). The
generalization for higher Q is straightforward. The energy of the Q-state Potts model can be reproduced by
a Q × Q unit matrix (Wu, 1982). Consequently, for certain types of dynamical rules, evolutionary potential
games become equivalent to many-particle systems, whose investigations by the tools of statistical physics
are very successful [for a textbook see e.g. Chandler (1987)].
The exploration of the possible dynamic update rules has resulted in an extremely wide variety of models,
which cannot be surveyed completely. In the following, we focus our attention on some of the most relevant
and/or popular rules appearing in the literature.
4.1. Synchronized update
Strategy revision opportunities can arrive synchronously or asynchronously for the agents. In spatial
models the diﬀerence between synchronous and asynchronous update is enhanced, because these processes
yield fundamentally diﬀerent spatio-temporal patterns and general behavior (Huberman and Glance, 1993).
In synchronous update the whole population updates simultaneously in discrete time steps, giving rise to a
discrete-time dynamics on the macro level. This is the kind of update used in cellular automata. Synchronous
update is applied, for instance, in biological models, when generations are clearly discernible in time, or when
seasonal eﬀects synchronize metabolic and reproductive processes. Synchronous update may be relevant for
some other systems, as well, where appropriate time delays enforce neighboring players to modify their
strategy with respect to the same current time surrounding.
Cellular automata can well represent those evolutionary games, where the players are located on the sites
of a lattice. The generalization to arbitrary networks (Abramson and Kuperman, 2001; Masuda and Aihara,
33

2003; Duran and Mulet, 2005) is straightforward and not detailed here. At discrete time steps (t = 0, 1, 2, . . .)
each player refreshes her strategy simultaneously according to a deterministic rule, depending on the state
of the neighborhood. For evolutionary games this rule is usually determined by the payoﬀs in Eq. (56).
For example, in the model suggested by Nowak and May (1992) each player adopts the strategy of those
neighbors (including herself) who achieved the highest income in the last round.
Spatio-temporal patterns (or behaviors) occurring in these cellular automata can be classiﬁed into four
distinct classes (Wolfram, 1983, 1984, 2002). In Class 1 the evolution leads exactly to the same uniform ﬁnal
pattern (called frequently a “ﬁxed point” or an “absorbing state”) from almost all initial states. In Class 2
the system can develop into many diﬀerent states built up from a certain set of simple local structures that
either remain unchanged or repeat themselves after a few steps (limit cycles). The behavior becomes more
complicated in Class 3, where the time-dependent patterns exhibits random elements. Finally, in Class 4
the time-dependent patterns involve high complexity (mixture of some order and randomness) and certain
features of these nested patterns exhibit power law behavior. The best known example belonging to this
universality class is the Game of Life invented by John Conway. This two-dimensional cellular automaton
has a lot of localized structures (called animals that can blink, move, collide, come to life, etc.) as discussed
in detail by Gardner (1970) and Sigmund (1993). Killingback and Doebeli (1998) have shown that the game
theoretical construction suggested by Nowak and May (1992) exhibits complex dynamics with long range
correlations between states in both time and space. This is a characteristic feature in Class 4.
A cellular automaton rule deﬁnes the new strategy for every player as a function of the strategy distribution
in her neighborhood. For the Nowak-May model the spatio-temporal behavior remains qualitatively the
same within a given range of payoﬀparameters, while larger variations of these parameters can modify
substantially the behavior and can even put it into another class. In Section 6.5, we will demonstrate
explicitly the consecutive transitions occurring in the model.
Cellular automaton rules may involve stochastic elements. In this case, while preserving synchronicity,
the update rule deﬁnes the probability to take one of the possible states for each site. In general, stochastic
rules destroy states belonging to Classes 2 and 4. This extension can also cause additional non-equilibrium
phase transitions (Kinzel, 1985).
Agent heterogeneity can also be included. In the stochastic cellular automaton model suggested by
Lim et al. (2002) each player has an acceptance level δx chosen randomly from a region −∆< δx < ∆
at her birth, and the best strategy of the neighborhood is accepted if Ux < δx + max(Uy), y ∈Ωx. This type
of stochasticity can largely aﬀect the behavior.
There is a direct way to make a cellular automaton stochastic (Mukherji et al., 1996; Tomochi and Kono,
2002). If the prescription of the local deterministic rule is accepted at each site with probability µ, while
the site remains in the previous state with probability 1 −µ, the parameter µ characterizes the degree of
synchronization. This update rule reproduces the original cellular automaton for µ = 1, whereas for µ < 1
it leads to stochastic update. This type of stochastic cellular automata allows us to study the continuous
transition from deterministic synchronized update to random sequential evolution (limit µ →0).
The eﬀects of weak noise, 1 −µ << 1, have been studied from diﬀerent points of view. Mukherji et al.
(1996) and Abramson and Kuperman (2001) demonstrated that a small amount of noise can prevent the
system to fall into a ”frozen” state characteristic of Class 2. The sparsely occurring ”errors” are capable
of initiating avalanches, which transform the system into another meta-stable state. Under some conditions
the size distribution of these avalanches exhibits power-law behavior, at least for some parameter regions,
as reported by Lim et al. (2002); Holme et al. (2003). Details of the frozen patterns and the avalanches are
discussed in detail by Zimmermann and Egu´ıluz (2005).
4.2. Random sequential update
The other basic update mechanism is asynchronous update. In many real social systems the players modify
their strategies independently of each other. For these systems random sequential (asynchronous) update
gives a more appropriate description. One possibility is that in each time step one agent at random is selected
from the population. Thus the probability per time of updating a given agent is λ = 1/N. Alternatively,
34

each agent may possess an independent “Poisson clock”, which “rings” for update according to a Poisson
process at rate λ. These assumptions assure that the simultaneous update of more than one agents has zero
probability, and thus in each moment the macroscopic state of the population can only change a little. In the
inﬁnite population limit asynchronous update leads to smooth, continuous dynamics as we will see in Sec.
4.4. Asynchronous strategy revisions are appropriate for overlapping generations in the Darwinian selection
context. Also they are more typical in economics applications.
In the case of random sequential update the central object of the agent-level description is the individual
transition rate w(s →s′) which denotes the conditional probability per unit time that an agent, given the
opportunity to update, ﬂips from strategy s to s′. Clearly, this should satisfy the sum rule
X
s′
w(s →s′) = λ
(58)
(s′ = s included in the sum). In population games the individual transition rate only depends on the
macroscopic state of the population w(s →s′) = w(s →s′; ρ). In network games the rate depends on the
other agents’ actual state in the neighborhood, including their current strategies or payoﬀs w(sx →s′
x) =
w(sx →s′
x; {sy, uy}y∈Ωx). In theory the transition probabilities could also depend explicitly on time (the
round of the game), or on the complex history of the game, etc., but we usually disregard these possibilities.
4.3. Microscopic update rules
In the following we enlist some of the most representative microscopic rules, based on replication, imita-
tion, and learning.
Mutation and experimentation
The simplest case is when the individual transition probability is independent of the state of the other
agents. Strategy change arises due to intrinsic mechanisms with no inﬂuence from the rest of the population.
The prototypical example is mutation in biology. The similar mechanism is often called experimentation in
economics contexts. It is customary to assume that mutation probabilities are payoﬀ-independent constants
w(s →s′) = css′.
(59)
such that the sum rule in Eq. (58) is satisﬁed.
If mutation is the only dynamic mechanism without any other selective force, it leads to spontaneous
genetic drift (random walk) in the state space. If the population is ﬁnite there is a ﬁnite probability that
a strategy becomes extinct by pure chance (Drossel, 2001). Drift usually has less relevance in large popula-
tions [for exceptions see, e.g., Traulsen et al. (2006c)], but becomes an important issue in the case of new
mutants. Initially mutant agents are small in numbers, and even if the mutation is beneﬁcial, the probability
of ﬁxation (i.e., reaching a macroscopic number in the population) is less that one, because the mutation
may be lost by random drift.
Imitation
Imitation processes form a wide class of microscopic update rules. The essence of imitation is that the
agent who has the opportunity to revise her strategy takes over the strategy of one of the fellow players with
some probability. The strategy of the fellow player remains intact; it only plays a catalyzing role. Imitation
cannot introduce a new strategy which is not yet played in the population; this rule is non-innovative.
Imitation processes can diﬀer in two respects: whom to imitate and with what probability. The standard
procedure is to choose the agent to imitate at random from the neighborhood. In the mean-ﬁeld case
this means a random partner from the whole population. The imitation probability may depend on the
information available for the agent. The rule can be diﬀerent if only the strategies used by the neighbors
are known, or if both the strategies and their resulting last-round (or accumulated) payoﬀs are available
35

for inspection. In the ﬁrst case the agent should decide only knowing her own payoﬀ. Rules in this case are
similar in spirit to the Win-Stay-Lose-Shift rules that we discuss later on.
In the case when both strategies and payoﬀcan be compared, one of the simplest imitation rules is Imitate
if Better. Agent x with strategy sx takes over the strategy of another agent y, chosen randomly from x’s
neighborhood Ωx, iﬀy’s strategy has yielded higher payoﬀ, otherwise the original strategy is maintained. If
we denote the set of neighbors of agent x who play strategy s by Ωx(s) ⊆Ωx, the individual transition rate
for s′
x ̸= sx can be written as
w(sx →s′
x) =
λ
|Ωx|
X
y∈Ωx(s′x)
θ[Uy −Ux],
(60)
where θ is the Heaviside function, λ > 0 is an arbitrary constant, and |Ωx| is the number of neighbors. In
the mean-ﬁeld case (population game) this simpliﬁes to
w(sx →s′
x) = λ ρs′xθ[U(s′
x) −U(sx)].
(61)
Imitation rules are more realistic if they take into consideration the actual payoﬀdiﬀerences between the
original and the imitated strategies. Along this line, an update rule with nice dynamical properties, as we
will see, is Schlag’s Proportional Imitation (Helbing, 1998; Schlag, 1998, 1999). In this case another agent’s
strategy in the neighborhood is imitated with a probability proportional to the payoﬀdiﬀerence, provided
that the new payoﬀis higher than the old one:
w(sx →s′
x) =
λ
|Ωx|
X
y∈Ωx(s′x)
max[Uy −Ux, 0].
(62)
Imitation only occurs if the target strategy is more successful, and in this case its rate goes linearly with
the payoﬀdiﬀerence. For later convenience we give again the mean-ﬁeld rates
w(sx →s′
x) = λ ρs′x max[U(s′
x) −U(sx), 0].
(63)
Proportional imitation does not allow for an inferior strategy to replace a more successful one. Update
rules which forbid this are usually called payoﬀmonotone. However, payoﬀmonotonicity is frequently broken
in case of bounded rationality, and a strategy may be imitated with some ﬁnite probability even if it has
produced lower payoﬀin earlier rounds. A possible general form of Smoothed Imitation is
w(sx →s′
x) =
λ
|Ωx|
X
y∈Ωx(s′x)
g(Uy −Ux)
(64)
where g is a monotonically increasing smoothing function, for instance,
g(∆u) =
1
1 + exp(−∆u/K).
(65)
where K can measure the extent of noise.
Imitation rules can be generalized to the case when the entire neighborhood is monitored simultaneously
and plays a collective catalyzing role. Denoting by ¯Ωx = {x, Ωx} the neighborhood which includes agent x
as well, a possible form used by Nowak et al. (1994a,b) and their followers (e.g., (Alonso-Sanz et al., 2001;
Masuda and Aihara, 2003)) for the Prisoner’s Dilemma is
w(sx →s′
x) = λ
P
y∈¯Ωx(s′
x) g(Uy)
P
y∈¯Ωx g(Uy)
.
(66)
where again g(U) is an arbitrary positive smoothing function, and the sum in the numerator is limited to
agents in the neighborhood who pursue the target strategy s′
x. Nowak et al. (1994a,b) considered g(z) = zk
(z > 0). This choice reproduces the deterministic rule Imitate the Best (in the neighborhood) in the limit
k →∞. Most of their analysis, however, focused on the linear version k = 1. When k < ∞this rule is not
36

payoﬀmonotone, but assures in general that strategies which perform better on average in the neighborhood
have higher chances to be imitated.
All types of imitation rules have the possibility to reach a homogeneous state sooner or later when the sys-
tem size is ﬁnite. Once the homogeneous state is reached the system remains there forever, that is, evolution
stops. Homogeneous strategy distributions are absorbing states for imitative behavior. The time to reach
one of the absorbing states, however, increases very rapidly with the system size. With a small mutation rate
added, the homogeneous states cease to remain steady states, and the dynamical process becomes ergodic.
Moran process
Although imitation seems to be a conscious decision process, the underlying mathematical structure
may emerge in dynamic processes which have nothing to do with higher level consciousness. Consider,
for instance, the Moran process, which is biology’s prototype dynamic update rule for asexual (haploid)
replication (Moran, 1962; Nowak et al., 2004). At each time step, one individual is chosen for reproduction
with a probability proportional to its ﬁtness. (In the game theory context ﬁtness can be the payoﬀor a
non-negative, monotonic function of the payoﬀ.) An identical oﬀspring (clone) is produced, which replaces
another individual. In the mean-ﬁeld case this latter is chosen randomly from the population. The population
size N remains constant. Update in the population is asynchronous.
The overall result of the Moran process is that one individual of a constant population forgoes her strategy,
and instead takes over the strategy of another agent with a probability proportional to the relative abundance
of that strategy. The Moran process can be viewed as a kind of imitation. Formally, in the mean-ﬁeld case,
the individual transition rates read
w(sx →s′
x) = λ ρs′
x
U(s′
x)
¯U
,
(67)
where ¯U = P
s ρsU(s) is the average ﬁtness of the population. The right hand side is simply the frequency
of s′-strategists, weighted by their relative ﬁtness. This is formally the rule Eq. (66) with g(z) = z.
The Moran process is investigated recently by Nowak et al. (2004); Taylor et al. (2004); Wild and Taylor
(2005); Antal and Scheuring (2006); Traulsen et al. (2006b) to determine the size-dependence of the relax-
ation time and the extinction probability characterizing how the system reaches a homogeneous absorbing
state via random ﬂuctuations. An explicit mean-ﬁeld description in the form of Fokker-Planck equation was
derived and studied by (Traulsen et al., 2005, 2006a).
Better and Best Response
Imitation dynamics, including the Moran process, considered thus far are all non-innovative dynamics,
which cannot introduce new strategies into the population. If a strategy becomes extinct, a non-innovative
rule cannot revive it. In contrast with this, dynamics which can introduce new strategies are called innovative.
One of the most important innovative dynamics is the Best Response rule. This assumes that agents,
when they get a revision opportunity, adopt their best possible strategy (best response) to the current
strategy distribution of the neighborhood. The Best Response rule is myopic, agents have no memory and
do not worry about the long run consequences of their strategy choice. Nevertheless, best response require
more cognitive abilities than imitation: (1) the agent should be aware of the distribution of the co-players’
strategies, and (2) should fully know the conceivable strategy options. Note that these may not be realistic
assumptions in complicated real-life situations.
Denoting by s−x the current strategy proﬁle of the population in the neighborhood of agent x, and by
BR(s−x) the set of the agent’s best replies to s−x, the Best Response rule can be formally written as
w(sx →s′
x) ∼



λ/|BR| if s′
x ∈BR(s−x),
0
if s′
x /∈BR(s−x)
(68)
where |BR| is the number of possible best replies (there may be more than one).
37

The player may not be able to assess the distribution of strategies in the population (neighborhood), but
may remember the ones confronted with in earlier rounds. Such setup leads to Fictitious Play, a prototype
dynamic rule studied already in the 50s (Brown, 1951), in which best response is given to the overall empirical
distribution of former rounds.
Bounded rationality may also imply that the agent is only able to consider a limited set of opportunities
and optimize within this set (Better Response). For instance, in the case of continuous strategy spaces,
taking a small step in the direction of the local payoﬀgradient is called Gradient Dynamics. The new
strategy adopted is
s′
x = sx + ∂U(sx, s−x)
∂sx
∆sx.
(69)
which improves the player’s payoﬀby a small amount.
In many cases it is reasonable to assume that the strategy update is a stochastic process, and instead of a
sharp Best Response a smoothed rule is posited. In Smoothed Best Response the transition rates are usually
written as
w(sx →s′
x) = λ
g[U(s′
x; s−x)]
P
s′′
x∈Sx g [U(s′′x; s−x)]
(70)
where g is a monotonically increasing positive smoothing function assuring that better strategies have more
chance to be adopted. A typical choice, as will be discussed in the next Section, is when g takes the Boltzman
form
w(sx →s′
x) = λ
exp[U(s′
x; s−x)/K]
P
s′′
x∈Sx exp[U(s′′x; s−x)/K].
(71)
This rule is usually called the “Logit rule” or the “Log-linear rule” in the game theory literature (Blume,
1993).
Smoothed Best Response is not payoﬀmonotone, and is very similar in form to smoothed imitation in Eq.
(66). The major diﬀerence is the extent of the strategy space: imitation only considers strategies actually
played in the social neighborhood, whereas the variants of the best response rules challenge the agent’s all
feasible strategies, even if they are not played in the population.
Smoothed Best Response can describe a myopic player who is capable of estimating the variation of her
own payoﬀupon a strategy change while assuming that the neighbors’ strategies remain unchanged. Such a
player always adopts (rejects) the advantageous (disadvantageous) strategy in the limit K →0 but makes
a boundedly rational (noisy) decision with some probability of mistaking when K > 0. The rule in Eq.
(71) may also model a situation in which players are rational but payoﬀs have a small hidden idiosyncratic
random component or when gathering perfect information about decision alternatives is costly (Blume, 2003;
Blume and Durlauf, 2003; Helbing, 1996). All these features together can be handled mathematically by the
“temperature” parameter K.
Such dynamical rules were used by Ebel and Bornholdt (2002) in the consideration of the Prisoner’s
Dilemma, by Sysi-Aho et al. (2005) who studied an evolutionary Snow-drift game, and by Blume (1993,
1998, 2003); Blume and Durlauf (2003) in Coordination games.
Win-Stay-Lose-Shift
When the co-players’ payoﬀs are unobservable, the player should decide about a new strategy in the
knowledge of her own payoﬀs realized earlier in the game. She may have an “aspiration level”: when her last
round payoﬀ(or payoﬀs averaged over a number of rounds) is below this aspiration level, she shifts over to
a new strategy, otherwise she stays with the original one. The new (target) strategy can be imitated from
the neighborhood or chosen randomly from the agent’s own strategy set.
This is the philosophy behind the Win-Stay-Lose-Shift rules. These rules have been frequently discussed
in connection with the Prisoner’s Dilemma, where there are four possible payoﬀvalues S < P < R < T in a
stage game (see Appendix A.7). If the aspiration level is set between the second and third payoﬀvalues, and
38

only the last round payoﬀis considered (no averaging), we obtain the so-called “Pavlov rule” [also called
“Pavlov strategy”, when considered as an elementary (non-meta) strategy]. The individual transition rate
can be written as
w(sx →¯sx) = λ Θ(a −Ux);
P < a < R,
(72)
where a is the aspiration level, sx = C, D and ¯sx = D, C (the opposite of s), respectively. Pavlov is known
to beat Tit-for-Tat in a noisy environment (Nowak and Sigmund, 1993). In the spatial versions the Pavlov
rule was used by Fort and Viola (2005), who observed that the size distribution of C (or D) strategy clusters
follows power-law scaling.
Other aspiration levels, with or without averaging, deﬁne other variants of the Win-Stay-Lose-Shift class
of (meta-)strategies. The set of these rules can be extended by allowing a dynamic change of the aspiration
level, as it appears frequently in human and animal examples (Colman, 1995). These strategies involve a
way how the aspiration level changes step by step knowing the previous payoﬀs. For example, the so-called
Yesterday strategy repeats the previous action if, and only if, the payoﬀis at least as good as in the previous
round (Posch et al., 1999). Other versions of these strategies are discussed in (Posch, 1999).
4.4. From micro to macro dynamics in population games
The individual transition rates introduced in the former section can be used to formulate the dynamics in
terms of a master equation. This is especially convenient in the mean-ﬁeld case, i.e., for population games.
For random sequential update in each inﬁnitesimal time interval there is at most one agent who considers
a strategy change. When the change is accepted, the old strategy i is replaced by a new strategy j, thereby
decreasing the number of players pursuing i by one, and increasing the number of players pursuing j by one
in the population. These processes are called Q-type birth-death Markov processes (Blume, 1998; Gardiner,
2004), where Q is the number of diﬀerent strategies in the game.
Let ni denote the number of i-strategists in the population, and
n = {n1, n2, . . . , nQ},
X
i
ni = N,
(73)
the macroscopic conﬁguration of the system. We introduce n(jk) as a shorthand for the conﬁguration
(Helbing, 1996, 1998)
n(jk) = {n1, n2, . . . , nj −1, . . . , nk + 1, . . . , nQ},
(74)
which diﬀers from n by the elementary process of changing one j-strategist into a k-strategist. The time-
dependent probability density over conﬁgurations, P(n, t), satisﬁes the master equation
dP(n, t)
dt
=
X
n′
[P(n′, t)W(n′ →n) −P(n, t)W(n →n′)] .
(75)
where W(n →n′) is the conﬁgurational transition rate. The ﬁrst (second) term represents the inﬂow
(outﬂow) into (from) conﬁguration n. This form assumes that the update rule is a Markov process with no
memory. [For a generalized master equation with a memory eﬀect see, e.g., Helbing (1998)].
The conﬁgurational transition rates can be calculated from the individual transition rates. Notice that
W(n →n′) is only nonzero if n′ = n(jk) with some j and k, and in this case it is proportional to the number
of j strategists nj in the population. Thus we can write the conﬁgurational rates as
W(n →n′) =
X
j,k
nj w(j →k; n) δn′,n(jk).
(76)
The master equation in Eq. (75) describes the dynamics of the conﬁgurational probabilities. Knowing the
actual state of the population in a given time means that the probability distribution P(n, t) is extremely
39

sharp (delta function). This initial probability density becomes wider and wider as time elapses. When
the population is large, this widening is slow enough such that a deterministic approximation can give
a satisfactory description. The temporal trajectory of the mean strategy densities, i.e., the state vector
ρ ∈∆Q obeys a deterministic, continuous-time, ﬁrst-order ordinary diﬀerential equation (Helbing, 1996,
1998; Benaim and Weibull, 2003).
In order to show this, we deﬁne the (time-dependent) average value of a quantity f as ⟨f⟩= P
n f(n)P(n, t).
Following Helbing (1998), we express the time derivative of ⟨ni⟩from the master equation as
d⟨ni⟩
dt
=
X
n,n′
(n′
i −ni)W(n →n′)P(n, t).
(77)
Using Eq. (76) we get
d⟨ni⟩
dt
=
X
n,j,k

n(jk)
i
−ni

njw(j →k; n)P(n, t)
=
X
n,j
[njw(j →i; n) −niw(i →j; n)] P(n, t)
(78)
where we have used that n(jk)
i
−ni = δik −δij.
Equation (78) is exact. However, to get a closed equation which only contains mean values an approxi-
mation should be made. When the probability distribution is narrow enough, we can write
⟨niw(i →j; n)⟩≈⟨ni⟩w(i →j; ⟨n⟩).
(79)
This approximation leads to the approximate mean value equation for the strategy frequencies ρi(t) = ⟨ni⟩/N
(Weidlich, 1991; Helbing, 1998, 1996; Benaim and Weibull, 2003):
dρi(t)
dt
=
X
j
[ρj(t)w(j →i; ρ) −ρi(t)w(i →j; ρ)] .
(80)
This equation can be used to derive the macroscopic dynamic equations from the microscopic update
rules. Take, for instance, Proportional Imitation in Eq. (63). Equation (80) then gives
dρi(t)
dt
=
X
j∈S−
ρjρi(ui −uj) −
X
j∈S+
ρiρj(uj −ui)
(81)
where S+ (S−) denotes the set of strategies superior (inferior) to strategy i. It can be readily checked that
this leads to
dρi(t)
dt
= λρi(ui −¯u)
¯u =
X
j
ρjuj
(82)
where ¯u is the average payoﬀin the population. This is exactly the replicator dynamics in the Taylor-Jonker
form, Eq. (41).
If the microscopic rule is chosen to be the Moran process, Eq. (67), the approximate mean value equation
leads instead to the Maynard-Smith form of the replicator equation, Eq. (42). Similarly, the Best Response
rule in Eq. (68) or the Logit rule in Eq. (71) lead to the corresponding macroscopic counterparts in Eqs.
(50) and (53).
Since Eq. (80) is only approximate, the actual behavior in a large but ﬁnite population will eventually
deviate from the solution of Eq. (80). Going beyond the approximate mean value equation requires a Taylor
expansion of the right hand side of Eq. (78), and leads to an inﬁnite hierarchy of coupled equations involving
higher moments. This hierarchy should be truncated by an appropriate decoupling scheme. The simplest
40

(second order) approximation beyond Eq. (80) yields two coupled equations: one for the mean and one for
the covariance ⟨ninj⟩t (Weidlich, 1991; Helbing, 1998, 1996) [for an alternative approach see Binmore et al.
(1995)].
4.5. Potential games and the kinetic Ising model
The kinetic Ising model, introduced by Glauber (1963), exempliﬁes how a static spin model can be ex-
tended by a dynamic rule such that the dynamics drives the system towards the thermodynamic equilibrium
characterized by Boltzmann probabilities.
In Glauber dynamics the following steps are repeated: (1) choose a site (player) x at random; (2) choose
a possible spin state (strategy) s′
x at random; 3) change the conﬁguration s = {sx, s−x} to s′ = {s′
x, s−x}
with a probability
W(s →s′) =
1
1 + exp(−∆E(s, s′)/K),
(83)
where ∆E(s, s′) = E(s′)−E(s) is the change in energy of the system with respect to the initial and ﬁnal spin
conﬁgurations. The parameter K is the “temperature” which measures the extent of noise. Traulsen et al.
(2007a,b); Perc (2006) have shown that the stochastic evaluation of payoﬀs can be interpreted as an increased
temperature. Notice that w(sx →s′
x) →1 (0) if ∆E >> K (∆E << K ) as illustrated in Fig. 11. In the
K →0 limit the dynamics becomes deterministic.
-5K
-4K
-3K
-2K
-K
0
K
2K
3K
4K
5K
∆E
0.5
1
W(∆E)
Fig. 11. Transition probability (83) as a function of ∆E provides a smooth transition from 0 to 1 within a region comparable
to K.
Glauber dynamics allows one-site spin ﬂips with a probability depending on the energy diﬀerence ∆E
between the ﬁnal and initial states. The equilibrium distribution P(s) of this stochastic process is known to
satisfy the condition of detailed balance (Glauber, 1963; Kawasaki, 1972)
W(s →s′) P(s) = W(s′ →s) P(s′).
(84)
In equilibrium there is no net probability current ﬂowing between any two microscopic states connected by
the dynamics. If the detailed balance is satisﬁed, the equilibrium can be calculated trivially: independently
of the initial state, the dynamics drives the system towards a limit distribution in which the probability of
a given spin conﬁguration s is given by the Boltzmann distribution at temperature K,
P(s) =
exp(−E(s)/K)
P
s′ exp(−E(s′)/K) .
(85)
The equilibrium distribution in Eq. (85) can be reached by other transition rates as well. The only
requirement following from the detailed balance condition Eq. (84) is that the ratio of forward and backward
transitions should be
W(s →s′)
W(s′ →s) = exp(−∆E(s, s′)/K).
(86)
41

Equation (83) corresponds to one of the standard choices with single spin ﬂips, where the sum of the forward
and backward transition probabilities equal to 1, but this choice is largely arbitrary. Alternative dynamics
may even allow two spin exchanges (Kawasaki, 1972).
We remind the readers that Glauber dynamics favors elementary processes reducing the total energy in the
model, while the contact with the heat reservoir provides an average energy depending on the temperature
K. In other words, this dynamics drives the system into a (maximally disordered) macroscopic state where
the entropy
S = −
X
s
P(s) ln P(s); ,
(87)
reaches its maximum, if the average energy is ﬁxed. The mathematical details of this approach are well
described in many books [see e.g., Chandler (1987); Haken (1988)].
Glauber dynamics, as introduced above, deﬁnes a simple stochastic rule whose limit distribution (equi-
librium) turns out to be the Boltzmann distribution. In the following we will show that the Logit rule, as
deﬁned in Eq. (71), is equivalent to Glauber dynamics when the game has a potential (Blume, 1993, 1995,
1998). In order to prove this we have to show two things: the ratio of forward and backward transitions
satisfy Eq. (86) with a suitable energy function E, and the detailed balance condition Eq. (84) is indeed
satisﬁed.
The ﬁrst is easy: for the Logit rule, Eq. (71), the ratio of forward and backward transitions reads
W(s →s′)
W(s′ →s) = w(sx →s′
x)
w(s′x →sx) = exp(∆Ux/K).
(88)
If the game has a potential V then Eq. (8) assures that
∆Ux = Ux(s′
x, s−x) −Ux(sx, s−x)
= V (s′
x, s−x) −V (sx, s−x).
(89)
Thus if we deﬁne the “energy function” as E({sx}) = −V ({sx}) then Eq. (86) is formally satisﬁed.
As for the detailed balance requirement what we have to check is Kolmogorov’s Criterion (Freidlin and Wentzell,
1984; Blume, 1998; Kelly, 1979): detailed balance is satisﬁed if and only if the product of forward transi-
tion probabilities equals to the product of backward transition probabilities along each possible closed loop
L : s(1) →s(2) →. . . →s(L) →s(1) in the state space, i.e.,
RL =
W(s(1) →s(2))
W(s(2) →s(1))
W(s(2) →s(3))
W(s(3) →s(2)) × . . . W(s(L) →s(1))
W(s(1) →s(L)) = 1.
(90)
Fortunately, it suﬃces to check the criterion for one-agent three-cycles and two-agent four-cycles: each closed
loop can be built up from these elementary building blocks.
For one-agent three-cycles L3 : sx →s′
x →s′′
x →sx (with no change in the other agents’ strategies) the
Logit rule satisﬁes trivially the criterion:
RL3 = exp
Ux(s′
x, s−x) −Ux(sx, s−x)
K

exp
Ux(s′′
x, s−x) −Ux(s′
x, s−x)
K

×
exp
Ux(sx, s−x) −Ux(s′′
x, s−x)
K

= 1,
(91)
even if the game has no potential. However, the existence of a potential is essential for the elementary
four-cycle, L4 : (sx, sy) →(s′
x, sy) →(s′
x, s′
y) →(sx, s′
y) →(sx, sy) (with no change in the other agents’
strategies). In this case
RL4 = exp
 1
K
h
Ux(s′
x, sy) −Ux(sx, sy) + Uy(s′
x, s′
y) −Uy(s′
x, sy)
i
×
exp
 1
K
h
Ux(sx, s′
y) −Ux(s′
x, s′
y) + Uy(sx, sy) −Uy(sx, s′
y)
i
(92)
42

where the notation was simpliﬁed by omitting the reference to other, ﬁxed-strategy players, Ux(sx, sy) ≡
Ux(sx, sy; s−{x,y}). If the game has a potential, and thus Eq. (89) is satisﬁed, this can be written as
RL4 = exp
 1
K
h
V (s′
x, sy) −V (sx, sy) + V (s′
x, s′
y) −V (s′
x, sy)
i
×
exp
 1
K
h
V (sx, s′
y) −V (s′
x, s′
y) + V (sx, sy) −V (sx, s′
y)
i
= 1.
(93)
Kolmogorov’s criterion is satisﬁed since all terms in the exponent cancel. Thus we have shown that for
potential games the Logit rule is equivalent to Glauber dynamics, consequently the limit distribution is the
Boltzmann distribution at temperature K with energy function −V ,
P(s) =
exp(V (s)/K)
P
s′ exp(V (s′)/K) .
(94)
The above equivalence with kinetic Ising-type models (Glauber dynamics) opens a direct way for the
application of statistical physics methods in this class of evolutionary games. For example, the mutual
reinforcement eﬀect between neighboring (connected) agents can be considered as an attractive interaction
in case of Coordination games. A typical example is when agents should select between two competing
technologies like LINUX and WINDOWS (Lee and Valentinyi, 2000) or VHS and BETAMAX (Helbing,
1996). When the connectivity structure is characterized by a square lattice and the individual strategy
update is deﬁned by the Logit rule (Glauber dynamics) then the stationary states of the corresponding
model are well described by the thermodynamic behavior of the Ising model, which exhibits a critical phase
transition in the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld (Stanley, 1971). Moreover, the ordering processes
(including the decay of metastable states, nucleation, and domain growth) are also well investigated for
Ising-type models (Binder and M¨uller-Krumbhaar, 1974; Bray, 1994). The behavior of potential games is
similar to that of the equivalent Ising-type model.
The above analogy can also be useful in games which do not strictly have a potential, but which are close
to a potential game that is equivalent to a well-known physical system. For example a small parameter ε can
characterize the symmetry-breaking of the payoﬀmatrix (Aij −Aji = ±2ε or 0) as happens when consider-
ing the combination of a three-state Potts model with the Rock-Scissors-Paper game (Szolnoki and Szab´o,
2005). One can study how the cyclic dominance (ε > 0) can prevent the formation of long-range order
described by the three-state Potts model (ε = 0) below the critical temperature. A similar idea was used
for the so-called “driven lattice gases” suggested by Katz et al. (1983, 1984), who studied the eﬀect of an
external electric ﬁeld (inducing particle transport through the system) on the ordering process controlled by
nearest-neighbor interactions in Ising-type lattice gas models [for a review see Schmittmann and Zia (1995);
Marro and Dickman (1999)].
4.6. Stochastic stability
Although stochastic update rules are essential at the level of individual decision making, the ﬂuctua-
tions average out and produce smooth, deterministic population dynamics on the aggregate level, when the
population is inﬁnitely large and all pairs are connected. In the case of ﬁnite populations, however, the de-
terministic approximation discussed in Section 4.4 is no longer exact, and usually it only provides acceptable
prediction for the short run behavior (Benaim and Weibull, 2003; Reichenbach et al., 2006a). The long-run
analysis requires the calculation of the full stochastic (limit) distribution. Even if the basic micro-dynamics
is deterministic, a small stochastic noise, originating from mutations, random errors in strategy implementa-
tion, or deliberate experimentation with new strategies may play a crucial role. It turns out that predictions
based on the asymptotic behavior of the deterministic approximation may not always be relevant for the long
run behavior of noisy systems. The stability of dynamic equilibria with respect to pertinent perturbations
becomes a fundamental question. The concept of noise tolerance can be introduced as a novel reﬁnement
criterium to provide additional guideline for realistic equilibrium selection.
43

Fig. 12. The Stag Hunt game with uniform noise. The N-state birth-death Markov process can be approximated by a two-state
process in the small noise limit.
The analysis of stochastic perturbations goes back to Foster and Young (1990) who deﬁne the notion
of stochastic stability. A stochastically stable set is a set of strategy proﬁles, which appear with nonzero
probability in the limit distribution of the stochastic evolutionary process, when the noise level becomes
inﬁnitesimally small. As such, stochastically stable sets may contain states which are not Nash equilibria
such as limit cycles. Nevertheless, for many important games this set contains a single Nash equilibrium.
For instance, in the case of 2x2 Coordination games, where the game has two asymptotically stable Nash
equilibria, only one of these, the risk-dominant equilibrium proves to be stochastically stable. The connection
between stochastic stability and risk dominance was found to hold under rather wide assumptions on the
dynamic rule (Kandori et al., 1993; Young, 1993; Blume, 1998, 2003). Stochastically stable equilibria are
sometimes called ”long-run equilibria” in the literature.
Following Kandori et al. (1993), we illustrate the concept of stochastic stability by a simple, symmetric,
two-strategy Coordination game
Hare Stag
Hare a=4 b=3
Stag c=0 d=5
(95)
played as a population game by a ﬁnite number N of players. We can think about this game as the Stag Hunt
game, where a population of hunters learn to coordinate on hunting for Stags or for Hares. (See Appendix
A.12 for a detailed description). Coordinating on Stag is Pareto optimal, but choosing Hare is less risky if
the hunter is unsure of the coplayer’s choice. As for a deﬁnite micro-dynamics, we assume a deterministic
Best Response rule with asynchronous update, perturbed by a small probability ε that a player, when it is
her turn to act, makes an erroneous choice (noise).
Let NS = NS(t) denote the number of Stag hunters in the population. Without mutations the game
has two Nash equilibria: (1) everybody hunts for Stag (“AllStag”, i.e., NS = N), and (2) everybody hunts
for Hare (“AllHare”, i.e., NS = 0). Both are evolutionarily stable. There is also a third, mixed strategy
equilibrium with N ∗
S = 2N/3, which is not evolutionarily stable. For the deterministic dynamics the ﬁrst
two NEs are stable ﬁxed points, the third is an unstable ﬁxed point playing the role of a separatrix. When
NS(t) < N ∗
S (NS(t) > N ∗
S) each agent’s best response is to hunt for Stag (Hare). Depending on the initial
condition one of the ﬁxed point is readily reached by the deterministic rule.
When the noise rate is ﬁnite, ε > 0, we should calculate a probability distribution over the state space,
which satisﬁes the appropriate master equation. The process is a one-type, N-state birth-death Markov
44

process, which satisﬁes detailed balance, and has a unique stationary distribution Pε(NS). It is intuitively
clear that in the ε →0 limit the probability will cluster on the two deterministic ﬁxed points, and thus the
most important features of the solution can be obtained without detailed calculations. When ε is small we
can ignore all intermediate states and estimate an eﬀective transition rate between the two stable ﬁxed points
(Kandori et al., 1993). Reaching the border of the basin of attraction from AllHare requires N ∗
S subsequent
mutations, whose probability is O(εN ∗
S) (see Fig. 12). From here the other ﬁxed point can be reached
by a rate O(1). Thus the eﬀective transition rate from AllHare to AllStag is λ = O(εN ∗
S) = O(ε2N/3).
A similar calculation gives the eﬀective rate for the inverse process λ′ = O(εN−N ∗
S) = O(εN/3). Using
this approximation, the stationary distribution over the two states AllHare and AllStag (neglecting all the
intermediate states) becomes
Pε ≈

λ′
λ + λ′ ,
λ
λ + λ′

−→
ε→0 (1, 0)
(96)
We can see that in this example as ε →0 the probability weight clusters on the state AllHare, showing that
only this NE is stochastically stable. Of course, this qualitative result would remain true if we calculated
the full limit distribution of this stochastic problem.
Even though the system ﬂips occasionally into AllStag by a series of appropriate mutations, it spends
most of the time near AllHare. If we look at the system at a random time we can almost surely ﬁnd it in
the state (more precisely, in the domain of attraction) of AllHare. The deterministic approximation based
on Eq. (80), which predicts AllStag as an equally possible solution depending on the initial condition, is
misleading in the long run. It should be noted, however, that when the noise level is low or the population
is large there is a huge time needed to take the system out from a non-stochastically stable conﬁguration,
which clearly limits the practical relevance of the concept of stochastic stability.
In the example above we have found that only AllHare is stochastically stable. AllStag, which is otherwise
Pareto optimal is not stochastically stable. Of course, this ﬁnding depends on the actual parameters in the
payoﬀmatrix. In general (still keeping the game to be a Coordination game), we ﬁnd that the stochastic
stability of AllHare holds iﬀ
a −c ≥d −b.
(97)
This is exactly the condition that AllHare is risk-dominant, exemplifying the general connection between
risk dominance and stochastic stability in this class of games (Kandori et al., 1993; Young, 1993). When
Eq. (97) loses validity, the other NE, AllStag, becomes risk-dominant and, at the same time, stochastically
stable.
Stochastic stability probes the limit distribution of the stochastic process in the zero noise limit for a
given ﬁnite population. Another interesting question arises if the noise level is low but ﬁxed, and the size
of the population is taken to inﬁnity. In this limit any given conﬁguration (strategy proﬁle) will have zero
probability, but the distribution may concentrate on one Nash conﬁguration and its small perturbations,
where most players play the same strategy. Such a Nash conﬁguration is called ensemble stable (Mi¸ekisz,
2004b,a,c). The concepts of stochastic stability and ensemble stability may not necessarily coincide (Mi¸ekisz,
2004b,a,c).
5. The structure of social graphs
In realistic multi-player systems players do not interact with all other players. In these situations the
connectivity between players is given by two graphs as suggested recently by Ohtsuki et al. (2007a,b), where
the nodes represent players, and the edges, connecting the nodes, refer to the connection between the
corresponding players. The ﬁrst graph deﬁnes how the connected players play a game to gain some income.
The second graph describes the learning (strategy adoption) mechanism. In a more general formalism the
edges of graphs may have two weight factors characterizing the strength of inﬂuence along both directions.
These extensions allow us to study the eﬀects of preferential learning (Lieberman et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2006;
Guan et al., 2006) that can involve an asymmetry in the teaching-learning activity between the connected
45

players (Kim et al., 2002; Szolnoki and Szab´o, 2007). The behavior of evolutionary games is strongly aﬀected
by the underlying social structure.
Henceforth our analysis concentrates on systems, where both the game theoretical interaction and the
learning mechanism are based on the same network of connectivity, and the weight of an edge is unity. The
theory of graphs [see textbooks, e.g., Bollob´as (1985); Bollob´as (1998)] gives a mathematical background for
the structural analysis. In the last decades an extensive research has focused on the diﬀerent random networks
[for detailed survey see Amaral et al. (2000); Albert and Barab´asi (2002); Dorogovtsev and Mendes (2003);
Newman (2003); Boccaletti et al. (2006)] that can be considered as potential structures of connectivity. The
investigation of evolutionary games on these structures has lead to the exploration of new phenomena and
raised a number of interesting questions.
The connectivity structure can be characterized by a number of topological properties. In the following we
assume that the corresponding graph is connected, i.e., there is at least one path along edges between any
two sites. Graph theory deﬁnes the degree zx of site x as the number of neighbors (co-players) connected to
x. For random graphs the degree distribution f(z) determines the probability of ﬁnding exactly z neighbors
for a player. The degree is uniform, i.e., f(z) = δ(z −z0), for regular structures 11 (e.g., for lattices), and
f(z) ∝z−γ (typically 2 < γ < 3) for the so-called scale-free graphs. These latter exhibit sites with extremely
large number of neighbors. Real networks can have statistical properties in between these extreme limits. It
is customary to classify structures according to their degree distributions (Amaral et al., 2000) as 1) scale-
free networks (e.g., the world-wide web) having a power-law tail for large z, 2) truncated scale-free networks
(e.g., the network of movie actors) with an extended power-law behavior up to some large z cutoﬀ, and 3)
single-scale networks (e.g., some friendship networks) with an exponential or Gaussian dependence in the
whole regime with a characteristic degree. For other speciﬁc real-life examples see, e.g., Amaral et al. (2000)
and Boccaletti et al. (2006).
In graph theory a clique means a complete subgraph in which all pairs are linked together. The clustering
coeﬃcient characterizes the ”cliquishness” of the closest environment of a site. More precisely, the clustering
coeﬃcient Cx of site x is the proportion of actual edges among the sites within its neighborhood to the
number of potential edges that could possibly exist among them. In a diﬀerent context the clustering
coeﬃcient characterizes the fraction of possible triangles (two edges with a shared site) which are in fact
triangles (three-site cliques). The distribution of C can be also introduced but usually only its average value
¯C is considered. In many cases the percolation of the overlapping triangles (or cliques with more site) seems
to be the crucial feature responsible for interesting phenomena (Palla et al., 2005).
Now we brieﬂy survey some prototypical connectivity structures, which have been investigated actively in
recent years. First we have to emphasize that a mean-ﬁeld-type behavior occurs for two drastically diﬀerent
graph structures as N →∞(see Fig. 13). On one hand, the mean-ﬁeld approximation is exact by deﬁnition
for those systems where all the pairs are linked, that is, the corresponding graph is complete. On the other
hand, similar behavior arises if each player’s income comes from games with only z temporary players who
are chosen randomly in every step. In this latter setup there is no correlation between partners from one
stage to the next.
5.1. Lattices
For spatial models the ﬁxed interaction network is deﬁned by the sites of a lattice and the edges between
those pair whose distance does not exceed a given value. The most frequently used structure is the square
lattice with von Neumann neighborhood (including connections between nearest neighbor sites, z = 4)
and Moore neighborhood (with connections between nearest and next-nearest neighbors, z = 8). Many
transitions from one behavior to a distinctly diﬀerent one depend on the dimensionality of the embedding
space, therefore the considerations can be extended to d-dimensional hyper-cubic structures too. When
using periodic boundary conditions these systems become translation invariant, and the spatial distribution
11 A graph is called regular, if the number of links zx, emanating from node x, is the same zx = z for all x.
46

x
Fig. 13. Connectivity structures for which the mean-ﬁeld approach is valid in the limit N →∞. On the right hand side the
dashed lines indicate temporary connections to co-players chosen at random for a given time.
of strategies can be investigated by mathematical tools developed in solid state theory and non-equilibrium
statistical physics (see e.g., Appendix C).
In many cases the regular lattice only provides an initial structure for the creation of more realistic social
networks. For example, diluted lattices (see Fig. 14) can be used to study what happens if a portion q of
players and/or interactions are removed at random (Nowak et al., 1994a). The resultant connectivity struc-
ture is inhomogeneous and we cannot use analytical methods assuming translation invariance. A systematic
numerical analysis in the limit q →0, however, can give us a picture about the eﬀect of these types of
defects.
Fig. 14. Two types of diluted lattices. Left: randomly chosen sites are removed together with the corresponding edges. Right:
randomly chosen edges are removed.
For many (partially) random connectivity structures more than one topological features change simulta-
neously, and the individual eﬀects of these are mixed up. The clariﬁcation of the role a feature may play
requires their separation and independent tuning. Figure 15 shows some regular connectivity structures (for
z = 4), whose topology is strikingly diﬀerent, meanwhile the clustering coeﬃcients are all zero (or vanishing
in the limit N →∞.
5.2. Small worlds
In Figure 15 a regular small-world network is created from a square lattice by randomly rewiring a fraction
q of connections in a way that conserve the degree for each site. Random links reduce drastically the average
distance ¯l between randomly chosen pair of sites, producing a small world phenomenon characteristic to
many social networks (Milgram, 1967). In the limit q →0 the depicted structure is equivalent to the square
lattice. If all connections are replaced (q = 1) the rewiring process yields the well-investigated random regular
graph (Wormald, 1999). Consequently, the set of these structures provides a continuous structural transition
from the square lattice to random regular graphs.
In random regular graphs the concentration of short loops vanishes as N →∞(Wormald, 1981), therefore
these structures become locally similar to a tree. In other words, the local structure is similar to the one
characterizing the ﬁctitious Bethe lattice (existing in the limit N →∞), on which analytical calculations
can be performed thanks to translation invariance. Hence the results of simulations on large random regular
47

a
b
d
c
Fig. 15. Diﬀerent regular connectivity structures where each player has four neighbors: (a) square lattice, (b) regular ”small–
world” network, (c) Bethe lattice (or tree-like structure) and (d) random regular graph.
graphs can be compared with analytical predictions (e.g., the pair approximation) on the Bethe lattice, at
least for those systems where the eﬀect of large loops is negligible.
Spatial lattices are full of short loops whose number decreases during the rewiring process. There exists a
wide range of q, however, where the two main features of small-world structures are present simultaneously
(Watts and Strogatz, 1998). These properties are (1) the small average distance ¯l between two randomly
chosen sites, and (2) the high clustering coeﬃcient ¯C, i.e., the high density of connections within the neigh-
borhood of a site. Evidently, the average distance increases with N in a way that depends on the topology.
For the sake of comparison, on a d-dimensional lattice ¯l ≈N 1/d; on a complete (fully connected) graph
¯l = 1; and on random graphs ¯l ≈ln N/ ln ¯z where ¯z denotes the average degree. When applying the method
of random rewiring the small average distance (¯l ≈ln N/ ln ¯z) can be achieved for a surprisingly low portion
of random links (q > 0.01).
For the structures in Fig. 15 the topological character of the graph cannot be characterized by the clustering
coeﬃcient, because ¯C = 0 (in the limit N →∞) as mentioned above. In the original small-world model
suggested by Watts and Strogatz (1998) the initial structure is a one-dimensional lattice with periodic
boundary conditions, where each site is connected to its z (even) nearest neighbors as shown in Fig. 16.
During a rewiring process one of the ends of qzN/2 bonds is shifted to another site chosen at random. The
ﬁnal structure has suﬃciently high clustering coeﬃcient and short average distances within a wide range of
q. Further versions of small-world networks were suggested by Newman and Watts (1999). In the simplest
structures random links are added to a lattice.
Fig. 16. Small-world structure (right) is created from a ring (left) with the nearest- and next-nearest neighbors. Random links
are substituted for a portion q of the original links as suggested by Watts and Strogatz (1998).
48

In the initial structure (left graph in Fig. 16) the average clustering coeﬃcient ¯C = 1/2 for z = 4, and its
value decreases linearly with q (if q << 1) and tends to a value of order 1/N as q →1. The analysis of these
types of graphs becomes interesting for those evolutionary games, where the clustering or percolation of the
overlapping cliques play a crucial role (see Sect. 6.8).
5.3. Scale-free graphs
In the above inhomogeneous connectivity structures the degree distribution f(z) has a sharp peak around
¯z and the occurrence of sites with z >> ¯z is unlikely. There exists, however, a lot of real networks in
nature (e.g., the internet, the network of acquaintance, collaborations, metabolic reactions, and many other
biological networks), where the presence of sites with large z is essential and is due to fundamental processes.
In recent years a lot of models have been developed to reproduce the main characteristics of these networks.
Now we only discuss two procedures for growing networks exhibiting scale-free properties. Both procedures
start with k connected sites and for each step t we add one site linked to m (diﬀerent) existing sites as
demonstrated in Fig. 17 for k = 3 and m = 2.
t=0
t=1
t=2
t=3
t=10
Fig. 17. Creation of two scale-free networks with the same average degree (⟨z⟩= 4) as suggested by Barab´asi and Albert (1999)
(top) and Dorogovtsev et al. (2001) (bottom).
For the growth procedure suggested by Barab´asi and Albert (1999) a site with m links is added to the
system step by step, and the new site is preferentially linked to those sites that have large degrees already.
To realize the ”rich-gets-richer” phenomenon the new site is linked to the existing site x with a probability
depending on its degree
Πx =
zx
P
y zy
.
(98)
After t steps this random graph has N = 3 + t sites and 3 + tm edges. For large t (or N) the degree
distribution exhibits a power law behavior within a wide range of z, i.e., f(z) ≈2m2z−γ where γ = 3,
because older sites increase their degree at the expense of the younger ones. The average connectivity stays
at ⟨z⟩= m.
In fact, network growth with linear preferential attachment naturally leads to power-law degree distri-
butions. A more general family of growing networks can be introduced if the attachment probability Πx is
modiﬁed as
Πx =
g(zx)
P
y g(zy) ,
(99)
where g(z) > 0 is an arbitrary function. The analytical calculations of Krapivsky et al. (2000) demonstrated
that nonlinear preferential attachment destroys the power-law behavior. The scale-free nature of the growing
49

network can only be achieved if the attachment probability is asymptotically linear, i.e., Πx ∼azx as z →∞.
In this case the exponent γ can be tuned to any value between 2 and ∞.
In the Barab´asi-Albert model (as well as in its variants) the clustering coeﬃcient vanishes as N →∞.
On the contrary, ¯C remains ﬁnite in many real networks. Dorogovtsev et al. (2001) have suggested another
procedure to create growing graphs providing more realistic clustering coeﬃcients. In this procedure one
site is added to the system in each step in such a way that the new site is linked to both ends of a
randomly chosen edge. The degree distribution of this structure is similar to those found in the Barab´asi-
Albert model. Apparently these two growth procedures yield very similar graphs for small t as illustrated
in Fig. 17. The algorithm suggested by Dorogovtsev et al. (2001), however, creates at least one triangle for
each step, therefore it results in a ﬁnite clustering coeﬃcient ( ¯C ∼0.5) for large N.
For realistic networks the growing process is aﬀected by the aging of vertices and also by the cost of linking
or the limited capacity of a vertex (Amaral et al., 2000). The mentioned phenomena prevent the formation
of scale-free degree distribution by yielding fast decrease in the probability for suﬃciently large degrees.
Evidently, many models of network growth were developed during the last years, and their investigation have
already become an extensive area within statistical physics. Nowadays this research covers the investigation
of time-dependent networks too.
5.4. Evolving networks
The simplest possible time-dependent connectivity structure is illustrated by the right hand plot in Fig. 13.
Here co-players are chosen randomly with equal probability in each round, making the mean-ﬁeld approxi-
mation valid in the limit N →∞. Partially random connectivity structures with some temporary co-players
are convenient from a technical point of view. For example, if randomly chosen co-players are substituted in
each round for a portion q of the standard neighbors on the square lattice, then spatial symmetries are con-
served on average, and the generalized mean-ﬁeld technique discussed in Appendix C can be safely applied.
The increase of q can induce a transition from spatial to mean-ﬁeld-type behavior as it will be discussed
later on.
Dynamically evolving networks in general are the subject of intensive research in many ﬁelds (Boccaletti et al.,
2006; Jackson, 2005; Dutta and Jackson, 2003). Here we only focus on models where the growth and/or
rewiring of the network is dictated by an evolutionary game played over the evolving social structure. Some
early works on this subject include Skyrms and Pemantle (2000) who investigated various dynamic models
of network formation assuming reinforcement learning. Choosing partners to play with in the next round
was assumed to depend on a probability distribution over possible co-players, which was updated according
to achieved payoﬀs in the former round. Even models with simple constant reinforcement rules were able
to demonstrate how structure can emerge from uniformity or, under diﬀerent model parameters, how uni-
formity may develop from an initial structure. In more complicated games like the Stag Hunt game with
possible discounting and/or noise the co-evolution of network and strategies can strongly depend on the rel-
ative speed of the two fundamental updating processes. It was found that when strategy evolution is faster
than structural evolution there is a tendency to coordinate on the risk dominant equilibrium (hunting hare)
as in the mean-ﬁeld case. In the opposite limit of fast network evolution the payoﬀ-dominant equilibrium
outcome (hunting stag) becomes more likely. In between the two limits the population is typically split into
disconnected clusters of stag or hare hunters which coexist in the society.
In a conceptually similar model Zimmermann et al. (2000, 2001); Santos et al. (2006a) considered what
happens if the links of a social graph can be removed and/or replaced by other links. They also assumed
that strategies and structure evolve simultaneously with diﬀerent rates. The (rare) cancelation of a link
depended on the total payoﬀreceived by the given pair of players. Their model becomes interesting for
the Prisoner’s Dilemma when an unsatisﬁed defector breaks the link to neighboring defectors with some
probability and looks for other randomly chosen partners. This mechanism conserves the number of links. In
models suggested by Biely et al. (2007); Pacheco et al. (2006a) the unsatisﬁed players are allowed to cancel
links (to defectors), and the cooperators can create new links to one of the second neighbors suggested by
the corresponding ﬁrst neighbor. Pacheco et al. (2006b) have developed an elegant mean-ﬁeld type approach
50

assuming ﬁnite life times for the links and allowing preferential search for new links. The main predictions
of these models will be discussed in Sec. 6.9.
For many real systems the migration of players plays a crucial role. It is assumed that during a move in the
graph the player conserves her original strategy but faces a new neighborhood. There are several ways how
this feature can be built into a model. If the connectivity structure is deﬁned by a lattice (or graph) then
we can introduce empty sites where neighboring players can move to. Depending on the microscopic details
this additional feature can either decrease or increase the frequency of cooperators in the spatial Prisoner’s
Dilemma Vainstein et al. (2007). The eﬀects of local migration can be studied by using a more convenient
way: two neighboring players (chosen randomly) are allowed to exchange their positions. In Section 8 we will
consider the consequences of tuning the relative strength between imitation and site exchange (migration).
In continuous space the random migration of players can be studied using reaction diﬀusion equations
(Hofbauer et al., 1997; Wakano, 2006) which exhibit either traveling waves or self-organizing patterns.
6. Prisoner’s Dilemma
By now the Prisoner’s Dilemma has become a world-wide known paradigm for studying the emergence of
cooperative (altruistic) behavior in communities consisting of selﬁsh individuals. The name of this game as
well as the traditional notation are explained in Appendix A.7.
In this two-player game the players have two options to choose from which are called defection (D) and
cooperation (C). For mutual cooperation the players receive the highest total payoﬀshared equally. The
highest individual payoﬀis reached by a defector against a cooperator. In the most interesting case the
defector’s extra income (related to the income for mutual cooperation), T −R, is less than the relative loss
of the cooperator, R −S. According to classical (rational) game theory both players should play defection,
since this is the Nash equilibrium. However, this outcome would provide them with the second worst income,
thus creating the dilemma.
There are other Social Dilemmas Macy and Flache (2002); Skyrms (2003) where mutual cooperation
could provide the highest total income, although selﬁsh individual reasoning often leads to other choices.
For example, in the Snowdrift game (see Appendix A.11) it is better to choose the opposite of what the
other player does; in the Stag Hunt game (see Appendix A.12) the player is better oﬀdoing whatever the
co-player does. In the last years several authors (e.g., (Santos et al., 2006b; Hauert et al., 2006; Hauert,
2006)) have studied all these dilemmas in a uniﬁed framework by expanding the range of payoﬀparameters.
In the following our discussion will focus on the Prisoner’s Dilemma which is the most prominent example
- other social dilemmas are less favorable to defection.
People face frequently the situation of Prisoner’s Dilemmas in real life when they have to choose between
to be selﬁsh or altruistic, to keep the ethical norms or not, to work (study) hard or lazy, etc (Alexander,
1987; Axelrod, 1986; Binmore, 1994; Trivers, 1985). Disarmament and some business negotiations are also
burdened with this type of dilemma. The traﬃc ﬂow models and game theoretic concepts were combined by
Helbing et al. (2005); Perc (2007). Dugatkin and Mesterton-Gibbons (1996) have shown that the Prisoner’s
Dilemma can be recognized in the behavior of hermaphroditic ﬁsh alternately releasing eggs and sperm, be-
cause the production of eggs implies a higher metabolic investment. The application of this game, however,
is not restricted to human or animal societies. When considering the interactions between two bacterio-
phages, living and reproducing within infected cells, Turner and Chao (1999) have identiﬁed the defective
and cooperative versions (Nowak and Sigmund, 1999). The investigation of two-dimensional models helps our
understanding how altruistic behavior occurs in bioﬁlms (Kreft, 2004; MacLean and Gudelj, 2006). In a bio-
chemical example (Pfeiﬀer et al., 2001) the two diﬀerent pathways of the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) pro-
duction represent cooperators (low rate but high yield of ATP production) and defectors (high rate but low
yield). Some authors speculate that in multicellular organisms cells can be considered as behaving coopera-
tively, except for tumor cells that shifted towards a more selﬁsh behavior (Pfeiﬀer and Schuster, 2005). Game
theoretical methods may provide a promising new approach for understanding cancer (Gatenby and Maini,
2003; Frick and Schuster, 2003; Axelrod et al., 2006).
Despite the prediction of classical game theory the emergence of cooperation can be observed in many
51

naturally occurring Prisoner’s Dilemma situations. In the subsequent sections we will discuss the possibilities
and conditions how cooperative behavior can subsist in multi-agent models. During the last decades it turned
out that the rate of cooperation is aﬀected by the strategy set, the evolutionary rule, the payoﬀs, and the
structure of connectivity. For such a high degree of freedom the analysis cannot be complete. In many cases
investigations are carried out for a payoﬀmatrix with a limited number of variable parameters.
6.1. Axelrod’s Tournaments
In the late 1970’s, a computer tournament were conducted by Robert Axelrod (1980a,b, 1984), whose
interest in game theory arose essentially from a deep concern about international politics and especially
the risk of nuclear war. Axelrod wanted to identify the conditions under which cooperation could emerge
in a Prisoner’s Dilemma, therefore he invited game theorists to submit strategies (in the form of computer
programs) for playing an Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma game with the payoﬀmatrix
D
C
D
C
A = D
C

P
T
S
R

= D
C

1
5
0
3

(100)
The computer tournament was structured as a round robin game. Each player was paired with all other
ones, then with its own twin (the same strategy) and with a random strategy choosing cooperation and
defection with equal probability. Each iterated game between ﬁxed opponents consisted of two hundred
rounds, and the entire round robin tournament was repeated ﬁve times to improve the reliability of the
scores. Within a tournament the players were allowed to take into account the history of the interactions as
had developed thus far. All these rules had been announced well before the tournament.
The highest average score was achieved by the so-called ”Tit-for-Tat” strategy developed by Anatol
Rapoport. This was the simplest of all the fourteen strategies submitted. Tit-for-Tat is a strategy which
cooperates on the ﬁrst round, and thereafter repeats what the opponent has done on the previous move.
The main results of this computer tournament were published and people were soon invited to submit
other strategies for a second tournament. The new strategies were developed in the knowledge of the fourteen
old strategies, therefore a large portion of them would have performed substantially better than Tit-for-Tat
in the environment of the ﬁrst tournament. Surprisingly, Tit-for-Tat won the second tournament too.
Using this set of strategies some further systematic investigations were performed to examine the robust-
ness of the results. For example, the tournaments were repeated with some modiﬁcations in the population
of strategies. The most remarkable investigations are related to the adaption of a dynamical rule (Trivers,
1971; Dawkins, 1976; Maynard Smith, 1978) that mimics Darwinian selection. This evolutionary computer
tournament was started with Q strategies, which were represented by a portion of players in the limit
N →∞. After a round robin game the score for each player was evaluated, and this quantity served as
a ﬁtness to determine the abundance of strategies in the subsequent generation. By repeating these steps
one can determine the variations in the population of strategies step by step. In most of these simulations,
the success of Tit-for-Tat was conﬁrmed because the evolutionary process almost always ended up with a
population of some mutually cooperating strategies prevailed by Tit-for-Tat.
Nevertheless, these investigations gave numerical evidence that there is no absolutely best strategy in-
dependent of the environment. The empirical success of Tit-for-Tat is related to some of its fundamental
properties. Tit-for-Tat does not wish to exploit others, it tries to maximize the total payoﬀ. On the other
hand, Tit-for-Tat cannot be exploited (except for the ﬁrst step), because it reciprocates defection (as a pun-
ishment) until the opponent unilaterally cooperates and thus compensates her by the largest income. One
can think that Tit-for-Tat is a forgiving strategy because its choice of defection is determined by the last
choice of its co-player only. A Tit-for-Tat strategy is identiﬁable easily, and its future behavior is predictable,
therefore for Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemmas the best strategy against Tit-for-Tat is to cooperate always. On
the other hand, exploiting strategies are suppressed by Tit-for-Tat because of their mutual defection se-
quences. Consequently, in evolutionary games the presence of Tit-for-Tat promotes mutual cooperation in
the whole community.
52

The main conclusions of these pioneering works were collected in a paper by Axelrod and Hamilton (1981),
and many technical details were presented in the Axelrod’s book (Axelrod, 1984). The relevant message for
people facing a Prisoner’s Dilemma can be summarized as follows:
(1) Don’t be envious.
(2) Don’t be the ﬁrst to defect.
(3) Reciprocate both cooperation and defection.
(4) Don’t be too clever.
In short, the above game theoretical investigations suggest that people wishing to beneﬁt from a Prisoner’s
Dilemma situation should follow a strategy similar to Tit-for-Tat. The application of this strategy (in
repeated games) provides a way to avoid the “Tragedy of the Community”.
Anyway, if the payoﬀof a one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma game can be divided into small portions then it is
usually very useful to transform the game into a Repeated Prisoner’s Dilemma game with an uncertainty in
the ending (because of the applicability of Tit-for-Tat). This approach has been used successfully in various
political negotiations.
Beside the deduction of the above very important results, the evolutionary approach also gave insight
into the mechanisms and processes resulting in the spontaneous emergence of cooperation. Here it is worth
recalling that the results were concluded from a set of numerical investigations with a rather limited number
of strategies (14 and 64 in the ﬁrst and second tournaments), whose construction includes eventualities. For
the purpose of a more quantitative and reliable analysis, we will brieﬂy describe another approach, which is
based on a well-deﬁned, continuous set of strategies capable of representing a remarkably reach variety of
interactions.
6.2. Emergence of cooperation for stochastic reactive strategies
The success of the Tit-for-Tat strategy in Axelrod’s computer tournament inspired Nowak and Sigmund
(1989a,b, 1990) to study a set of stochastic reactive strategies, where the choice of action in a given round
is only aﬀected by the opponent’s behavior in the previous round. These mixed strategies are described by
three parameters, s = (u, p, q), where u is the probability to choose cooperation in the ﬁrst round, while p
and q are the conditional probabilities to cooperate in later rounds, given that the opponent’s previous choice
was cooperation or defection, respectively. So, if a player using strategy s = (u, p, q) is matched against an
opponent with a strategy s′ = (u′, p′, q′) then they will cooperate with probabilities
u1 = u
and
u′
1 = u′
(101)
in the ﬁrst step, respectively. In the second step the probability of cooperation becomes
u2 = pu′ + q(1 −u′)
u′
2 = p′u + q′(1 −u) .
(102)
In subsequent steps the variation of these quantities is given by the recursive relation
un+2 = vun + w ,
u′
n+2 = vu′
n + w′ ,
(103)
where
v = (p −q)(p′ −q′) ,
w = pq′ + q(1 −q′) ,
w′ = p′q + q′(1 −q) .
According to this recursive process, if |p −q|, |p′ −q′| < 1 then the probabilities of cooperation tend towards
the stationary values,
53

¯u =
q + (p −q)q′
1 −(p −q)(p′ −q′) ,
¯u′ =
q′ + (p′ −q′)q
1 −(p −q)(p′ −q′) ,
(104)
independently of u and u′. In this case we can neglect the notation of u and label strategies with p and q
only, s = s(p, q).
Using the expressions for ¯u and ¯u′ the expected income of strategy s against s′ reads
A(s, s′) = R¯u¯u′ + S¯u(1 −¯u′) + T (1 −¯u)¯u′ + P(1 −¯u)(1 −¯u′) ,
(105)
at least, when the stationary state is reached. For a homogeneous system consisting of strategy s only, the
average payoﬀobeys a simple form,
A(s, s) = P + (T + S −2P)¯u + (R −S −T + P)¯u2 ,
(106)
which has a maximum at p = 1 (nice strategies cooperating mutually forever) as illustrated in Fig. 18.
Notice that A(s, s) becomes a non-analytical function at s = (1, 0) (Tit-for-Tat strategy), where the payoﬀ
depends on the initial probability of cooperations u and u′.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
1
2
3
TFT
GTFT
AllC
p
AllD
q
A
Fig. 18. Average payoﬀif all players follow an s = (p, q) strategy for T = 5, R = 3, P = 1, and S = 0. The function has a
singularity at s = (1, 0) (TFT).
In their simulation Nowak and Sigmund (1992) used Axelrod’s payoﬀmatrix in Eq. (100) and the above
stationary payoﬀfunctions. Their numerical investigation aimed to clarify the role of Tit-for-Tat (TFT) and
Generous (Forgiving) Tit-for-Tat (GTFT) strategies (see Appendix B for a description). Deterministic Tit-
for-Tat has a weakness when playing against itself in a noisy environment (Axelrod, 1984): after any mistakes
two (deterministic) Tit-for-Tat strategies would choose alternately to defect and to cooperate in opposite
phases. This shortcoming is suppressed by Generous Tit-for-Tat, which, instead of retaliating defection,
chooses cooperation against a previously defecting opponent with a nonzero probability q.
The evolutionary game suggested by Nowak and Sigmund (1992) started with Q = 100 strategies, with p
and q parameters chosen at random and with the same initial strategy concentrations. Now we will discuss
this approach using strategies distributed equidistantly on the p −q plane.
Consider an evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma game with Q = 152 = 225 stochastic reactive strategies
si = (pi, qi) with parameters pi = 0.01 + 0.07k1 and qi = 0.01 + 0.07k2 where k1 = i (mod15) and k2 =
i −15k1 for i = 0, 1, . . ., Q −1. In this discretized strategy space, (0.01, 0.01) is the closest approximation of
the strategy AllD (unconditional defection), and (0.99, 0.99) is that of Tit-for-Tat. Besides these, this space
54

also includes several Generous Tit-for-Tat strategies, e.g., (0.99, 0.08), (0.99, 0.15), etc. Initially all strategies
have the same concentration, ρsi(0) = 1/Q. In subsequent steps (t = 1, 2, . . .) the concentration for each
strategy is determined by its previous payoﬀ,
ρsi(t + 1) =
ρsi(t)E(si, t)
P
sj ρsj(t)E(sj, t) ,
(107)
where the total payoﬀfor strategy si is given as
E(si, t) =
X
sj
ρsj(t)A[si(t), sj(t)];
(108)
and A[si(t), sj(t)] is deﬁned by Eq. (105) for T = 5, R = 3, P = 1, and S = 0. Equation (107) is the
discretized form of the replicator equation in the Maynard Smith form in Eq. (42). In the present system
the payoﬀs are positive and the evolutionary rule yields exponential decrease in the concentration for the
worst strategies. The evolutionary process is illustrated in Fig. 19.
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
1.0
t=50
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
ρ(t)
1.0
t=400
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
ρ(t)
1.0
t=700
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
ρ(t)
1.0
t=800
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
ρ(t)
1.0
t=1000
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
ρ(t)
1.0
t=4000
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
ρ(t)
1.0
t=20,000
0.5
1
0
p
0.5
0
1
q
ρ(t)
Fig. 19. Distribution of the relative strategy concentrations for diﬀerent t values illustrated in the plots. The height of columns
indicates the relative concentrations for the corresponding strategies excepting those where ρs(t)/ρs(0) < 1. In the upper-left
plot the crosses show the distribution of (Q = 225) strategies on the p −q plane.
Figure 19 shows that the strategy concentrations near (0, 0) grow rapidly due to the large income received
from the exploited, and thus diminishing strategies near (1, 1). After a short transient process the system
is dominated by defective strategies whose income tends towards the minimum, P = 1. This phenomenon
reminds us of the following ancient Chinese script (circa 1000 B.C.) as interpreted by Wilhelm and Baynes
(1977):
”Here the climax of the darkening is reached. The dark power at ﬁrst held so high a place that it could
wound all who were on the side of good and of the light. But in the end it perishes of its own darkness, for
evil must itself fall at the very moment when it has wholly overcome the good, and thus consumed the energy
to which it owed its duration.”
During the extinction process the few exceptions are the remnants of the Tit-for-Tat strategies near (1, 0)
cooperating with each other. Consequently, after a suitable time the defector’s income becomes smaller than
the payoﬀof Tit-for-Tats, which grows up at the expense of defectors as shown in Fig. 20.
The increase of the population of Tit-for-Tat is accompanied by a striking increase in the average payoﬀas
demonstrated in Fig. 20. However, the present stochastic version of Tit-for-Tat cannot provide the maximum
possible total payoﬀforever. The evolutionary process does not terminate by the prevalence of Tit-for-Tat,
because this state can be invaded by Generous Tit-for-Tat (Axelrod and Dion, 1988; Nowak, 1990b). The left
plot of Fig. 20 shows the nearly exponential growth of (0.99, 0.08) and the exponential decay of (0.99, 0.01)
around t ≈750.
A stability analysis helps to understand the relevant features of this behavior. In Fig. 21 the gray territory
indicates those strategies whose homogeneous population can be invaded by AllD. Evidently, one can also
55

0
200
400
600
800
1000
t
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
ρs(t)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
t
1.0
2.0
3.0
average payoff
Fig. 20. Time dependence of the strategy concentrations (left) for three relevant strategies (solid line: (0.01, 0.01); dotted line:
(0.99, 0.01)); dashed line: (0.99, 0.08)) playing relevant role until t = 1000 and the variation of average payoﬀ(right).
determine the set of strategies s′ which are able to invade a homogeneous system with a given strategy s.
The complete stability analysis of this system is given by Nowak and Sigmund (1990).
0.0
0.5
1.0
p
0.0
0.5
1.0
q
Fig. 21. Defectors (0, 0) can invade a homogeneous population of stochastic reactive strategies belonging to the gray territory.
Within the hatched region ˙p = ˙q > 0, while along the inside boundary ˙p = ˙q = 0. The boundaries are evaluated for T = 5,
S = 3, P = 1, and S = 0.
In biological applications it is natural to assume that mutant strategies only diﬀer slightly from their
parents. Thus Nowak and Sigmund (1990) assumed an Adaptive Dynamics, and in the spirit of Eq. (54)
they introduced a vector ﬁeld in the p −q plane pointing towards the preferred direction of inﬁnitesimal
evolution,
˙p = ∂A(s, s′)
∂p

s′=s
,
˙q = ∂A(s, s′)
∂q

s′=s
.
(109)
It is found that both quantities become zero along the same boundary separating positive and negative
values. In Fig. 21 the hatched region shows those strategies where ˙p, ˙q > 0. In the above simulation (see
Fig. 19) the noisy Tit-for-Tat strategy (0.99, 0.01) is within this region, therefore a homogeneous system
develops into a state dominated by a more generous strategy with higher q value. Thus, for the present set of
strategies, the strategy (0.99, 0.01) will be dominated by (0.99, 0.08), that will be overcome by (0.99, 0.15),
and so on, as illustrated by the variation of strategy frequencies in Fig. 22.
The evolutionary process stops when the average value of q reaches the boundary deﬁned by ˙p = ˙q = 0.
In the low noise limit, p →1, ˙p and ˙q vanishes at q ≃1 −(T −R)/(R −S) (= 1/3 for the given payoﬀs).
56

10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
10
5
10
6
t
0.0
0.5
1.0
ρs(t)
Fig. 22. Time-dependence of the concentration of the strategies dominating in some time interval. From left to right the peaks
are reached by the following p and q values: (0.01, 0.01), (0.99, 0.01), (0.99, 0.08), (0.99, 0.15), (0.99, 0.22), (0.99, 0.29), and
(0.99, 0.36). The horizontal dotted line shows the maximum when only one strategy exists.
On the other hand, this state is invasion-proof against AllD until q < (R −P)/(T −P) (= 1/2 here). Thus
the quantity
q ≃min

1 −T −R
R −S , R −P
T −P

(110)
(for p ≃1) can be considered as the optimum of generosity (forgiveness) in the week noise limit (Molander,
1985). A rigorous discussion, including the detailed stability analysis of stochastic reactive strategies in a
more general context is given in Nowak and Sigmund (1989a); Nowak (1990a,b).
6.3. Mean-ﬁeld solutions
Consider a situation where the players interact with a limited number of randomly chosen co-players
within a large population. For the sake of simplicity, we assume that a portion ρ of the population follows
unconditional cooperation (AllC, to be denoted simply as C), and a portion 1 −ρ plays unconditional
defection (AllD, or simply D). No other strategies are allowed. This is the extreme limit where players have
no memory of the game.
Each player’s income comes from z games with randomly chosen opponents. The average payoﬀfor
cooperators and defectors are given as
UC = Rzρ + Sz(1 −ρ) ,
UD = T zρ + Pz(1 −ρ) ,
(111)
and the average payoﬀof the population is
¯U = ρ UC + (1 −ρ) UD.
(112)
With the replicator dynamics Eq. (41), the variation of ρ satisﬁes the diﬀerential equation
˙ρ = ρ(UC −¯U) = ρ(1 −ρ)(UC −UD) .
(113)
In general, the macro-level dynamics satisﬁes the approximate mean value equation Eq. (80), which in
the present case reads
˙ρ = (1 −ρ) w(D →C) −ρ w(C →D) .
(114)
In the case of the Smoothed Imitation rule Eq. (64) with (65), the transition rates are
57

w(C →D) = (1 −ρ)
1
1 + exp [(UC −UD)/K] ,
w(D →C) = ρ
1
1 + exp [(UD −UC)/K] ,
(115)
and the dynamical equation becomes
˙ρ = ρ(1 −ρ) tanh
UC −UD
2K

.
(116)
In both cases above, ρ tends to 0 as t →∞since UD > UC for the Prisoner’s Dilemma independently
of the value of z and K. This means that in the mean-ﬁeld case cooperation cannot be sustained against
defectors with imitative update rules. Notice furthermore, that both systems have two absorbing states,
ρ = 0 and ρ = 1, where ˙ρ vanishes.
For the above dynamical rules we assumed that players adopt one of the co-player’s strategy with a proba-
bility depending on the payoﬀdiﬀerence. The behavior is qualitatively diﬀerent for innovative strategies such
as Smoothed Best Response (Logit or Glauber dynamics), where players update strategies independently of
the actual density of the target strategy. For two strategies Eq. (71) gives
w(C →D) =
1
1 + exp [(UC −UD)/K] ,
w(D →C) =
1
1 + exp [(UD −UC)/K] ,
(117)
where K characterizes the noise as before. In this case the dynamical equation becomes
˙ρ = (1 −ρ) w(D →C) −ρ w(C →D)
= w(D →C) −ρ ,
(118)
and the corresponding stationary solution satisﬁes the implicit equation,
ρ = w(D →C)
(119)
=
1
1 + exp
 z[(T −R)ρ + (P −S)(1 −ρ)]/K
 .
In the limit K →0 this reproduces the Nash equilibrium ρ = 0, whereas the frequency of cooperators in-
creases monotonously from 0 to 1/2 as K increases from 0 to ∞(noise-sustained cooperation). In comparison
with the algebraic decay of cooperation predicted by Eqs. (113) and (116), Smoothed Best Response yields
a faster (exponential) tendency towards the Nash equilibrium for K = 0. On the other hand, for ﬁnite noise
the absorbing solutions are missing.
The situation changes drastically when the players can follow Tit-for-Tat strategies or they are positioned
on a lattice and the interaction is limited to their neighborhood as will be detailed in the next sections.
6.4. Prisoner’s Dilemma in ﬁnite populations
Following the work by Nowak et al. (2004) we will discuss what happens in a population of N players who
can choose AllD or Tit-for-Tat (TFT) strategies, and play n games with each other within a round. In this
case the eﬀective payoﬀmatrix can be given as
A =

a
b
c
d

(120)
where a = Pn, b = T + P(n −1), c = S + P(n −1), and d = Rn. Notice that the original rank of
order can be modiﬁed by n. Consequently, both AllD and TFT become strict Nash equilibria (and ESSs) if
58

n > (T −P)/(R −P). The deterministic replicator dynamics for inﬁnite populations predicts that TFT is
eliminated by natural selection if its initial frequency is less than a critical value x⋆= (a −c)/(a −b −c + d)
(otherwise the frequency of AllD tends to zero).
Nowak et al. (2004) have considered a stochastic (Moran) process when at each time step a player is
chosen for reproduction with a probability proportional to her payoﬀand her oﬀspring is substituted for a
randomly chosen player. This stochastic process is investigated in the so-called weak-selection limit, when
only a small part of payoﬀ(ﬁtness) comes from games, i.e.,
UD = 1 −w + w[a(i −1) + b(N −i)]/(N −1) ,
UT = 1 −w + w[ci + d(N −i −1)]/(N −1) ,
(121)
where the strength of selection is characterized by w (0 < w << 1), and the number of AllD and TFT
strategies are denoted by i and (N −i). This approach resembles the high temperature limit and seems to
be adequate for biological systems where strategy changes have little eﬀect on overall ﬁtness (Ohta, 2002).
The elementary steps can increase or decrease the value of i by 1 with probabilities µi+ and µi−given as
µi+ =
UDi(N −i)
N[iUD + (N −i)UC] ,
µi−=
UCi(N −i)
N[iUD + (N −i)UC] .
(122)
This Moran process is equivalent to a random walk on sites i = 0, . . . , N. The evolution is stopped when
the system reaches one the two absorbing states: i = 0 and i = N. Nowak et al. (2004) have determined the
ﬁxation probability νT that a single TFT strategy will invade the whole population containing (N −1) AllD
strategies at the beginning. It is well known that νT = 1/N if w = 0. Thus selection favors TFT invading
AllD if νT > 1/N. For the limit of large N and weak selection the analytical result predicts that TFT is
favored if x⋆< 1/3 (this is the so-called 1/3 rule).
When investigating the same system Antal and Scheuring (2006) have found that the average ﬁxation
time tfix is proportional to N ln N if the system has at least one ESS, and tfix ∼eN/[
√
N(N −1)] if the
two strategies coexist in the limit N →∞.
6.5. Spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma with synchronized update
In 1992 Nowak and May introduced a spatial evolutionary game to demonstrate that local interactions
within a spatial structure can maintain cooperative behavior indeﬁnitely. In the ﬁrst model they proposed
(Nowak and May, 1992, 1993), the players, located on the sites of a square lattice, could only follow two
memoryless strategies: AllD (to be denoted simply as D) and AllC (or simply C), i.e., unconditional defection
and unconditional cooperation, respectively. In most of their analysis they used a simpliﬁed, rescaled payoﬀ
matrix,
A =

P
T
S
R

= lim
c→−0

0
b
c
1

=

0
b
0
1

,
(123)
which only contains one free parameter b, but is expected to preserve the essence of the Prisoner’s Dilemma. 12
In each round (time step) of this iterated game the players play a Prisoner’s Dilemma with all their
neighbors, and the payoﬀs are summed up. After this, each player imitates the strategy of those neighboring
players (including herself) who has scored the highest payoﬀ. Due to the deterministic, simultaneous update
this evolutionary rule deﬁnes a cellular automaton. [For a recent survey about the rich behavior of cellular
automata, see the book by Wolfram (2002).]
12 The case c = 0 is sometimes called a “Weak” Prisoner’s Dilemma, where not only (D, D), but (D, C) and (C, D) are also
Nash equilibria. Nevertheless, it was found (Nowak and May, 1992) that when played as a spatial game the weak version has
the same qualitative properties as the typical version with c < 0, at least when |c| << 1.
59

Systematic investigations have been made for diﬀerent types of neighborhoods. In most cases the authors
considered the Moore neighborhood (involving nearest and next-nearest neighbors) with or without self-
interactions. The computer simulations were started from random initial states (with approximately the
same number of defectors and cooperators) or from symmetrical starting conﬁgurations. Wonderful sequence
of patterns (kaleidoscopes, dynamic fractals) were found when the simulation was started from a symmetrical
state (e.g., one defector in the sea of cooperators).
Figure 23 shows typical patterns appearing after a large number of time steps with random initial con-
ditions. The underlying connectivity structure is a square lattice with periodic boundary condition. The
players’ income derives from nine games against nearest- and next-nearest neighbors and against the player’s
own strategy as opponent. These self-interactions favor cooperators, and become relevant in the formation
of a number of speciﬁc patterns.
b=1.05
b=1.15
b=1.35
b=1.77
b=1.95
b=2.10
Fig. 23. Stationary 80×80 patterns indicating the distribution of defectors and cooperators on a square lattice with synchronized
update (with self-, nearest-, and next-nearest-neighbor interactions) as suggested by Nowak and May (1992). The simulations
are started from random initial states with diﬀerent values of b as indicated. The black (white) pixels refer to defectors
(cooperators) who have chosen defection (cooperation) in the previous step too. The dark (light) gray pixels indicate defectors
(cooperators) who invaded the given site in the very last step.
In these spatial models defectors receive one of the possible payoﬀs UD = 0, b, . . ., zb depending on
the given conﬁguration, whereas the cooperators’ payoﬀis UC = 0, 1, . . ., z (or UC = 1, . . . , z + 1 if self-
interaction is included), where z denotes the number of neighbors. Consequently, the parameter space for
b can be divided into small equivalency regions by break points, bbp = k2/k1, where k1 = 2, 3, . . . , z and
k2 = 3, 4, . . . , z [and (z + 1) for self-interaction]. Within these regions the cellular automaton rules are
equivalent. Notice, however, that the strategy change at a given site depends on the actual conﬁguration
within a suﬃciently large surroundings, including all neighbors of neighbors. For instance, for the Moore
neighborhood this means a square block of 5 × 5 sites. As a result, for 1 < b < 9/8 one can observe a frozen
pattern of solitary defectors, whose typical spatial distribution is plotted in Fig. 23 for b = 1.05.
In the absence of self-interactions the pattern of solitary defectors can be observed for 7/8 < b < 1. For
b > 1, however, solitary defectors always receive the highest score, therefore their strategy is adopted by
their neighbors in the next step. In the step after this the payoﬀof the defecting oﬀsprings is reduced by
interacting with each other, and they ﬂip back to cooperation. Consequently, for 1 < b < 7/5 we ﬁnd that
the 3 × 3 block of defectors shrink back to their original one-site size. In the sea of cooperators there are
isolated islands of defectors with ﬂuctuating size, 1 × 1 ↔3 × 3. These objects are easily recognizable in
several snapshots of Fig. 23. This phenomenon demonstrates how a strategy adoption (learning) mechanism
for interacting players can prevent the spreading of defection (exploitation) in a spatial structure.
In the formation of the patterns shown in Fig. 23, the invasion of cooperators along horizontal and
vertical straight line fronts plays a crucial role. As demonstrated in Fig. 24, this process can be observed for
b < 5/3 (or b < 2 in the presence of self-interactions). The invasion process stops when two fronts surround
defectors who form a network (or fragments of lines) as illustrated in Fig. 23. In some constellations the
defectors’ income becomes suﬃciently high to be followed by some neighboring cooperators. However, in
60

the subsequent steps, as described above, cooperators strike back, and this leads to local oscillations (limit
cycles) as indicated by the grey pixels in the snapshots.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 3b 5
8
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 3b 5
8
8
3b 3b 3b 3b 3b 3b
3b 3b 5b 6
8
8
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
Fig. 24. Local payoﬀs for two distributions of defectors (black boxes) and cooperators (white boxes) if z = 8. The cellular
automaton rules yield that cooperators invade defectors along the horizontal boundary for the left hand constellation if b < 5/3.
This horizontal boundary is stopped if 5/3 < b < 8/3, whereas defector invasion occurs for b > 8/3. Similar cooperator invasions
can be observed along both the horizontal and vertical fronts for the right hand distribution, except for the corner, where three
defectors survive if 7/5 < b < 5/3.
There exists a region of b, namely 8/5 < b < 5/3 (or 9/5 < b < 2 with self-interactions included), where
consecutive defector invasions also occur, and the average ratio of cooperators and defectors is determined by
the dynamical balance between these competing invasion processes. Within this region the average concen-
tration of strategies becomes independent of the initial conﬁguration, except for some possible pathologies.
Otherwise, in other regions, the time-dependence of the strategy frequencies and the limit values depend on
the initial conﬁguration (Nowak and May, 1993; Schweitzer et al., 2002). Figure 25 compares two series of
numerical results obtained by varying the initial frequency ρ(t = 0) of cooperators on a lattice consisting
of 106 sites. These simulations are repeated 10 times to demonstrate that the standard deviation of limit
values increases drastically for low values of ρ(t = 0). The triangles represent typical behavior when the
system evolves into a ”frozen (blinking) pattern”.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ρ(t=0)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ρ
Fig. 25. Monte Carlo data for the average frequency of cooperators as a function of initial cooperator’s frequency for b = 1.35
(triangles) and 1.65 (squares) in the absence of self-interaction.
The visualization of the evolution makes clear that cooperators have a fair chance of survival if they form
compact colonies. For random initial states the probability of ﬁnding compact cooperator colonies decreases
very fast with their concentration. In this case the dynamics becomes very sensitive to the initial conﬁgura-
tion. The last snapshot in Fig. 23 demonstrates that cooperators forming a k ×l (k, l > 2) rectangular block
can remain alive even for 5/3 < b < 8/3 (or 2 < b < 3 for self-interactions), when cooperator invasions along
the horizontal and vertical fronts are already blocked.
Keeping in mind that the stationary frequencies of strategies depend on the initial conﬁguration, it is
useful to compare the numerical results obtained in the presence or absence of self-interactions. As indicated
61

in Fig. 26 the coexistence of cooperators and defectors is maintained for larger b values in the case of
self-interactions. These numerical data (obtained on a large box containing 106 sites) have suﬃciently low
statistical error to demonstrate the occurrence of break points. We have to emphasize, that for frozen
patterns the variation of ρ(t = 0) in the initial state can cause signiﬁcant deviation for the data denoted by
open symbols.
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
b
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ρ
Fig. 26. Average (non-vanishing) frequency of cooperators as a function of b in the model suggested by Nowak and May (1992).
Diamonds (squares) represent Monte Carlo data obtained for a Moore neighborhood on the square lattice in the presence
(absence) of self-interactions. The simulations start from a random initial state with equal frequency of cooperators and
defectors. Closed symbols indicate states, where the coexistence of cooperators and defectors is maintained by a dynamical
balance between opposite invasion processes. Open symbols refer to frozen (blinking) patterns. The arrows at the bottom (top)
indicate break points in the absence (presence) of self-interactions.
The results obtained via cellular automaton models have raised a lot of questions, and inspired people to
develop a wide variety of models. For example, in subsequent papers Nowak et al. (1994a,b) studied diﬀerent
spatial structures including triangular and cubic lattices and a random grid, whose sites were distributed
randomly on a rectangular block with periodic boundary condition with a range of interaction limited by a
given radius. It turned out that cooperation can be maintained in spatial models even for some randomness.
The rigorous comparison of all the results obtained under diﬀerent conditions is diﬃcult, because most of
the models were developed without knowing all previous investigations published in diﬀerent areas of science.
The conditions for the coexistence of the C and D strategies and some quantitative features of these states
on a square lattice were studied systematically for more general, two-parameter payoﬀmatrices containing
b and c parameters by Lindgren and Nordahl (1994); Hauert (2001); Schweitzer et al. (2002). Evidently, on
the two-dimensional parameter space the break points form crossing straight lines.
The cellular automaton model with nearest-neighbor interactions was studied by Vainstein and Arenzon
(2001) on diluted square lattices (see the left hand structure in Fig. 14). If too many sites are removed the
spatial structure fragments into small parts, on which cooperators and defectors survive separately from
each other, and the ﬁnal strategy frequencies depend on the initial state. The most interesting result was
found for small q values. The simulations have indicated that the fraction of cooperators increases with q if
q < qth ≃0.05. In this case the sparsely removed sites can play the role of sterile defectors who block further
spreading of defection.
Cellular automaton models on random networks were also studied by Abramson and Kuperman (2001),
Masuda and Aihara (2003), and Duran and Mulet (2005). These investigations highlighted some interesting
and general features. It was observed that local irregularities in the small-world structures or random graph
shrink the region of parameters where frozen patterns occur (Class 2 of cellular automata). On random
graphs this eﬀect may prevent the formation of frozen patterns if the the average value of connectivity ¯C
62

is large enough (Duran and Mulet, 2005). Furthermore, the simulations also revealed at least two factors
which can increase the frequency of cooperators. Both an inhomogeneity in the degree distribution and a
suﬃciently large clustering coeﬃcient can support cooperation.
Kim et al. (2002) studied a cellular automaton model on a small-world graph, where many players are
allowed to adopt the strategy of an inﬂuential player. On this inhomogeneous structure the asymmetric role
of the players can cause large ﬂuctuations, triggered by the strategy ﬂips of the inﬂuential site. Many aspects
of this phenomenon will be discussed later on.
Huge eﬀorts were focused on the extension of the strategy space. Most of these investigations studied
what happens if the players are allowed to follow a ﬁnite subset of stochastic reactive strategies [see e.g.,
Nowak et al. (1994a); Lindgren and Nordahl (1994); Grim (1995); Brauchli et al. (1999)]. It was shown that
the addition of some Tit-for-Tat strategy to the standard D and C strategies supports the prevalence of
cooperation in the whole range of payoﬀparameters. A similar result was earlier found by Axelrod (1984) for
non-spatial games. Nowak et al. (1994a) demonstrated that the application of three cyclically dominating
strategies leads to a self-organizing pattern, to be discussed later on within the context of the spatial Rock-
Scissors-Paper game.
Grim (1995, 1996) studied a cellular automaton model with D, C, and several Generous Tit-for-Tat
strategies, characterized by diﬀerent values of the q parameter. The chosen strategy set included those
strategies that play a dominating role in Figs. 19, 20, and 22. Besides deterministic cellular automata
Grim also studied the eﬀects of mutants introduced in small clusters after each step. In both cases the
time-dependence of the strategy population was very similar to those plotted in Figs. 20 and 22. There
was, however, an important diﬀerence: the spatial evolutionary process ended up with the dominance of a
Generous Tit-for-Tat strategy, whose generosity parameter exceeded the optimum of the mean-ﬁeld system
by a factor of 2 (Molander, 1985; Nowak and Sigmund, 1992; Grim, 1996). This can be interpreted as an
indication that spatial eﬀects encourage greater generosity.
Within the family of spatial multi-strategy evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma games the model introduced
by Killingback et al. (1999) represents another remarkable cellular automaton. For this approach a player’s
strategy is characterized by an investment (incurring some cost for her) that will be beneﬁcial for all her
neighbors including herself. This formulation of the Prisoner’s Dilemma is similar to Public Good games as
described in Appendix A.8. The cellular automaton on a square lattice was started with (selﬁsh) players
having low investment. The authors demonstrated that these individuals can be invaded by mutants who
have higher investment rate due to spatial eﬀects.
Another direction towards which cellular automaton models were extended involves the stochastic cellular
automata discussed brieﬂy in Sec. 6.1. The corresponding spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma game was introduced
and investigated by many authors, e.g., Nowak et al. (1994a); Mukherji et al. (1996); Kirchkamp (2000);
Hauert (2002), and further references are given in the paper by Schweitzer et al. (2005). The stochastic
elements of the rules are capable of destroying local regularities, which appear in deterministic cellular
automata belonging to Class 2 or 4. As a result, stochasticity modiﬁes the phase boundary separating quan-
titatively diﬀerent behaviors in the parameter space. In the papers by Hauert (2002) and Schweitzer et al.
(2005) the reader can ﬁnd phase diagrams obtained by numerical simulations. The main features caused
by these types of randomness are similar to those observed for random sequential update. Anyway, if the
strategy change suggested by the deterministic rule is realized with low probability then the corresponding
dynamical system becomes equivalent to a model with random sequential update. In the next section we
will show that random sequential update usually provides a more eﬃcient and convenient framework for
studying the eﬀects of payoﬀparameters, noise, randomness, and diﬀerent connectivity structures on the
emergence of cooperation.
6.6. Spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma with random sequential update
In many cases random sequential update provides a more realistic approach as detailed by Huberman and Glance
(1993). Evolution starts from a random initial state, and the following elementary strategy adoption steps
are repeated: choose two neighboring players at random and the ﬁrst player (at site x) adopts the second’s
63

strategy (at site y) with a probability P(sx →sy) depending on the payoﬀdiﬀerence. This rule belongs to
the general (smoothed) imitation rules deﬁned by Eq. (64). In this section we use Eq. (65) and write the
transition probability as
P(sx →sy) =
1
1 + exp[(Ux −Uy)/K].
(124)
Our principal goal is to study the eﬀect of noise K.
In order to quantify the diﬀerences between synchronized and random sequential update, in Fig. 27 we
compare two sets of numerical data obtained on square lattices with nearest- and next-nearest neighbor
interactions (z = 8) in the absence of self-interactions. First we have to emphasize that ”frozen” (blinking)
patterns cannot be observed for random sequential update. Instead, the system always develops into one
of the homogeneous absorbing states with ρ = 0 or ρ = 1, or into a two-strategy co-existence state being
independent of the initial state.
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
b
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ρ
Fig. 27. Average frequency of cooperators as a function of b, using synchronized update (squares) and random sequential
updates (diamonds) for nearest- and next-nearest interactions. Squares are the same data as plotted in Fig. 26, diamonds are
obtained for K = 0.03 within the coexistence region of b.
The most striking diﬀerence is that for noisy dynamics cooperation can only be maintained until a lower
threshold value of b. As mentioned above, for synchronized update cooperation is strongly supported by the
invasion of cooperators perpendicular to the horizontal or vertical interfaces. For random sequential update,
however, the invasion fronts become irregular, favoring defectors. At the same time the noisy dynamics is
capable to eliminate solitary defectors who appear for low values of b, as illustrated in Fig. 27.
The left snapshot of Fig. 28 shows that solitary defectors can create an oﬀspring positioned on one of the
neighboring sites for 7/8 < b < 1 in the absence of self-interactions. As the parent and the oﬀspring mutually
reduce each other’s income, one of them becomes extinct within a short time, and the survival is ready to
create another oﬀspring. Due to this mechanism defectors perform random walks on the lattice. These moving
objects collide and one of them is likely to be destroyed. On the other hand, there is some probability that
they split into two objects. In short, these processes are analogous to branching and coalescing random walks,
thoroughly investigated in non-equilibrium statistical physics. Cardy and T¨auber (1996, 1998) have shown
that these systems exhibit a non-equilibrium phase transition (more precisely an extinction process) when
the parameters are tuned. There the transition belongs to the so-called directed percolation universality class.
A very similar phenomenon can be observed at the extinction of cooperators in our spatial game. In the
vicinity of the extinction point the cooperators form colonies (see right snapshot of Fig. 28) who also perform
branching and coalescing random walks. Consequently, both extinction processes exhibit the same universal
features (Szab´o and T˝oke, 1998; Chiappin and de Oliveira, 1999). However, the occurrence of these universal
features of the extinction transition is not restricted to random sequential update. Similar properties have
64

Fig. 28. Distribution of defectors (black pixels) and cooperators (white areas) on a square lattice for b = 0.95 (left) and b = 1.036
(right) if K = 0.1.
also been found in several stochastic cellular automata (synchronous update) (Domany and Kinzel, 1984;
Bidaux et al., 1989; Jensen, 1991; Wolfram, 2002).
The universal properties of this type of non-equilibrium critical phase transitions have been intensively
investigated. For a survey see the book by Marro and Dickman (1999) or the review paper by Hinrichsen
(2000). The very robust features of this transition from the active phase ρ > 0 to the absorbing phase (ρ = 0)
occur in many homogeneous spatial systems where the order parameter is scalar and the interactions are
short ranged (Janssen, 1981; Grassberger, 1982). The simplest model exemplifying this transition is the
contact process proposed by Harris (1974) as a toy model to describe the spread of an epidemic. In his
model healthy and infected objects are localized on a lattice. Infection spreads with some rate through
nearest-neighbor contacts (in analogy to a learning mechanism), while infected sites recover at a unit rate.
Due to its simplicity, the contact process allows for a very accurate numerical investigation of the universal
properties of the critical transition.
In the vicinity of the extinction point (here bcr), the frequency of the given strategy plays the role of the
order parameter. In the limit N →∞it vanishes as a power law,
ρ ∝|bcr −b|β,
(125)
where β = 0.583(4) in two dimensions, independently of many irrelevant details of the system. The algebraic
decrease of ρ is accompanied by an algebraic divergence of the ﬂuctuations of ρ,
χ = N

⟨ρ2(t)⟩−⟨ρ(t)⟩2
∝|bcr −b|−γ ,
(126)
as well as of the correlation length
ξ ∝|bcr −b|−ν⊥
(127)
and the relaxation time
τ ∝|bcr −b|−ν∥.
(128)
For two-dimensional systems the numerical values of the exponents are: γ = 0.35(1), ν⊥= 0.733(4), and
ν∥= 1.295(6). Further universal properties and techniques to study these transitions are well described in
Marro and Dickman (1999) and Hinrichsen (2000) (and further references therein).
The above divergencies cause serious diﬃculties in numerical simulations. Within the critical region the
accurate determination of the average frequencies requires large system sizes, L >> ξ, and simultaneously
long thermalization and sampling times, tth, ts >> τ. In typical Monte Carlo simulations the suitable
accuracy for ρ ≃0.01 can be achieved by run times as long as several weeks on a PC.
The peculiarity of evolutionary games is that there may be two subsequent critical transitions. The
numerical conﬁrmation of the universal features becomes easier, if the spatial evolutionary game is as simple
as possible. The simplicity of the model also allows us to perform the generalized mean-ﬁeld analyses, using
65

larger and larger cluster sizes (for details see Appendix C). Therefore, in the rest of this section our attention
will be focused on those systems, where the players only have four neighbors, and the evolution is governed
by sequential strategy adoptions, as described at the beginning of this section.
Figure 29 shows a typical variation of ρ, when we tune the value of b within the region of coexistence
for K = 0.4. These data refer to two critical transitions at bc1 = 0.9520(1) and at bc2 = 1.07277(2). The
log-log plot in the inset provides numerical evidence that both extinction processes belong to the directed
percolation universality class.
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
b
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ρ
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
|b-bcr|
10
-2
10
-1
1−ρ,   ρ
Fig. 29. Average frequency of cooperators as a function of b on the square lattice for K = 0.4. Monte Carlo results are denoted
by squares. Solid, dashed, and dotted lines indicate the predictions of the generalized mean-ﬁeld technique at the level of 3×3-,
2 × 2-, 2-site clusters. Inset shows the log-log plot of the order parameter Φ vs. |b −bcr|, where Φ = 1 −ρ or Φ = ρ in the
vicinity of the ﬁrst and second transition points. The solid line has the slope β = 0.58 characterizing directed percolation.
In Fig. 29 the Monte Carlo data are compared with the results of the generalized mean-ﬁeld technique. The
large diﬀerence between the Monte Carlo data and the prediction of the pair approximation is not surprising,
if we know that traditional mean-ﬁeld theory (one-site approximation) predicts ρ = 0 at b > 1 for any K
as detailed above. As expected, the prediction improves gradually for larger and larger clusters. The slow
convergence towards the exact (Monte Carlo) results for increasing cluster sizes highlights the importance
of short range correlations related to the occurrence of solitary defectors and cooperator colonies. According
to these results, the ﬁrst continuous (linear) transition appears at b = bc1 < 1. As this transition lies outside
the parameter region of the Prisoner’s Dilemma (b > 1), we do not consider this in the sequel.
It is worth mentioning that the four-site approximation predicts a ﬁrst-order phase transition, i.e., a sudden
jump to ρ = 0 at b = bc2, while the more accurate nine-site approximation predicts linear extinction at a
threshold value b(9s)
c2
= 1.0661(2), very close to the exact result. We have to emphasize that the generalized
mean-ﬁeld method is not able to reproduce the exact algebraic behavior for any ﬁnite cluster sizes, although
its accuracy increases gradually. Despite this shortcoming, this technique can be used to estimate the region
of parameters where strategy coexistence is expected.
By the above techniques one can determine the transition point bc2 > 1 for diﬀerent values of K. The
remarkable feature of the results (see Fig. 30) is the extinction of cooperators for b > 1 in the limits when
K goes to 0 or ∞(Szab´o et al., 2005). In other words, there exists an optimum value of noise to maintain
cooperation at the highest possible level. This means that noise plays a crucial role in the emergence of
cooperation, at least in the given connectivity structure.
The prediction of the pair approximation cannot be illustrated in Fig. 30 because the corresponding
data lie outside the plotted region. The most serious shortcoming of this approximation is that it predicts
66

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
K
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
bc2
Fig. 30. Monte Carlo data (squares) for the critical value of b as a function of K on the square lattice. The solid and dashed
lines denote predictions of the generalized mean-ﬁeld technique at the levels of 3 × 3- and 2 × 2-site approximations.
limK→0 b(2s)
c2
= 2. Notice, however, that the generalized mean-ﬁeld approximations are capable to reproduce
the correct result, limK→0 b(MC)
c2
= 1, at higher levels.
The occurrence of noise enhanced cooperation can be demonstrated more strikingly when we plot the
frequency of cooperators against K at a ﬁxed b < max(bc2). As expected the results show two subsequent
critical transitions belonging to the directed percolation universality class, as demonstrated in Fig. 31.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
K
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
ρ
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
|K-Kc|
10
-2
10
-1
ρ
Fig. 31. Frequency of cooperators has a maximum when increasing K for b = 1.03. Inset shows the log-log plot of the frequency
of cooperators vs. |K −Kc| (Kc1 = 0.0841(1) and Kc2 = 1.151(1)). The straight line indicates the power-law behavior
characterizing directed percolation.
Using a diﬀerent approach, Traulsen et al. (2004) also found that the learning mechanism (for weak
external noise) can drive the system into a state, where the unfavored strategy appears with an en-
hanced frequency. They showed that the eﬀect can be present in other games (e.g. the Matching Pennies)
too. The frequency of the unfavored strategy reaches its maximum at intermediate noise intensities in a
resonance-like manner. Similar phenomena, called stochastic resonance, are widely studied in climatic change
(Benzi et al., 1982), biology (Douglass et al., 1993), ecology (Blarer and Doebeli, 1999), and excitable media
(Jung and Mayer-Kress, 1995; Gammaitoni et al., 1998) when considering the response to a periodic exter-
nal force. The present phenomenon, however, is more similar to coherence resonance (Pikovsky and Kurths,
1997; Traulsen et al., 2004; Perc, 2005; Perc and Marhl, 2006) because no periodic force is involved here.
In other words, the enhancement in the frequency of cooperators appears as a nonlinear response to purely
noisy excitations.
67

The analogy becomes more striking when we also consider additional payoﬀﬂuctuations. In a recent
paper Perc (2006) studied an evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma game with a noisy dynamical rule at very
low value of K, and made the payoﬀs stochastic by adding some noise ζ, chosen randomly in the range
−σ < ζ < σ. When varying σ the numerical simulations indicated a resonance-like behavior in the frequency
of cooperators. His curves, obtained for a somewhat diﬀerent parametrization, are very similar to those
plotted in Fig. 31.
The disappearance of cooperation in the zero noise limit for the present topology is contrary to naive
expectations that could be deduced from previous simulations (Nowak et al., 1994a). To further clarify the
reasons, systematic investigations were made for diﬀerent connectivity structures (Szab´o et al., 2005). Ac-
cording to the simulations, this evolutionary game exhibits qualitatively similar behavior if the connectivity
is characterized by a simple square or cubic (z = 6) lattice, a random regular graph (or Bethe lattice), or a
square lattice of four site cliques (see the right hand side of Fig. 32). Notice that these structures are prac-
tically free of triangles, or the overlapping triangles form larger cliques that are not connected by triangles
but by single links (see the top structure on the right in Fig. 32).
In contrast with these, cooperation is maintained in the zero noise limit on two-dimensional triangular
(z = 6) and kagome (z = 4) lattices, on the three-dimensional body centered cubic lattice (z = 8) and on
random regular graphs (or Bethe lattice) of one-site connected triangles (see the right hand side of Fig. 32).
Similar behavior was found on the square lattice when second-neighbor interactions are also taken into
account. The common topological feature of these structures is the percolation of the overlapping triangles
over the whole system. The exploration of this topological feature of networks has begun very recently
(Palla et al., 2005; Der´enyi et al., 2005), and for the evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma it seems to be more
important than the spatial character of the connectivity graph. In order to separate the dependence on the
degree of nodes from other topological characteristics in Fig. 32 we compare results obtained for structures
with the same number of neighbors z = 4. It is worth mentioning that these qualitative diﬀerences are also
conﬁrmed by the generalized mean-ﬁeld technique for suﬃciently large clusters (Szab´o et al., 2005).
0.0
1.0
2.0
K
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
bc2
Fig. 32. Critical values of b vs. K for ﬁve diﬀerent connectivity structures characterized by z = 4. Monte Carlo data are indicated
by squares (square lattice), pluses (random regular graph or Bethe lattice), ⃝(lattice of four-site cliques), △(kagome lattice),
and ▽(regular graph of overlapping triangles). The last three structures are illustrated above from top to bottom on the
right-hand side.
In the light of the above results it is conjectured that for the given dynamical rule cooperation can
be maintained in the zero noise limit only for those regular connectivity structures, where the overlapping
triangles span an inﬁnitely large portion of the system for N →∞. For low values of K the highest frequency
of cooperators is found on those random (non-spatial) structures, where two overlapping triangles have only
one common site (see Fig. 32).
68

The advantageous feature of these topologies (Vukov et al., 2006) can be explained most easily on those
z = 4 structures where the overlapping triangles have only one common site (the middle and bottom
structures on the right hand side of Fig. 32). Let us assume that originally only one triangle is occupied by
cooperators in the sea of defectors. Such a situation is plotted in Fig. 33.
Fig. 33. Schematic illustration of the spreading of cooperators (white dots) within the sea of defectors (black dots) on a network
built up from one-site overlapping triangles. These structures are locally similar to those plotted in the middle and bottom
structures on the right-hand side of Fig. 32. Arrows show the direction of the most frequent transitions in the low noise limit.
The payoﬀof cooperators within a triangle is 2, neighboring defectors receive b, and all the other defectors
get 0. For this constellation the most likely process is that one of the neighboring defectors adopts the more
successful cooperator strategy. As the state of the new cooperator is not stable, she can return to defection
again within a short time, unless the other neighboring defector changes to cooperation too, provided that
b < 3/2. In the latter case we obtain another triplet of cooperators. This is a stable conﬁguration against
the attack of neighboring defectors for low noise. Similar processes can occur at the tip of the branches, if
the overlapping triangles form a tree. Consequently, the iteration of these events gives rise to a growing tree
of overlapping cooperator triplets. The growth process, however, is blocked at defector sites separating two
branches of the tree. This blocking process is missing if only one tree of cooperator triplets exists like on a
tree-like structure. Nevertheless, it constraints the spreading of cooperators on spatial structures (e.g., on
the kagome lattice). The blocking process controls the spreading of cooperators (and assure the coexistence
of cooperation and defection) for both types of connectivity structures, if many trees of cooperator triplets
are simultaneously present in the system. Evidently, more complicated analysis is required to clarify the role
of diﬀerent topological properties for z > 4, as well as for cases when the overlapping triangles have more
than one common sites.
The above analysis also suggests some further interesting conclusions (conjectures). In the large K limit,
simulations show similar behavior for all the investigated spatial structures. The highest rate of cooperation
occurs on random regular graphs, where the role of loops is negligible. In other words, for high noise the
(quenched) randomness in the connectivity structure provides the highest rate of cooperation, at least, if
the structure of connectivity is restricted to regular graphs with z = 4.
According to preliminary results some typical phase diagrams on the K–b plane are depicted in Fig. 34.
The versions on the top have already been discussed above. The bottom left diagram is expected to occur
on the kagome lattice if the strategy adoption probability from some players (with ﬁxed position) is reduced
by a suitable factor (Szolnoki and Szab´o, 2007). The fourth type (bottom right) is characteristic to some
one-dimensional systems.
6.7. Two-strategy Prisoner’s Dilemma game on a chain
First we consider a system with players located on the sites x of a one-dimensional lattice. The players
follow one of the two strategies, sx = C or D, and their total utility comes from a Prisoner’s Dilemma
game with their left and right neighbors. If the evolution is governed by some imitative learning mechanism,
which involves nearest-neighbors, then a strategy change can only occur at those pair of sites, where the
neighbors follow diﬀerent strategies. At these sites the maximum payoﬀof cooperators, 1, is always lower
than the defectors’ minimum payoﬀb. Consequently, for any Darwinian selection rule cooperators should
become extinct sooner or later.
69

0
K
1
b
D
C+D
C
0
K
1
b
D
C+D
C
0
K
1
b
D
C+D
C
0
K
1
b
D
C
C+D
Fig. 34. Possible schematic phase diagrams of the Prisoner’s Dilemma on the K–b plane. The curves show the phase transitions
between the coexistence region (C + D) and homogeneous solutions (C or D). The K →∞limit reproduces the mean-ﬁeld
result bc1 = bc2 = 1 for three plots, the exception represents a behavior occurring for some inhomogeneous strategy adoption
rates.
In one-dimensional models the imitation rule leads to a domain growing process (where one of the strategies
is favored) driving the system towards the homogeneous ﬁnal state. Nakamaru et al. (1997) studied the
competition between D and Tit-for-Tat strategies under diﬀerent evolutionary rules. It is demonstrated
that the pair approximation predicts correctly the ﬁnal state dependent on the evolutionary rule and initial
strategy distribution.
Considering C and D strategies only, the behavior changes signiﬁcantly if second neighbors are also
taken into account. In this case the players have four neighbors and the results can be compared with
those discussed above (see Fig. 32), provided we choose the same dynamical rule. Unfortunately, systematic
investigations are hindered by extremely slow transient events. According to the preliminary results, the two
subsequent phase transitions coincide, bc1 = bc2 > 1, if the noise exceeds a threshold value, K > Kth. This
means that evolution reaches a homogeneous absorbing state of cooperators (defectors) for b < bc1 = bc2
(b > bc1 = bc2). For lower noise levels, K < Kth, coexistence occurs in a ﬁnite region, bc1(K) < b < bc2(K).
The simulations indicate that bc2 →1 if K goes to zero. Shortly, for this connectivity structure the system
represents another class of behavior, complementing those discussed in the previous section.
Very recently Santos and Pacheco (2005) have studied a similar evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma game
on the one-dimensional lattice varying the number z of neighbors. In their model a randomly chosen player
x adopts the strategy of her neighbor y (chosen at random) with a probability (Uy −Ux)/U0 (where U0 is
a suitable normalization factor) if Uy > Ux. This is Schlag’s Proportional Imitation rule, Eq. (62). It turns
out that cooperators can survive if 4 ≤z ≤zmax ≈64. More precisely, the range of b with coexisting C and
D strategies decreases when z increases. Similar results are reported by Ifti et al. (2004) and Tang et al.
(2006) who used a diﬀerent dynamical rules. As expected, a mean-ﬁeld type behavior governs the system
for suﬃciently large z.
The importance of one-dimensional systems lies in the fact that they act as starting structures for small-
world graphs as suggested by Watts and Strogatz (1998), who substituted random links for a portion q
of bonds connecting nearest- and next-nearest neighbors on a one-dimensional lattice (see Fig. 16). The
long-range connections generated by this rewiring process decrease the average distance between sites, and
produce a small world phenomenon (Milgram, 1967), which characterizes typical social networks.
70

6.8. Prisoner’s Dilemma on social networks
The spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma has been studied by many authors on diﬀerent random networks. Some
results for synchronized update were brieﬂy discussed in Sec. 6.5. In Fig. 34 we have compared the phase
diagrams for regular graphs, i.e., lattices and random graphs where the number of neighbors is ﬁxed. However,
the assumption of a uniform degree is not realistic for most social networks, and these models do not
necessarily give adequate predictions. In this section we focus our attention on graphs where the degree has
a non-uniform scale-free distribution. The basic message is that degree heterogeneity can drastically enhance
cooperation.
The emergence of cooperation around the largest hub was reported by Pacheco and Santos (2005). To
understand the eﬀect of heterogeneity in the connectivity network, ﬁrst we consider a simple situation,
which represents a typical part of a scale-free network. We restrict our attention to the surroundings of two
connected central players (called hubs), each linked to a large number of other, less connected players, as
shown in Fig. 35. Following Santos et al. (2006c), we wish to illustrate the basic mechanism how cooperation
gets supported when a cooperator and a defector face each other in such a constellation.
x
y
Fig. 35. A typical subgraph of a scale-free social network, where two connected central players are linked to many others having
signiﬁcantly less neighbors.
For the sake of simplicity we assume that both the cooperator x and the defector y are linked to the same
number Nx = Ny of additional co-players (xn and yn players), who follow the C and D strategies with
equal probability in the initial state. This random initial conﬁguration provides the highest total income for
the central defector. The central cooperator’s total utility is lower, but exceeds the income of most of her
neighbors, because she has much more connections. We can assume that the evolutionary rule is Smoothed
Imitation deﬁned by Eq. (124), with the imitated player chosen randomly from the neighbors. The inﬂuence
of the neglected part of the whole system on xn and yn players is taken into consideration in a simpliﬁed
manner. We assume no direct interaction with the rest of the population but posit that xn and yn players
adopt a strategy from each other with probability Prsa (rsa - random strategy adoption), because the strategy
distribution in this subset is alike to that of the whole system.
The result of a numerical simulation is shown in Fig. 36. At the beginning of the evolutionary process the
frequency of cooperators increases (decreases) in the neighborhood of the central cooperator (defector), and
this variation is accompanied by an increase (decrease) of the utility Ux (Uy). Consequently, after some time
the central cooperator will obtain the highest payoﬀand becomes the best player to be followed by others.
A necessary condition for this scenario is Nx, Ny >> 1 which can be satisﬁed in scale-free networks, ant that
the random eﬀect of the surroundings characterized by Prsa should not be too strong. A weak asymmetry
in the number of neighbors cannot modify this picture.
This mechanism seems to work well for all scale-free networks, as was reported by Santos and Pacheco
(2005); Santos et al. (2006c); Santos and Pacheco (2006), who observed a signiﬁcant enhancement in the fre-
quency of cooperators. The stationary frequency of cooperators were determined both for the Barab´asi and Albert
(1999) and Dorogovtsev et al. (2001) structures (see Fig. 17). Cooperation remains high in the whole re-
gion of b, especially for the Dorogovtsev-Mendes-Samukhin network (see Fig. 37). To illustrate the striking
enhancement, these data are compared with the results obtained for two lattices at the optimum value of
noise (i.e., K = 0.4 on the square lattice and K = 0 on the kagome lattice) in Fig. 37.
71

10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
2
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ρ
x
y
xn
yn
Fig. 36. Frequency (probability) of cooperators as a function of time for the topology in Fig. 35 at the central sites x and y,
as well as at their neighbors (xn and yn). Initially sx = C and sy = D, and the neighboring players choose C or D with
equal probability. The numerical results are averaged over 1000 runs for b = 1.5, Prsa = 0.1, and the number of neighbors
Nx = Ny = 49.
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
b
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ρ
Fig. 37. Frequency of cooperators vs. b for two diﬀerent scale-free connectivity structures, where the average number of neighbors
is ⟨z⟩= 4 (Santos and Pacheco, 2005). The Monte Carlo data are denoted by pluses (Barab´asi-Albert model) and triangles
(Dorogovtsev-Mendes-Samukhin model). Squares and the dashed line show ρ on the square and kagome lattices, resp., at a
noise level K where bcr reaches its maximum.
Santos et al. (2006c) found no qualitative change when using asynchronous update instead of the syn-
chronous rule. The simulations clearly indicated that the highest frequency of cooperation occurs on sites
with a large degree. Furthermore, contrary to what was observed for regular graphs, the frequency of co-
operators increases with ⟨z⟩. Conversely, cooperative behavior evaporates if the edges connecting the hubs
are artiﬁcially removed. Considering an evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma game with synchronized update
(without irrational strategy adoption) G´omez-Garde˜nez et al. (2007) have found that cooperation remains
unchanged in a vicinity of hubs. All these features support the conclusion that the appearance of connected
hubs is responsible for enhanced cooperation in these structures.
Note that in these simulations an imitative adoption rule was applied, and the total utility was posited
to be simply additive. These elements favor cooperative players with many neighbors. Robustness of the
above mechanism is questionable for other type of dynamics like Best Response, or when the utility is
non-additive. Indeed, using diﬀerent evolutionary rules Wu et al. (2005b) have studied what happens on a
72

scale-free structure if the strategy adoption is based on the normalized payoﬀ(payoﬀdivided by the number
of co-players) rather than the total payoﬀ. The simulations indicate that the huge increase in the cooperator
frequency found in Santos et al. (2006c) is largely suppressed.
A weaker, although well-detectable consequence of the inhomogeneous degree distribution was observed
by Santos et al. (2005), when they compared the stationary frequency of cooperators on the classic (see
Fig. 16) and regular version of the small-world structure suggested by Watts and Strogatz (1998). They
found that on regular structures (with z = 4) the frequency of cooperators decreases (increases) below
(above) a threshold value of b, when the ratio of rewired links is increased.
In some sense hubs can be considered as privileged players, whose interaction with the neighborhood
is asymmetric. Such a feature was artiﬁcially built into a cellular automaton model by Kim et al. (2002),
who observed large drops in the level of cooperation after ﬂipping an inﬂuential site from cooperation to
defection. Very recently Wu et al. (2006), Ren et al. (2006), and Szolnoki and Szab´o (2007) have demon-
strated numerically that inhomogeneities in the strategy adoption rate can also enhance cooperation. Be-
sides inhomogeneities, the percolation of the overlapping triangles in the connectivity structure can also
give an additional boost for cooperation. Notice that the highest frequency of cooperators were found for
the Dorogovtsev-Mendes-Samukhin structure (see Fig. 17), where the construction of the growing graph
guarantees the percolation of triangles.
All the above analysis is based on the payoﬀmatrix given by Eq. (123). In the last years another
parametrization of A is used frequently. Within this approach the cooperator pays a cost c for her op-
ponent to receive a beneﬁt b (0 < c < b). The defector pays nothing and does not distribute beneﬁts. The
corresponding payoﬀmatrix is:
A =

0
b
−c
b −c

.
(129)
Using this payoﬀmatrix Ohtsuki et al. (2006) have studied the ﬁxation of solitary C (and D) strategy
on ﬁnite social networks for several evolutionary rules (e.g., ”death-birth”, ”birth-death”, and imitation
updating). For example, for the elementary steps of ”death-birth” updating a random player is chosen to
die and subsequently the neighboring players compete for the empty site in proportion to their ﬁtness. In
the so-called weak-selection limit, deﬁned by expression (121), the pair approximation can be performed
analytically. The pair approximation predicts that the cooperator has on average one more cooperator
neighbor than the defector, and the cooperators have a ﬁxation probability larger than 1/N (i.e., C is favored
in comparison to the voter model dynamics) if the ratio of beneﬁt to cost exceeds the average number of
neighbors (b/c > z). The results of simulations (performed on diﬀerent networks) show suﬃciently good
agreement with the prediction of pair approximation although this approximation neglects the role of loops
in the connectivity structure. Evidently, the accuracy of pair approximation is improved as z is increased. It
is underlined that the mentioned simple rule seems to be similar to Hamilton’s rule saying that kin selection
can favor cooperation if b/c > 1/r, where the social relatedness r can be measured by the inverse of the
number of neighbors (Hamilton, 1964a). Nowak (2006b) has shown that the altruistic behavior emerges if the
beneﬁt-to-cost ratio (b/c) exceeds some threshold value for three other mechanisms called direct reciprocity,
indirect reciprocity, and group selection.
All the above phenomena indicate that there are possibly many ways to inﬂuence and enhance cooperative
behavior in social networks. Further investigations would be required to clarify the distinguished role of noise,
appearance of diﬀerent time scales, and inhomogeneities in these structures.
6.9. Prisoner’s Dilemma on evolving networks
In real-life situations the preferential choice and refusal of partners play an important role in the emergence
of cooperation. Several aspects of this process have been investigated by using diﬀerent dynamics in the
mathematical models (Ashlock et al., 1996; Bala and Goyal, 2000; Hanaki et al., 2006) and experimentally
[see (Hauk and Nagel, 2001; Coricelli et al., 2004) and further references therein] for several years.
73

An interesting model where the social network and the individual strategies co-evolve was introduced by
Zimmermann et al. (2000, 2004). The construction of the system starts with the creation of a random graph
[as suggested by (Erd˝os and R´enyi, 1959)], which serves as an initial connectivity structure with a prescribed
average degree. The strategy of the players, positioned on this structure, can be either C or D. In discrete
time steps (t = 1, 2, . . .) each player plays a one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma game with all her neighbors and
the payoﬀs are summed up. Knowing the payoﬀs, unsatisﬁed players (whose payoﬀis not the highest in their
neighborhood) adopt the strategy of their best neighbors. This is the deterministic version of the Imitate
the Best rule in Eq. (66).
It is assumed that after the imitation phase unsatisﬁed players who have become defectors (and only these
players) break the link with the imitated defector with probability p. The broken link is replaced by a new
link to a randomly chosen player (self-links and multiple links are forbidden). This network adaption rule
conserves the number of links and allows cooperators to receive new links from the unsatisﬁed defectors.
The simulation starts from a random initial strategy distribution, and the evolution of the network, whose
intensity is characterized by p, is switched on after some thermalization time, typically 150 generations.
The numerical analysis for N = 104 sites shows that evolution ends up either in an absorbing state with
defectors only or in a state where cooperators and defectors form a frozen pattern. In the ﬁnal cooperative
state the defectors are isolated, and their frequency depends on the initial state due to the cellular automaton
rule. It turns out that modiﬁcations in ⟨z⟩can only cause a slight variation in the results. The adaptation of
the network leads to fundamental changes in the connectivity structure: the number of high degree sites are
enhanced signiﬁcantly, and these sites (leaders) are dominantly occupied by cooperators. These structural
changes are accompanied by a signiﬁcant increase in the frequency of cooperators. The ﬁnal concentration
of cooperators is as high as found by Santos and Pacheco (2005) (see Fig. 37) in the whole region of the
payoﬀparameter b (temptation to defect). It is observed, furthermore, that social crisis, i.e., large cascades
in the evolution of both structure and frequency of cooperators propagate through the network, if a leader’s
state is changed suddenly (Zimmermann and Egu´ıluz, 2005; Equ´ıluz et al., 2005).
The ﬁnal connectivity structure exhibits hierarchical characters. The formation of this structure is preceded
by the cascades mentioned above, in particular, for high values of b. This phenomenon may be related to
the competition of leaders (Santos et al., 2006c), discussed in the previous section (see Figs. 35 and 36).
This type of network adaption rule could not cause a relevant increase in the clustering coeﬃcient. In
(Zimmermann et al., 2004; Equ´ıluz et al., 2005) the network adaption rule was altered to favor the choice of
second neighbors (the neighbors of the D neighbor who are companions in distress) with another probability
p when selecting a new partner. As expected, this modiﬁcation resulted in a remarkable increase in the ﬁnal
clustering coeﬃcient. A particularly high increase was found for large b and small p values.
Fundamentally diﬀerent co-evolutionary dynamics were studied by Biely et al. (2007). The synchronized
strategy adoption rule was extended by the possibility of cancellation and/or creation of new links with
some probability. The number of removed and new links were limited by model parameters. In this model
the players were capable to estimate the expected payoﬀs in subsequent steps by taking into account the
possible variations in the neighborhood. In contrast to the previous model, here the number of connections
did not remain ﬁxed. The numerical simulations indicated the emergence of oscillations in some quantities
(e.g., the frequency of cooperators and the number of links) within some region of the parameter space. For
high frequency of the cooperators the network characteristics resemble those of scale-free graphs discussed
above. The appearance of global oscillations reminds us of similar phenomena found for voluntary Prisoner’s
Dilemma games (see below).
The above versions of co-evolutionary models are extended to involve stochastic elements (irrational
choices) in the evolution of both the strategy distribution and the connectivity structure (Santos et al.,
2006a; Pacheco et al., 2006a). Such an adaptive individual behavior introduces two time scales (τl and τs)
associated with the typical lifetime of the links and individual strategies modiﬁed by imitation via pairwise
comparison. In the limit W = τs/τl →0 this model reproduces the results achieved on quenched structure. In
the opposite limit (W →∞) the players readjust their connectivity structure for ﬁxed strategy distribution.
This latter phenomenon was investigated by Pacheco et al. (2006a,b) who assumed that the connections can
disappear exponentially with a life time and new links are created between randomly chosen players with
some rates. The characteristic death and birth rates of connections depend on the player’s strategies and the
74

corresponding parameters will determine the stationary frequency of connections (ΦXY ) between the s −s′
strategy pairs (s, s′ = D or C). In this case the slow evolution of the strategy frequencies can be described
by a mean-ﬁeld type equation based on a rescaled payoﬀmatrix (A →A′). In other words, under the mean-
ﬁeld conditions the players feel an eﬀective payoﬀmatrix with coeﬃcients A′
ss′ = Ass′Φss′. Evidently, this
transformation can change the ranking of payoﬀvalues. Pacheco et al. (2006a,b) have demonstrated that
the Prisoner’s Dilemma can be transformed into a new game favoring cooperation deﬁnitely when choosing
a suitable dynamics of linking. The numerical analysis indicates that similar consequences can be observed
even for W = 1. Two schematic plots in Fig. 38 show the expansion of those region of parameters where
cooperators dominates the system as W is increased from 0 to 3.
W=0
PD
SH
SG
0
1
2
-1
0
1
T
S
W=3
PD
SH
SG
0
1
2
-1
0
1
T
S
Fig. 38. Red areas indicate regions of the S −T plane where cooperators prevail the system for two diﬀerent values of W . Blue
territories refer to defectors’ dominance. The quadrants of Snowdrift, Stag Hunt, and Prisoner’s Dilemma are denoted by the
corresponding abbreviations (Santos et al., 2006a).
In the multilevel selection model introduced by Traulsen and Nowak (2006) N players are divided into
m groups. Individual incomes (ﬁtness) come from games between members of the same group, i.e., the
connectivity structure is a union of m disjoint complete subgraphs (cliques). At each time step of the
evolution a player is chosen randomly from the whole population with a probability proportional to her
income. The player’s oﬀspring is added to the same group. The players in the given group are divided into
two groups randomly with a probability q if the group size reaches a critical value n. Otherwise one of the
players is eliminated from this group (with a probability 1−q). The number of groups is ﬁxed by eliminating
a randomly chosen group whenever a new group is created. Although the evolutionary dynamics is based
on individual ﬁtness the selection occurs at two levels, and favors the fastest reproduction for both the
individuals and the groups. This model can be interpreted as a hierarchy of two types of Moran processes,
and has been analyzed analytically in the weak selection limit for low values of q. The model was extended by
allowing migration between the groups with some probability. Using the payoﬀmatrix (129) and considering
the ﬁxation probabilities Traulsen and Nowak (2006) have shown that cooperators are favored over defectors
if the beneﬁt-to-cost ratio exceeds a threshold value, b/c > 1 + z + n/m, where z is the average number of
migrants arising from a group during its lifetime.
Finally we call the reader’s attention to the work by Vainstein et al. (2007) who surveyed the eﬀect of
player’s migration on the measure of cooperation. The introduction of mobility drives the system towards
the mean-ﬁeld situation favoring the survival of defectors. Despite of this expectation Vainstein et al. have
described several dynamical rules increasing the frequency of cooperators. Similar results were reported
by Aktipis (2004) who considered the eﬀect of contingent movement of cooperators: the players walked
away once a defection occurred in the previous step. In some sense, this “win-stay, lose-move” strategy is
analogous to voluntary participation which also enhance cooperation (Saijo and Yamato, 1999; Hauert et al.,
2002; Szab´o and Hauert, 2002a; Wu et al., 2005a) as detailed in the subsequent section.
75

6.10. Spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma with three strategies
In former sections we considered in detail the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma game with two memoryless
strategies, AllD (shortly D) and AllC (shortly C). Enlarging the strategy space to three or more strategies
(now with memory) is a straightforward extension. The ﬁrst numerical investigations in this genre focused
on games with a ﬁnite subset of stochastic reactive strategies. As mentioned in Sec.6.2 one can easily select
three stochastic reactive strategies, for which cyclic dominance appears naturally as detailed by Nowak et al.
(1994a); Nowak and Sigmund (1989b,a). In the corresponding spatial games most of the evolutionary rules
give rise to self-organizing patterns, similar to those characterizing spatial Rock-Scissors-Paper games that
we discuss later in Sec. 7.
In the absence of cyclic dominance, a three-strategy spatial game usually develops into a state where one
or two strategies die out. This situation can occur in a model which allows for D, C, and Tit-for-Tat (shortly
T ) strategies (see Appendix B.2 for an introduction on Tit-for-Tat). In this case the T strategy will invade
the territory of D, and ﬁnally the evolution terminates in a mixture of C and T strategies, as was described
by Axelrod (1984) in the non-spatial case. In most spatial models, for suﬃciently high b any external support
of C against T yields cyclic dominance: T invades D invades C invades T .
In real social systems a number of factors can favor C against T . For example, permanent inspection,
i.e., keeping track of the opponents moves introduces a cost which reduces the net income of T strategists.
Similar payoﬀreduction is found for Generous T players (see again Appendix B.2 for an introduction on
Generous Tit-for-Tat). In some populations the C strategy may be favored by education or by the appearance
of new, unexperienced generations. These eﬀects can be built into the payoﬀmatrix (Imhof et al., 2005)
and/or can be handled via the introduction of an external force (Szab´o et al., 2000). Independently of the
technical details, these evolutionary games have some common features that we discuss here for the Voluntary
Prisoner’s Dilemma and later for the Rock-Scissors-Paper game.
The idea of a Voluntary Prisoner’s Dilemma game comes from Voluntary Public Good games (Hauert et al.,
2002) or Stag Hunt games (see Appendix A.12), where the players are allowed to avoid exploitation. Namely,
the players can refuse to participate in these multi-player games. Besides the traditional two strategies (D
and C) this option can be considered as a third strategy called “Loner” (shortly L). The cyclic dominance
between these strategies (L invades D invades C invades L) is due to the average payoﬀof L. The exper-
imental veriﬁcation that this leads to a Rock-Scissors-Paper-like dynamics is reported in Semmann et al.
(2003).
In the spatial versions of Public Good games (Hauert et al., 2002; Szab´o and Hauert, 2002b) the players
income comes from multi-player games with their neighborhood. This makes the calculations very compli-
cated. However, all the relevant properties of these models can be reserved when we reduce the ﬁve- (or
nine-) site interactions into pairwise interactions. With this proviso, the model becomes equivalent to the
Voluntary Prisoner’s Dilemma characterized by the following payoﬀmatrix:
D
C
L
A =
D
C
L


0
b
σ
0
1
σ
σ
σ
σ


(130)
where the loner and her opponent share a payoﬀ0 < σ < 1. Notice that the sub-matrix corresponding to
the D and C strategies is the same we used previously in Eq. (123). Similar payoﬀstructure can arise for a
job made in collaboration by two workers, if the collaboration itself involves a Prisoner’s Dilemma. In this
case, the workers can look for other independent jobs yielding lower income σ, if any of them declines the
common work.
First we consider the Voluntary Prisoner’s Dilemma game on a square lattice with nearest neighbor
interaction (Szab´o and Hauert, 2002a). The evolutionary dynamics is assumed to be random sequential
with a transition rate deﬁned by Eq. (124). According to the traditional mean-ﬁeld approximation, the
time-dependent strategy frequencies follow the typical trajectories shown in Fig. 39, that is, evolution tends
76

towards the homogeneous loner state. 13 A similar behavior was found by Hauert et al. (2002), when they
considered a Voluntary Public Good game.
L
C
D
Fig. 39. Trajectories of the Voluntary Prisoner’s Dilemma game predicted by the traditional mean-ﬁeld approximation for
σ = 0.3, b = 1.5, and K = 0.1.
The simulations indicate a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent behavior on the square lattice. In the absence of L
strategies this model agrees with the system discussed in Sec. 4.2, where cooperators become extinct if
b > bcr(K) (max(bcr) ≃1.1). Contrary to these, cooperators can survive for arbitrary b in the presence of
loners.
Figure 40 shows the coexistence of all three strategies. Note that this is a dynamic image. It is perpetually
in motion due to propagating interfaces, which reﬂect the cyclic dominance nature of the strategies. Nev-
ertheless, the qualitative properties of this self-organizing pattern are largely unchanged for a given payoﬀ
matrix.
D:
C:
L:
Fig. 40. A typical distribution of the three strategies on the square lattice for the Voluntary Prisoner’s Dilemma in the vicinity
of the extinction of loners.
It is worth emphasizing that cyclic dominance is not directly built into the payoﬀmatrix (130). Cyclic
invasions appear at the corresponding boundaries, where the role of strategy adoption and clustering is
important.
The results of a systematic analysis are summarized in Fig. 41 (Szab´o and Hauert, 2002a). Notice that
loners cannot survive for low values of b, where the defector frequency is too low to feed loners. Furthermore,
the loner frequency increases monotonously with b, despite the fact that large b only increases the payoﬀof
defectors. This unusual behavior is related to the cyclic dominance as explained later in Sec. 7.7.
13 Notice that L is attractive but unstable (see the relevant discussion in Sec. 3.3).
77

1
1.5
2
b
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
strategy frequencies
Fig. 41. Stationary frequency of defectors (squares), cooperators (diamonds), and loners (triangles) vs. b for the Voluntary
Prisoner’s Dilemma on the square lattice at K = 0.1 and σ = 0.3. The predictions of the pair approximation are indicated by
solid lines. Dashed lines refer to the region where this stationary solution becomes unstable.
As b decreases the stationary frequency of loners vanishes algebraically at a critical point (Szab´o and Hauert,
2002a). In fact, the extinction of loners belongs to the directed percolation universality class, although the
corresponding absorbing state is an inhomogeneous and time-dependent one. However, on large spatial and
temporal scales, the rate of birth and death becomes homogeneous on this background, and these are the
relevant criteria for belonging to the robust universality class of directed percolation, as was discussed in
detail by Hinrichsen (2000).
The predictions of the pair approximation are also illustrated in Fig. 41. Contrary to the two-strategy
model, here the agreement between the pair approximation and the Monte Carlo data is surprisingly good.
Figure 29 nicely demonstrates that the two-strategy pair approximation can fail in those regions, where
one of the strategy frequencies is low. This is, however, not the case here. For three-strategy solutions the
accuracy of this approach becomes better. The stability analysis, however, reveals a serious shortcoming:
the stationary solutions become unstable in the region of parameters indicated by dashed lines in Fig. 41.
In this region the numerical analysis indicates the appearance of global oscillations in the frequencies of
strategies.
Although the shortcomings of the generalized mean-ﬁled approximation on the square lattice diminish
when we go beyond the pair approximation and consider higher levels (larger clusters), it would be enlight-
ening to ﬁnd other connectivity structures on which the pair approximation becomes acceptable. Possible
candidates are the Bethe lattice and random regular graphs for large N (as discussed brieﬂy in Sec. 5),
because this approach neglects correlations mediated by four-site loops. In other words, the prediction of
the pair approximation is more reliable if loops are missing, as in the Bethe lattice.
The simulations (Szab´o and Hauert, 2002a) found a similar behavior to those on the square lattice (see
Fig. 41) if b remains below a threshold value b1 depending on K. For higher b global oscillations were
observed, in nice agreement with the prediction of the pair approximation, as illustrated in Fig. 42. To avoid
confusion in this plot we only illustrate the frequency of defectors, obtained on a random regular graph
with 106 sites. The plotted values (closed squares) are determined by averaging the defector’s frequency
over a long sampling time, typically 105 Monte Carlo steps (MCS). During this time the maximum and
minimum values of the defector’s frequency were also determined (open squares). The predictions of the
pair approximation for the same quantities can be easily determined, and they were compared with the
Monte Carlo data in Fig. 42. Both methods predict that the ”amplitude” of global oscillation increases with
b until a second threshold value b2. If b > b2, the strategy frequencies oscillate with a growing amplitude,
and after some time one of them dies out. Finally the system develops into a homogeneous state. In most
cases cooperators become extinct ﬁrst, and then loners sweep out defectors.
78

1
1.5
2
b
0
0.5
1
defector frequency
Fig. 42. Monte Carlo results (closed squares) for the frequency of defectors as a function of b on a random regular graph for
K = 0.1 and σ = 0.3. The average frequency of defectors are denoted by closed squares. Open squares indicate the maximum
and minimum values taken during the simulation. Predictions of the pair approximation are shown by solid (stable) and dashed
(unstable) lines.
Further investigations of this model were aimed to clarify the eﬀect of partial randomness (Szab´o and Vukov,
2004). When tuning the portion of rewired links on a regular small-world network (see Fig. 15), the self-
organizing spatial pattern transforms into a state exhibiting global oscillations. If the portion of rewired
bonds exceeds about ten percent (q ≳0.1) the small-world eﬀect leads to a behavior similar to those found
on random regular graphs. Using a diﬀerent evolutionary rule Wu et al. (2005a) reported similar features
on the small-world structure suggested by Newman and Watts (1999).
In summary, the possibility of voluntary participation in spatial Prisoner’s Dilemma games supports
cooperation via a cyclic dominance mechanism, and leads to a self-organizing pattern. This spatio-temporal
structure is destroyed by random links (or small-world eﬀects) and synchronizes the local oscillations over
the whole system. In some parameter regions the evolution is terminated in a homogeneous state of loners
after some transient processes, during which the amplitude of the global oscillations increase. In this ﬁnal
state the interaction between the players vanishes, that is, they do not try to beneﬁt from possible mutual
cooperations. According to the classical mean-ﬁeld calculation (Hauert et al., 2002) an analogous behavior
is expected for the connectivity structures shown in Fig. 13. These general properties are rather robust,
similar behavior can be observed if the loner strategy is replaced by some Tit-for-Tat strategies in these
evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma games.
6.11. Tag-based models
Kin selection (Hamilton, 1964a,b) can support cooperation among individuals (relatives), who mutually
help each other. This mechanism assumes that individuals are capable of identifying their relatives to be
donated. In fact, tags characterizing a group of individuals can facilitate selective interactions, leading to
growing aggregates in spatial systems (Holland, 1995). Such a tag-matching mechanism was taken into
account in the image scoring model introduced by Nowak and Sigmund (1998), and many other, so-called
tag-based models.
In the context of the Prisoner’s Dilemma a simple tag-based model was introduced by Hales (2000). In
his model each player possesses a memoryless strategy, D or C, and a tag, which can take a ﬁnite number of
discrete values. A tag is a phenotypic marker like sex, age, cultural traits, language, etc., or any other signal
that individuals can detect and distinguish (Robson, 1990). Agents play a Prisoner’s Dilemma game with
random opponents, provided that the co-player possesses the same tag. This mechanism partitions the social
network into disjunct clusters with identical tags. There is no play between clusters. Nevertheless, mutation
79

can take individuals from one tag cluster into another, or change her strategy with some probability. Players
reproduce in proportion to their average payoﬀ.
Hales (2000) found that cooperative behavior ﬂourishes in the model when the number of tags is large
enough. Clusters with diﬀerent tag values compete with each other in the reproductive step, and those that
contain a large proportion of cooperators outperform other clusters. However, such clusters have a ﬁnite life
time, since if mutations implant defectors into a tag cluster, they soon invade the cluster and shortly cause
its extinction (within a cluster it is a mean-ﬁeld game where defectors soon expel cooperators). The room
is taken over by other growing cooperative groups. Due to mutations new tag groups show up from time
to time, and if these happen to be C players they start to increase. At each step there are a small number
of mostly cooperative clusters present in the system, i.e., the average level of cooperation is high, but the
prevailing tag values vary from time to time. Jansen and Baalen (2006) have considered the maintenance
of cooperation through the so-called beard chromodynamics in a spatial system where the tag (color) and
behavior (C or D strategy) are inherited via loosely coupled genes. Similar models for ﬁnite populations are
analyzed by Traulsen and Nowak (2007) (further references therein).
A rather diﬀerent tag-based model, similar in spirit to Public Good games (see Appendix A.8), was
suggested by Riolo et al. (2001). Each player x is characterized by a tag value τx ∈[0, 1] and a tolerance
level ∆x > 0, which constitute the player’s strategy in a continuous strategy space. Initially the tags and the
tolerance levels are assigned to players at random. For a given step (generation) each player is paired with
all others, but player x only donates to player y if |τx −τy| ≤∆x. Agents with close enough tag values are
forced to be altruistic. Player x incurs a cost c and player y receives a beneﬁt b (b > c > 0) if the tag-based
condition of donation (cooperation) is satisﬁed. At the end of each step the players reproduce: the income of
each player is compared with another player’s income chosen at random, and the loser adopts the winner’s
strategy (τ, ∆). During the strategy adoption process mutations are allowed with a small probability. Using
numerical simulations Riolo et al. (2001) demonstrated that tagging can again promote altruistic behavior
(cooperation).
In the above model the strategies are characterized by two continuous parameters. Traulsen and Schuster
(2003) have shown that the main features can be reproduced with only four discrete strategies. The minimal
model has two types of players (species), say Red and Blue, and both types can possess either minimum
(∆= 0) or maximum (∆= 1) tolerance levels. Thus, (Red,1) and (Blue,1) donate to all others, while (Red,0)
[resp., (Blue,0)] only donates to (Red,0) and (Red,1) [resp., (Blue,0) and (Blue,1)]. The corresponding payoﬀ
matrix is
A =



b −c
b −c
b −c
−c
b −c
b −c
−c
b −c
b −c
b
b −c
0
b
b −c
0
b −c



(131)
for the strategy order (Red,1), (Blue,1), (Red,0), and (Blue,0). This game has two pure Nash equilibria,
(Red,0) and (Blue,0), and an evolutionary unstable mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium, where the two intol-
erant (∆= 0) strategies are present with probability 1/2.
The most interesting features appear when mutations are introduced. For example, allowing that (Red,0)
[resp., (Blue,0)] players mutate into (Red,1) [resp., (Blue,1)] players, the population of (Red,1) strategists
can increase in a predominantly (Red,0) state, until the minority (Blue,0) players receive the highest income
and begin to invade the system. In the resulting population the frequency of (Blue,1) increases until (Red,0)
dominates, thus restarting the cycle. In short, this system exhibits spontaneous oscillations in the frequency
of tags and tolerance levels, which were found to be one of the characteristic features in the more complicated
model (Riolo et al., 2001; Sigmund and Nowak, 2001). In the simpliﬁed version, however, many aspects of
this dynamics can be investigated more quantitatively as was discussed by Traulsen and Schuster (2003).
The spatial (cellular automaton) version of the above discrete tag-tolerance model was studied by Traulsen and Claussen
(2004). As was expected, the spatial version clearly demonstrated the formation of large Red and Blue do-
mains. The spatial model allows for the occurrence of tolerant mutants in a natural way. In the cellular
automaton rule they used, a player increased her tolerance level from ∆= 0 to 1, if she was surrounded
by players with the same tag. In this case the cyclic dominance property of the strategies gives rise to a
80

self-organizing pattern with rotating spirals and anti-spirals, which will be discussed in detail in the next
Section. It is remarkable how these models sustain a poly-domain structure (Traulsen and Schuster, 2003).
The coexistence of (Red,1) and (Blue,1) domains is stabilized by the appearance of intolerant strategies,
(Red,0) and (Blue,0), along the peripheries of these regions.
The main feature of tag-based models can be recognized in the systems studied by Ahmed et al. (2006)
who considered what happens if the players are grouped, and their choices and/or evolutionary rules depend
on the group tags. Evidently, tag-based models can be extended by allowing some variations of the tag,
which is related to the evolving community structure on the network.
7. Rock-Scissors-Paper games
Rock-Scissors-Paper games exemplify those systems from ecology or non-equilibrium physics where three
states (strategies or species) cyclically dominate each other (May and Leonard, 1975; Hofbauer and Sigmund,
1988; Tainaka, 2001). Although cyclic dominance does not manifest itself directly in the payoﬀmatri-
ces of the Prisoner’s Dilemma, that model can exhibit similar properties when three stochastic reactive
strategies are considered (Nowak and Sigmund, 1989b,a). Cyclic dominance can also be caused by spa-
tial eﬀects as observed in some spatial three-strategy evolutionary Public Good games (Hauert et al.,
2002; Szab´o and Hauert, 2002b) and Prisoner’s dilemma games (Nowak et al., 1994a; Szab´o et al., 2000;
Szab´o and Hauert, 2002a).
Rock-Scissors-Paper-type cycles can be observed directly in nature. One of the best known examples, de-
scribed by Sinervo and Lively (1996) are the three diﬀerent mating strategies of the lizard species Uta stans-
buriana. Similarly, the interaction networks of many marine ecological communities involve three-species cy-
cles (Johnson and Seinen, 2002). Successional three-state systems such as space-grass-trees (Durrett and Levin,
1998) or forest ﬁre models with states: “green tree”, “burning tree”, and “ash” (Bak et al., 1990; Drossel and Schwabl,
1992; Grassberger, 1993) may also have similar dynamics. For many spatial predator-prey (Lotka-Volterra)
models the “empty site”, “prey”, and “predator” states also follow cyclically each other (Bascompte and Sol´e,
1998; Tilman and Kareiva, 1997). The synchronized versions of these phenomena have been studied in the
framework of cellular automaton models by several authors (Greenberg and Hastings, 1978; Fisch, 1990;
Silvertown et al., 1992; Fuks and Lawniczak, 2001).
Cyclic dominance occur in the so-called epidemiological SIRS models. The mean-ﬁeld version of the simpler
SIR model was formulated by Lowell Reed and Wade Hampton Frost [their work was never published but
is cited in (Newman, 2002)] and by Kermack and McKendrick (1927). The abbreviation SIR refers to the
three possible states of individuals during the spreading of an infectious disease: “susceptible”, “infected”,
and “removed”. In this context “removed” means to be either recovered and become immune to further
infection or being dead. For the more general SIRS model susceptible individuals replace removed ones with
a certain rate representing the birth of susceptible oﬀsprings or loosing immunity and regaining susceptible
status after a while.
Another biological system demonstrates how cyclic dominance occurs in the biochemical warfare among
three types of microbes. Bacteria extract toxic substances that are very eﬀective against strains of their micro-
bial cousins who do not produce the corresponding resistance factor (Durrett and Levin, 1997; Nakamaru and Iwasa,
2000; Cz´ar´an et al., 2002; Kerr et al., 2002; Kirkup and Riley, 2004; Neumann and Schuster, 2007). For a
certain toxin three types of bacteria can be distinguished: the Killer type produces both the toxin and the
corresponding resistance factor (to prevent its suicide); the Resistant produces only the resistance factor;
and the Sensitive produces neither. Colonies of Sensitive can always be invaded and replaced by Killers.
At the same time Killer colonies can be invaded by Resistants, because the latter are immune to the toxin
but do not carry the metabolic burden of synthesizing the toxic substance. Due to their faster reproduction
rate they achieve competitive dominance over the Killer type. Finally the cycle is closed: Sensitives have
metabolic advantage over Resistants, because they do not even have to pay the cost of producing the resis-
tance factor. In general cyclic dominance in biological systems can play two fundamental roles: supporting
bio-diversity (May and Leonard, 1975; Kerr et al., 2002) and providing protection against external invaders
(Boerlijst and Hogeweg, 1991; Szab´o and Cz´ar´an, 2001b).
81

It is worth mentioning, though, that cyclic invasion processes and the resultant spiral wave structures have
been investigated in some physical, chemical, or physiological contexts for a long time. The typical chemical
example is the Belousov-Zhabotinski reaction (Field and Noyes, 1974). However, similar phenomena were
found for the Rayleigh-Bernard convection in ﬂuid layers discussed by (Busse and Heikes, 1980; Toral et al.,
2000), as well as in many other excitable media, e.g., cardiac muscle (Wiener and Rosenblueth, 1946) and
neural systems (Hempel et al., 1999). Recently Prager et al. (2003) have introduced a similar three-state
model to consider stochastic excitable systems.
In the following we ﬁrst survey the picture that can be deduced from Monte Carlo simulations of the
simplest spatial evolutionary Rock-Scissors-Paper games. The results will be compared with the general
mean-ﬁeld approximation at diﬀerent levels. Then the consequences of some modiﬁcations (extensions) will
be discussed. We will consider what happens if we modify the dynamics, the payoﬀmatrix, the background,
or the number of strategies.
7.1. Simulations on the square lattice
In the Rock-Scissors-Paper model introduced by Tainaka (1988, 1989, 1994), agents are located on the
sites of a square lattice (with periodic boundary condition), and follow one of three possible strategies to
be denoted shortly as R, S, and P. The evolution of the population is governed by random sequential
invasion events between randomly chosen nearest neighbors. Nothing happens if the two agents follow the
same strategy. For diﬀerent strategies, however, the direction of invasion is determined by the rule of the
Rock-Scissors-Paper game, that is, R invades S invades P invades R.
Notice that this dynamical rule corresponds to the K →0 limit of Smoothed Imitation in Eqs. (64) with
(65), if the players’ utility comes from a single game with one of their neighbors. For the sake of simplicity
we choose the following payoﬀmatrix:
A =


0
1
−1
−1
0
1
1
−1
0

.
(132)
The above strategy adoption mechanism mimics a simple biological interaction rule between predators
and their prey: the predator eats the prey and the predator’s oﬀspring occupies the empty site. This is why
the present model is also called a cyclic predator-prey (or cyclic spatial Lotka-Volterra) model. The payoﬀ
matrix (132) is equivalent to the adjacency matrix (Bollob´as, 1998) of the three-species cyclic food web
represented by a directed graph.
Due to its simplicity the present model can be studied accurately by Monte Carlo simulations on a ﬁnite
L × L box with periodic boundary conditions. Independently of the initial state the system evolves into a
self-organizing pattern, where each species is present with a probability 1/3 on average (for a snapshot see
Fig. 43). This pattern is characterized by perpetual cyclic invasions and the average velocity of the invasion
fronts is approximately one lattice unit per Monte Carlo step.
Some features of the self-organizing pattern can be described by traditional concepts. For example, the
equal-time two-site correlation function is deﬁned as
C(x) = 1
L2
X
y
δ(s(y), s(y + x)) −1/3,
(133)
where δ(s1, s2) is the Kronecker delta, and the summation runs over all the y sites. Figure 44 shows C(x) as
obtained by averaging over 2 · 104 independent patterns with a linear size L = 4000. The log-lin plot clearly
indicates that the correlation function vanishes exponentially in the asymptotic region, C(x) ∝e−x/ξ, where
the numerical ﬁt yields ξ = 2.8(2). Above x ≈30 the statistical error becomes comparable to |C(x)|.
Each species on the snapshot in Fig. 43 will be invaded sooner or later by its predator. Using Monte Carlo
simulations one can easily determine the average survival probability of individuals Si(t) that deﬁnes those
portion of sites where the individuals remain alive from a time t0 to t0 + t in the stationary state. The
82

Fig. 43. Typical spatial distribution of the three strategies on a block of 100 × 100 sites of a square lattice.
0
10
20
30
x
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
C(x)
Fig. 44. Correlation function vs. horizontal (or vertical) distance x for the spatial distribution plotted in Fig. 43.
numerical results are consistent with an exponential decrease in the asymptotic region, Si(t) ≃e−t/τi with
τi = 1.9(1).
Ravasz et al. (2004) studied a case when each newborn predator inherits the family name of its parent.
One can study how the number of surviving families decreases while their average size increases. The survival
probability of families Sf(t) gives the portion of surviving families (with at least one representative) at time
t+t0 if at time t0 all the species had diﬀerent family names. The numerical simulation revealed (Ravasz et al.,
2004) that the survival probability of families varies as Sf(t) ≃ln(t)/t in the asymptotic limit t >> τi, which
is a typical behavior for the two-dimensional voter model (Ben-Naim et al., 1996a). This behavior is a direct
consequence of the fact that for large times the confronting species (along the family boundaries) face their
predator or prey with equal probability like in the voter model [for a textbook see Liggett (1985)].
Starting from an initial state of parallel stripes or concentric rings, the interfacial roughening of invasion
fronts was studied by Provata and Tsekouras (2003). As expected, the propagating fronts show dynamical
characteristics that are similar to those of the Eden growth model. This means that smooth interfaces
become more and more irregular, and ﬁnally the pattern develops into a random domain structure as
83

plotted in Fig. 43.
Due to cyclic dominance, at any site of the lattice the species follow cyclically each other. Short-range
interactions with noisy dynamics are not able to fully synchronize these oscillations. On the square lattice
Monte Carlo simulations show damping oscillations of the strategy concentrations. If the system is started
from an asymmetric initial state it spirals towards the symmetric state as is illustrated on the strategy
simplex (ternary diagram) in Fig. 45. The symmetric state is asymptotically stable.
2
1
3
Fig. 45. Trajectory of evolution during a Monte Carlo simulation for N = 10002 agents when the system is started from an
asymmetric initial state indicated by a plus symbol. The seemingly smooth trajectory is decorated with noise, but the noise
amplitude is comparable to the line width at the given system size.
For small system sizes (e.g., L = 10) the simulations show signiﬁcantly diﬀerent behavior, because oc-
casionally one of the species becomes extinct. Then the system evolves into one of the three homogeneous
states, and further evolution halts. The probability to reach one of these absorbing states decreases very fast
as the system size increases.
This model was also investigated on a one-dimensional chain (Tainaka, 1988; Frachebourg et al., 1996a)
and on a three-dimensional cubic lattice (Tainaka, 1989, 1994). The corresponding results will be discussed
later on. First, however, we survey the prediction of the traditional mean-ﬁeld approximation, whose result
is independent of the spatial dimension d. Subsequently we will consider the predictions of the pair and the
four-site approximations.
7.2. Mean-ﬁeld approximation
Within the framework of the traditional mean-ﬁeld approximation the system is characterized by the
concentration of the three strategies. These quantities are directly related to the one-site conﬁgurational
probabilities p1(s), where for later convenience we use the notation s = 1, 2, and 3 for the three strategies
R, S,and P, respectively. (We neglect the explicit notation of time dependence.) These time-dependent
quantities satisfy the corresponding approximate mean value equation, Eq. (80), i.e.,
˙p1(1) = p1(1)[p1(2) −p1(3)] ,
˙p1(2) = p1(2)[p1(3) −p1(1)] ,
˙p1(3) = p1(3)[p1(1) −p1(2)] .
(134)
The summation of these equations yields ˙p1(1) + ˙p1(2) + ˙p1(3) = 0, i.e., the present evolutionary rule leaves
the sum of the concentrations unchanged, in agreement with the condition of normalization P
s p1(s) = 1.
It is also easy to see that Eq. (134) gives d P
s ln[p1(s)]/dt = P
s ˙p1(s)/p1(s) = 0, hence
m = p1(1)p1(2)p1(3) = constant
(135)
is another constant of motion.
84

The equations of motion (134) have some trivial stationary solutions. The symmetric (central) distribution
̺1 = ̺2 = ̺3 = 1/3 is invariant. Furthermore, Eqs. (134) have three additional homogeneous solutions:
p1(1) = 1, p1(2) = p1(3) = 0, and two others obtained by cyclic permutations of the indices.
The homogeneous stationary solutions are unstable. Small perturbations are not damped, except for the
unlikely situation when only prey are added to a homogeneous state of their predators. Under generic
perturbations the homogeneous state is completely invaded by the corresponding predator strategy. On
the other hand, perturbing the central solution the system exhibits a periodic oscillation, that is p1(s) =
1/3 + ε sin(ωt + 2sπ/3) with ω = 1/
√
3 for s = 1, 2, and 3 in the limit ε →0. This periodic oscillation
becomes more and more anharmonic for increasing initial perturbation amplitude, and ﬁnally the trajectory
approaches the edges of the triangle on the strategy simplex as shown in Fig. 46. The symmetric solution is
stable but not asymptotically stable.
2
1
3
Fig. 46. Concentric orbits predicted by the mean-ﬁeld approximation around the central point.
Notice the contradiction between the results of simulations and the prediction of the mean-ﬁeld approxi-
mation which lacks the asymptotically stable solution. Contrary to our naive expectation, this contradiction
becomes even more explicit at the level of the pair approximation.
The stochastic version of the three-species cyclic Lotka-Volterra system is studied by Reichenbach et al.
(2006a,b) within the formalism of an urn model which allows the investigation of ﬁnite size eﬀects. It is
found that ﬂuctuations around the deterministic trajectories grow in time until two species become extinct.
The extinction probability depends on the rescaled time t/N.
7.3. Pair approximation and beyond
In the pair approximation (Tainaka, 1994; Sato et al., 1997), the system is characterized by the proba-
bilities p2(s1, s2) of all strategy pairs (s1, s2) on two neighboring sites (s1, s2 = 1, 2, 3). These quantities
are directly related to the one-site probabilities, p1(s1), through the compatibility conditions discussed in
Appendix C. Neglecting technical details, now we discuss the results on the d-dimensional hyper-cubic lattice.
The equations of motion for the one-site conﬁguration probabilities can be expressed by p2(s1, s2) as
˙p1(1) = p2(1, 2) −p2(1, 3) ,
˙p1(2) = p2(2, 3) −p2(2, 1) ,
˙p1(3) = p2(3, 1) −p2(3, 2) .
(136)
Note that in this case the sum of the one-site conﬁguration probabilities remains unchanged, while the
conservation law for their product is no longer valid, in contrast with the prediction of the mean-ﬁeld
approximation [see Eq. (135)].
At the pair approximation level the time derivatives of the nine pair-conﬁguration probabilities, p2(s1, s2)
(s1, s2 = 1, 2, 3), satisfy nine coupled ﬁrst-order nonlinear diﬀerential equations (Tainaka, 1994; Sato et al.,
85

1997). For d > 1 numerical integration conﬁrms that the dynamics tends to a state satisfying rotation and
reﬂection symmetries, p2(s1, s2) = p2(s2, s1), independently of the initial state.
The equations have four trivial stationary solutions, the same as obtained in the mean-ﬁeld approxima-
tion. In one of these solutions p1(1) = 1 and p2(1, 1) = 1, and the other one- and two-site conﬁguration
probabilities are zero. For the non-trivial symmetric solution p1(1) = p1(2) = p1(3) = 1/3, and the pair
conﬁguration probabilities turn out to be (Tainaka, 1994; Sato et al., 1997)
p2(1, 1) = p2(2, 2) = p2(3, 3) =
2d + 1
9(2d −1) ,
p2(1, 2) = · · · = p2(3, 2) =
2d −2
9(2d −1) .
(137)
In the limit d →∞this solution reproduces the prediction of the mean-ﬁeld approximation, p2(s1, s2) =
p1(s1)p1(s2) = 1/9. In contrast with this, in d = 1 the pair approximation predicts a vanishing probability
for ﬁnding two diﬀerent species on neighboring sites. This is due to a domain growth process, to be discussed
in Sec. 7.4.
On the square lattice (d = 2) the pair approximation predicts p(2p)
2
(1, 1) = 5/27 ≈0.185, which is
signiﬁcantly lower than the Monte Carlo result, p(MC)
2
(1, 1) = 0.24595. In Appendix C we show how to
deduce a correlation length from the pair conﬁguration probabilities for two-state systems [see Eq. (C.10)].
Using this technique we can determine the correlation length for the corresponding autocorrelation function,
ξ(2p) = −
1
ln
  9
2 [p2(1, 1) −p1(1)p1(1)]
 .
(138)
Substituting the solution (137) into Eq. (138) we ﬁnd ξ(2p) = 1/ ln 3 = 0.91 for d = 2, which is again
signiﬁcantly less than the simulation result.
For d = 2 the numerical integration gives increasing oscillations in the strategy concentrations (Tainaka,
1994). Figure 47 illustrates that the amplitude of these oscillations approaches a saturation value with
an exponentially increasing time period. In practice the theoretically endless oscillations are stopped by
ﬂuctuations (or rounding errors in the numerical integration), and the evolution terminates in one of the
absorbing states. A similar behavior was found for higher dimensions too, with a decreasing pitch of the
spiral for increasing d. The general properties of these so-called heteroclinic cycles and their relevance to
ecological models were described and discussed in a more general context by May and Leonard (1975) and
Hofbauer and Sigmund (1988).
The above numerical investigations suggest that the stationary solutions of the pair approximation are
unstable for small perturbations. This conjecture was conﬁrmed analytically by Sato et al. (1997). This
property of the pair approximation is qualitatively diﬀerent from the mean-ﬁeld or the Monte Carlo results,
where the central solution is stable or asymptotically stable. This shortcoming of the pair approximation
can be eliminated by using the more accurate four- and nine-site approximations (Szab´o et al., 2004), which
determine the probability of all possible conﬁgurations in the corresponding block. These approaches repro-
duce qualitatively well the spiral trajectories converging towards the symmetric stationary solution, as was
found by the Monte Carlo simulations (see Fig. 45).
7.4. One-dimensional models
In the one-dimensional case the boundaries separating homogeneous domains move left or right with the
same average velocity. If two domain walls collide a domain disappears as is illustrated in Fig. 48. At the
same time, the average size of the domains increases. Using Monte Carlo simulations Tainaka (1988) found
that the average number of domain walls decreases with time as nw ∼t−α, where α ≃0.8, contrary to the
prediction of the pair approximation, which suggests α = 1. We will see that this discrepancy is related to
the formation of “superdomains” (Frachebourg et al., 1996a,b).
In this system one can distinguish six types of domain walls (or kinks), whose concentration is charac-
terized by the pair conﬁguration probabilities p2(s1, s2) (s1 ̸= s2). The compatibility conditions, discussed
86

0
50
100
150
200
time
0.0
0.5
1.0
concentration
2
1
3
Fig. 47. Time-dependence of strategy concentrations (left) as predicted by the pair approximation for d = 2. The system is
started from an uncorrelated initial state with p1(1) = p1(2) = 0.36 and p1(3) = 0.24. The corresponding trajectory spirals out
and approaches the edges of the triplex (right).
0
100
200
300
0
100
200
300
x
t, [MCS]
Fig. 48. Time evolution of domains for random sequential update in the one-dimensional case.
in Appendix C, yields three constraints for the domain wall concentrations, P
s2 p2(s1, s2) = P
s2 p2(s2, s1)
(s1 = 1, 2, and 3). Despite naive expectations these constraints allow the breaking of the spatial reﬂection
symmetry in such a way that p2(1, 2) −p2(2, 1) = p2(2, 3) −p2(3, 2) = p2(3, 1) −p2(1, 3). In particular cases
the system can develop into a state, where all interfaces move either to the right [p2(1, 2) = p2(2, 3) =
p2(3, 1) = 0] or to the left [p2(2, 1) = p2(3, 2) = p2(1, 3) = 0]. Allowing this type of symmetry breaking, now
we recall the time-dependent solution of the pair approximation for the one-dimensional case.
For the “symmetric” solution we assume that p1(1) = p1(2) = p1(3) = 1/3, p2(1, 2) = p2(2, 3) = p2(3, 1) =
ρl/3, and p2(2, 1) = p2(3, 2) = p2(1, 3) = ρr/3, where ρl and ρr denote the total concentration of left and
right moving interfaces. Under these conditions the pair approximation leads to
˙ρl = −2ρ2
l −2ρlρr + ρ2
r ,
˙ρr = −2ρ2
r −2ρrρl + ρ2
l .
(139)
87

Starting from a random, uncorrelated initial state the time-dependence of the interface concentrations obeys
the following form (Frachebourg et al., 1996b):
ρl(t) = ρr(t) =
1
3 + 3t .
(140)
We remind the reader that this prediction does not agree with the result of the Monte Carlo simulations,
and the correct description requires a more careful analysis.
Figure 48 clearly shows that the evolution of the domain structure is governed by two basic types of
elementary processes (Tainaka, 1989). If two opposite moving interfaces collide they annihilate each other.
On the other hand, the collision of two right (left) moving interfaces leads to their mutual annihilation,
and simultaneously the creation of a left (right) moving interface. Equations (139) can be considered as the
corresponding rate equations (Frachebourg et al., 1996b).
As a result of these elementary processes, one can observe the formation of superdomains (see Fig. 48),
in which all the internal interfaces move to the same direction. The coarsening pattern can be characterized
by two diﬀerent length scales as illustrated by the following conﬁguration:
P
L
z
}|
{
SSSPPPPRRRRSSSS
| {z }
ℓ
PPRRRSSS R .
(141)
Here L denotes the size of the superdomain and ℓis the size of a classical domain. Evidently, the average
size of domains is related directly to the total number of interfaces, i.e., L(ρl + ρr) = ⟨ℓ⟩.
Inside superdomains the interfaces perform biased random walks. Consequently, two parallel moving in-
terfaces can meet and annihilate each other while a new, opposite moving interface is created. This in turn
is annihilated by a suitable neighboring interface within a short time. This domain wall dynamics is sim-
ilar to the one-dimensional ballistic annihilation process, when each particle has a ﬁxed average velocity
which may be either +1 or -1 with equal probability (Ben-Naim et al., 1996b). Using scaling arguments
Frachebourg et al. (1996a,b) have shown that in these systems the superdomain and domain sizes growth
respectively as
⟨L(t)⟩∼t
(142)
and
⟨ℓ(t)⟩∼t3/4 .
(143)
Monte Carlo simulations have conﬁrmed the above theoretical predictions. Frachebourg et al. (1996b) have
observed that the average domain size increases approximately as ⟨ℓ(t)⟩(MC) ∼tα with α ≃0.79, while the
local slope α(t) = d ln ℓ(t)/d ln t approaches the asymptotic value α = 3/4. This is an interesting result,
because separately both the diﬀusion-controlled and the ballistic controlled annihilation processes yield the
same coarsening exponent 1/2, whereas their combination gives a higher value, 3/4.
7.5. Global oscillations on some structures
The pair approximation cannot handle short loops, which characterize all d-dimensional spatial structures.
It is expected, however, that on tree-like structures, e.g., on the Bethe lattice, the qualitative prediction of
the pair approximation can be valid. The Rock-Scissors-Paper game on the Bethe lattice with a coordination
number z was investigated by Sato et al. (1997) using the pair approximation. Their result is equivalent to
those discussed above when substituting z for 2d in Eq. (137). Unfortunately, the validity of these analytical
results cannot be conﬁrmed directly by Monte Carlo simulations, because of boundary eﬀects present in any
ﬁnite system. It is expected, however, that the growing spiral trajectories seen Fig. 47 can be observed on
random regular graphs for suﬃciently large N. The Monte Carlo simulations (Szolnoki and Szab´o, 2004b)
have conﬁrmed this analytical result on random regular graphs with z = 6 (and similar behavior is expected
88

2
1
3
Fig. 49. Emergence of global oscillations in the strategy concentrations for the Rock-Scissors-Paper game on random regular
graphs with z = 3. A Monte Carlo simulation for N = 3 · 106 sites shows that the system evolves from an uncorrelated initial
state (denoted by the plus sign) towards a limit cycle (thick orbit). The dashed orbit indicates the limit cycle predicted by the
generalized mean-ﬁeld method at the six-site approximation level. The corresponding six-site cluster is indicated on the right.
for z > 6, too). However, for z = 3 and 4 the evolution tends towards a limit cycle as demonstrated in
Fig. 49.
For z = 3 the generalized mean-ﬁeld analysis can also be performed with four- and six-site clusters. The
four-site approximation gives growing spiral trajectories, whereas the six-site approximation predicts a limit
cycle with good quantitative agrement with the Monte Carlo simulation (see the thick solid and dashed lines
in Fig. 49). It is conjectured that the growth of the global oscillation is blocked by ﬂuctuations whose role
increases with decreasing z.
Diﬀerent quantities can be introduced to characterize the extension of limit cycles. The simplest quantity is
the amplitude, i.e., the diﬀerence between the maximum and minimum values of the strategy concentrations.
However, this quantity is strongly aﬀected by ﬂuctuations, whose magnitude depends on the size of the
system. There are other ways to quantify limit cycles, which are less sensitive to noise and to system size
eﬀects. For example, the limit cycle can be characterized by its average distance from the center. Besides
it, one can deﬁne an order parameter Φ as the average relative area of the limit cycle on the ternary phase
diagram (see Fig. 49), compared to its maximum possible value (the area of the triangle). According to
Monte Carlo results on random regular graphs, Φ(RRG) = 0.750(5) and 0.980(1) for z = 3 and 4, respectively
(Szab´o et al., 2004; Szolnoki and Szab´o, 2004a).
An alternative deﬁnition of the order parameter can be based on the constant of motion in the mean-
ﬁeld approximation Eq. (135), i.e., Φ′ = 1 −33⟨p1(1)p1(2)p1(3)⟩. It was found that the product of strategy
concentrations only exhibits a weak periodic oscillation along the limit cycle (the amplitude is about a few
percent of the average value). The order parameters Φ and Φ′ can be easily calculated either in simulations
or in the generalized mean-ﬁeld approximation.
Evidently, both order parameters become zero on the square lattice and 1 on the random regular graph
with a degree of z = 6 and above. Thus, using these order parameters we can analyze quantitatively the
transitions between the above mentioned three diﬀerent sort of behaviors.
Now we present a simple model exhibiting two subsequent phase transitions when an adequate control
parameter r is tuned. The parameter r characterizes the temporal randomness in the connectivity structure
(Szab´o et al., 2004). For r = 0 the model is equivalent to the spatial Rock-Scissors-Paper game on the square
lattice. A randomly chosen player adopts one of the randomly chosen neighbor’s strategy provided that the
latter is dominant. With probability 0 < r < 1 a standard (nearest) neighbor is replaced by a randomly
chosen other player in the system, and irrespectively of their distance a strategy adoption event occurs.
When r = 1, partners are chosen uniformly randomly, and the mean-ﬁeld approximation becomes exact for
suﬃciently large N.
The results of the Monte Carlo simulation in Fig. 50 show three qualitatively diﬀerent behaviors. For weak
temporal randomness [r < r1 = 0.020(1)] the spatial distribution of the strategies remains similar to the
89

snapshots observed for r = 0 (see Fig. 43). On the sites of the lattice the three strategies cyclically follow
each other in a local sense. The short range interactions are not able to synchronize these local oscillations.
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
r
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Φ
Fig. 50. Monte Carlo results for Φ, the relative area of the limit cycle, as a function of r, the probability of choosing random
co-players instead of nearest neighbors on the square lattice.
In the region r1 < r < r2 = 0.170(1) global oscillations occur. Finally for r > r2, following a growing spiral
trajectory, the (ﬁnite) system evolves into one of the three homogeneous states and remains there forever.
The numerical values of r1 and r2 are surprisingly low, and indicate high sensitivity to the introduction of
temporal randomness. Similar transitions can be observed for quenched randomness in random regular small-
world structures. In this case, however, the corresponding threshold values are higher (Szolnoki and Szab´o,
2004a).
The appearance of the global oscillation is a Hopf bifurcation (Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998; Kuznetsov,
1995), as is indicated by the linear increase of Φ above r1. 14
When r →r2 the order parameter Φ goes to 1 very smoothly. The Monte Carlo data are consistent with a
power-law behavior: 1 −Φ ∼(r2 −r)γ where γ = 3.3(4). This power-law behavior seems to be a very robust
feature of three-state systems with cyclic symmetries, because similar exponents were found for several other
(regular) connectivity structures. It is worth noting that the generalized mean-ﬁeld technique at the six-site
approximation level (the corresponding cluster is shown in Fig. 49) reproduces this behavior on the Bethe
lattice with degree z = 3 Szolnoki and Szab´o (2004a).
The generalization of this model on other non-regular (quenched or temporal) connectivity structures is
not straightforward. Diﬀerent rules can be postulated to handle the variations in the degree. For example,
within an elementary invasion process one can choose a site and one of its neighbors randomly, or one can
select one of the edges of the connectivity graph with equal probability (the latter case favors the selection
of sites with larger degree). Masuda and Konno (2006) have studied a case when the randomly chosen
site (a potential predator) invades all possible prey sites in its neighborhood. The simulations indicated
clearly that the system develops into the symmetric stationary state on both Erd˝os-R´enyi and scale-free
(Barab´asi-Albert) networks. In the light of these results it would be interesting to see what happens on
other non-regular networks when using diﬀerent evolutionary rules, and to clarify the relevant ingredients
aﬀecting the ﬁnal stationary state.
14 Note that in a Hopf bifurcation the amplitude increases by a square-root law above the transition point. However, in our
case the order parameter is the area Φ which is quadratic in the amplitude.
90

7.6. Rotating spiral arms
The self-organizing spatiotemporal patterns of Rock-Scissors-Paper game on the square lattice are char-
acterized by moving invasion fronts. Let us recall ﬁrst the relevant topological diﬀerence between three- and
two-color patterns. On the continuous plane two-color patterns are topologically equivalent to a structure of
”islands in lakes in islands in lakes in ...”, at least if four-edge vortices are neglected. In fact the probability
of these four-edge vertices vanishes both in the continuum limit and also in the advanced states of the
domain growth process for smooth interfaces. Furthermore, on the triangular lattice four-edges vortices are
forbidden topologically. In contrast with this, three-edge vertices are distinctive points where three domains
(or domain walls) meet on a three-color pattern. Due to cyclic dominance among the three states, the edges
of these objects rotate clockwise or anti-clockwise. We will call these structures vortices and anti-vortices,
respectively.
The three edges of the vortices and anti-vortices form spiral arms, because their average normal velocity
is approximately constant. At the same time, the deterministic part of the interface motion is strongly
decorated by noise, and the resultant irregularity is able to suppress the ”deterministic” features of these
rotating spiral arms.
Rotating spiral arms become nicely visible in models, where the motion of the invasion fronts is aﬀected by
some surface tension. As the schematic three-color pattern in the right panel of Fig. 51 indicates vortices and
anti-vortices alternate each other along interfaces. In other words, a vortex is linked to three (not necessary
diﬀerent) anti-vortices by its arms, and vice versa. It also implies that vortices and anti-vortices are created
or annihilated in pairs during interface motion (Szab´o et al., 1999).
Fig. 51. The left snapshot shows a typical rotating spiral structure of the three strategies on a block of 500 × 500 sites of a
square lattice. The invasion rate in (144) is κ = 4/3, and ǫ = 0.05. The schematic plot (right) illustrates how vortices (black
dots) and anti-vortices (white dots) are positioned in the three-color model. A vortex and anti-vortex can be connected to each
other by one, two, or three edges.
Smooth interfaces can be observed for dynamical rules that suppress the probability of elementary pro-
cesses trying to increase the length of an interface. This requirement can be fulﬁlled by a simple model
(Szab´o and Szolnoki, 2002), where the probability of nearest neighbor (y ∈Ωx) invasions is
P(sx →sy) =
1
1 + exp[κ ∆EP + ε A(sx, sy)] .
(144)
Cyclic dominance is built into the model through the payoﬀmatrix (132) with a magnitude denoted by ε
and κ characterizing how interfacial energy is taken into account. The total length of the interface is deﬁned
by the Potts energy (Wu, 1982),
EP =
X
⟨x,y⟩
[1 −δ(sx, sy)] ,
(145)
91

where the summation runs over all nearest neighbor pairs and δ(s, s′) is the Kronecker delta. ∆EP denotes
the diﬀerence in the interface length between the ﬁnal and the initial states. Notice that this rule enhances
(suppresses) those elementary invasion events which decrease (increase) the total length of the interface. It
also inhibits the creation of new islands inside homogeneous domains. For κ > 2 the formation of horizontal
and vertical interfaces is favored (as for the Potts model at low temperatures during the domain growth
process) due to the anisotropic interfacial energy on the square lattice. However, this undesired eﬀect becomes
irrelevant in the region κ ≤4/3 (see left snapshot of Fig. 51), where our analysis mostly concentrated.
For κ = 0, the interfacial energy does not play a role, and the model reproduces a version of the
Rock-Scissors-Paper game, in which the probability of the direct invasion process is reduced, P = [1 +
tanh(ε/2)]/2 < 1, and the inverse process is also allowed with probability 1 −P. Tainaka and Itoh (1991)
demonstrated that when P →1/2 (or ε →0) this model becomes equivalent to the three-state voter model
(Liggett, 1985; Cliﬀord and Sudbury, 1973; Holley and Liggett, 1975). The behavior of the voter model de-
pends on the spatial dimension d (Ben-Naim et al., 1996a). In two dimensions a very slow (logarithmic)
domain coarsening occurs for P = 1/2. In the presence of cyclic dominance (ε > 0 or P > 1/2), however,
the domain growth stops at a ”typical size” that diverges as P →1/2. The mean-ﬁeld aspects of this system
were considered by Ifti and Bergersen (2003).
In order to quantify the divergence of the typical length scale Tainaka and Itoh (1991) considered the
average concentration of vortices and found a power-law behavior, ρv ∼|P −1/2|β ∼|ε|β. The numerical ﬁt
to the Monte Carlo data predicted β = 0.4. Simulations performed by Szab´o and Szolnoki (2002) on larger
systems indicate a decrease in β for smaller ε. Apparently, the Monte Carlo data in Fig. 52 are consistent
with β = 1/4. Unfortunately this conjecture is not yet supported by theoretical arguments, and a more
rigorous numerical conﬁrmation is hindered by the fast increase of the relaxation time as ε →0.
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
10
1
ε
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
ρv
Fig. 52. Log-log plot of the concentration of vortices as a function of ε for κ = 1 (squares), 1/4 (triangles), 1/16 (pluses), 1/64
(diamonds), and 0 (circles). The solid (dashed) line represents a power-law behavior with an exponent of 2 (resp., 1/4).
Figure 52 shows a strikingly diﬀerent behavior when the Potts energy is switched on, i.e., κ > 0. The
Monte Carlo data indicates a faster decrease in the concentration of vertices, tending towards a quadratic
behavior, ρv ∼ε2, in the limit ε →0 for any 0 < κ ≤1.
The geometrical features of the interfaces in Fig. 51 demonstrate that these self-organizing patterns cannot
be characterized by a single length scale [e.g., the correlation length, the average (horizontal or vertical)
distance between the interfaces, or the inverse of EP /2N] as it happens for traditional domain growing
processes [for a survey on ordering phenomena see the review by Bray (1994)]. In the present case additional
length scales can be introduced to characterize the average distance between the connected vortex–anti-
vortex pairs or to describe the geometrical features of the (rotating) spiral arms.
92

On the square lattice the interfaces are polygons consisted of unit length elements whose relative tan-
gential rotation can be ∆θ = 0 or ±π/2. The tangential rotation of a vortex edge can be determined by
summing up the values of ∆θ along the given edge step by step from the vortex to the connected anti-
vortex (Szab´o and Szolnoki, 2002). One can also determine the total length of the interface connecting a
vortex–anti-vortex pair, as well as the average curvature for the given polygon. The average value of these
quantities characterize the pattern. Beside vortex–anti-vortex edges one can observe islands, whose total
perimeter can be evaluated in the knowledge of the Potts energy Eq. (145) and the total length of the vortex
edges. Furthermore, vortices can also be classiﬁed by the number of anti-vortices, to which the given vortex
is linked by vortex edges (Szolnoki and Szab´o, 2004b). For example, the collision of two diﬀerent islands
(e.g., states 1 and 2 in the sea of state 0) creates a vortex–anti-vortex pair linked to each other by three
common vortex edges (see Fig. 51). If the evolution of the interfaces is aﬀected by some surface tension
reducing the total length, then this process will decrease the portion of vortex–anti-vortex pairs linked to
each other by more than one edge.
Unfortunately, a geometrical analysis of the vortex edges on the square lattice requires removal of all
four-edge vertices for the given pattern. During this manipulation the four-edge vertex is considered as an
instantaneous object which is about to transform into a vortex–anti-vortex pair or into two non-crossing
interfaces. In many cases the eﬀect of this manipulation is negligible and the subsequent geometrical analysis
gives useful information about the three-color pattern (Szab´o and Szolnoki, 2002). It turns out, for example,
that the average tangential rotation θ of the vortex edges increases as ǫ decreases, if the surface tension is
switched on.However, this quantity goes smoothly to zero when ǫ →0 for κ = 0 (voter model limit). In this
latter case the vortex edges do not show the characteristic features of ”spiral arms”. The contribution of
islands to the total length of interfaces is practically negligible for κ > 0. Consequently, pattern formation
is governed dominantly by the confronting rotating spiral arms.
In the absence of surface tension (κ = 0) interfacial roughening (Provata and Tsekouras, 2003; Dornic et al.,
2001) plays a crucial role as is illustrated by Fig. 43. The interfaces become more and more irregular, and
the occasional overhanging brings about a mechanism that creates new islands. Moreover, the confronting
fragments can also enclose a homogeneous territory and create islands. Due to these mechanisms the total
perimeter of the islands becomes comparable to the total length of the vortex edges (Szab´o and Szolnoki,
2002). The resultant patterns and dynamics diﬀer drastically from those appearing for smooth interfaces.
Despite the huge theoretical eﬀorts aimed to clarify the main features of spiral patterns [for a review
see Cross and Hohenberg (1993)], our current knowledge is still rather poor about the relationship between
geometrical and dynamical characteristics. Using a geometrical approach suggested by Brower et al. (1984),
the time evolution of an invasion front between a ﬁxed vortex–anti-vortex pair was studied numerically by
Meron and Pelc´e (1988). Unfortunately, the deterministic behavior of a single rotating spiral front has not
yet been compared to the geometrical parameters averaged over vortex edges in the self-organizing patterns.
Possible geometrical parameters of interest can be the concentration of vortices (ρv), the total length of
interfaces (or Potts energy), the total length and average tangential rotation (or curvature) of the vortex
edges, whereas the dynamical parameters are those that describe the average normal velocity of invasion
fronts and quantify interfacial roughening.
On the simple cubic lattice the above evolutionary Rock-Scissors-Paper game exhibits a self-organizing
pattern, whose two-dimensional cross-section is similar to the one illustrated in Fig. 43 (Tainaka, 1994).
The core of the vortices form directed strings in three dimensions, whose direction refers to being a vortex
or an anti-vortex on the 2D cross-section. The core string typically closes in a ring, resembling a long thin
toroid. The possible topological features of how the loops of these vortex strings are formed and linked
together are discussed theoretically by Winfree and Strogatz (1984). The three-dimensional simulations of
the Rock-Scissors-paper game by Tainaka (1994) can serve as an illustration of the basic properties. Here it is
worth mentioning that the investigation of evolving vortex string networks has a tradition in diﬀerent areas of
physics from topological defects in solids to cosmic strings (Vilenkin and Shellard, 1994). Many aspects of the
associated dynamical rules and the generation of entangled string networks have also been extensively studied
for superﬂuid turbulence [for surveys see Schwarz (1982); Martins et al. (2004); Bradley et al. (2005)]. The
predicted richness of possible behaviors has not yet been fully identiﬁed in cyclically dominated three-state
games.
93

7.7. Cyclic dominance with diﬀerent invasion rates
The Rock-Scissors-Paper game described above remains invariant for a cyclic permutation of species
(strategies). However, some basic features of this system can also be observed when the exact symmetry
does not hold. In order to demonstrate the distortion of the solution, ﬁrst we study the eﬀect of unequal
invasion rates within the mean-ﬁeld approximation. In this case the equations of motion [whose symmetric
version was given in Eqs. (134)] take the form:
˙p1(1) = p1(1)[w12p1(2) −w31p1(3)] ,
˙p1(2) = p1(2)[w23p1(3) −w12p1(1)] ,
˙p1(3) = p1(3)[w31p1(1) −w23p1(2)] ,
(146)
where wsˆs > 0 deﬁnes the invasion rate between the predator s and its prey ˆs. As for the symmetric case,
these equations have three trivial homogeneous solutions,
p1(1) = 1 ,
p1(2) = 0,
p1(3) = 0 ;
p1(1) = 0 ,
p1(2) = 1,
p1(3) = 0 ;
p1(1) = 0 ,
p1(2) = 0,
p1(3) = 1 ,
(147)
which are unstable against the attack of the corresponding predators as discussed in Section 7.2. Further-
more, the system has another stationary solution which describes the coexistence of all three species with
concentrations
p1(1) = w23
W ,
p1(2) = w31
W ,
p1(3) = w12
W ,
(148)
where W = w12 +w23 +w31. It should be emphasized that all species survive with the above concentrations,
i.e., cyclic dominance provides a way for their coexistence in a wide range of parameters (Gilpin, 1975;
May and Leonard, 1975; Tainaka, 1993; Durrett and Levin, 1997).
Notice, however, the counterintuitive response to the variation of the invasion rates. Naively, one may
expect that the predator of the largest invasion rate should be in the most beneﬁcial position. Contrary to
this, Eq. (148) claims that the equilibrium concentration of a given species is proportional to the invasion
rate of its prey. In fact, this unusual behavior is a direct consequence of cyclic dominance in all three-state
systems.
In order to clarify this unexpected response, let us consider a simple example. Suppose that the con-
centration of species 1 is increased externally. In this case species 1 consumes more of species 2, whose
concentration decreases. As a result, species 2 consumes less of species 3. Finally, species 3 gets the advan-
tage in the dynamical balance, because it has more prey and less predators. In this example the external
support can be realized by either increasing the corresponding invasion rate (here w12), or converting ran-
domly chosen individuals into species 1. The latter situation was analyzed by Tainaka (1993), who studied
what happens in a three-candidate (cyclic) voter model when one of the candidates is supported by the
mass media during an election campaign. Further biological examples are discussed in Frean and Abraham
(2001) and Durrett (2002). The rigorous mathematical treatment of these equations of motion was given by
Hofbauer and Sigmund (1988); Gao (1999, 2000).
In analogy to the symmetric case, a constant of motion can be constructed for Eqs. (146). It is easy to
check that
m = pw23
1
(1)pw31
1
(2)pw12
1
(3) = constant .
(149)
This means that the system evolves along closed orbits, i.e., the concentrations return periodically to their
initial values as illustrated in Fig 53.
Shortly, according to the mean-ﬁeld analysis the qualitative behavior of such asymmetric Rock-Scissors-
Paper systems remain unchanged, despite the fact that diﬀerent invasion rates break the cyclic symmetry
(Ifti and Bergersen, 2003). A special case of the above system with w12 = w23 ̸= w31 was analyzed by
94

3
2
1
Fig. 53. Concentric orbits on the ternary phase diagram if the invasion rates are w12 = 2 and w23 = w31 = 1. The strategy
concentrations in the central stationary state (indicated by the plus symbol) are shifted towards the predator of the seeming
beneﬁciary of the largest invasion rate.
Tainaka (1995) using the pair approximation, which conﬁrmed the above predictions. Furthermore, the pair
approximation predicts that trajectories spiral out (as discussed for the symmetric case) if the system starts
from a random initial state. Evidently, due to the absence of cyclic symmetry the three absorbing states are
reached with unequal probabilities.
Simulations have conﬁrmed that most of the relevant features are hardly aﬀected by the loss of cyclic
symmetry on spatial structures either. The appearance of self-organizing patterns (sometimes with rotating
spiral arms) were reported for many three-state models. Examples are the forest-ﬁre models (Bak et al.,
1990; Drossel and Schwabl, 1992) and ecological models (Durrett and Levin, 1997) mentioned already. Sev-
eral aspects of phase transitions, spatial correlations, ﬂuctuations, and ﬁnite size eﬀects are studied by
Antal and Droz (2001); Mobilia et al. (2006a,b) who considered lattice Lotka-Volterra models.
For the SIRS models the transitions I →R and R →S are not aﬀected by the neighbors, and this may be
the reason why the mean-ﬁeld and pair approximations predict damping oscillations on hypercubic lattices
for a wide range of parameters (Joo and Lebowitz, 2004). At the same time, emerging global oscillations
were reported by Kuperman and Abramson (2001) on small-world structures when they tuned the ratio of
rewired links. For the latter system the amplitude of global oscillations never reached the saturation value
(excluding ﬁnite size eﬀects), i.e., a transition from the limit cycle to one of the absorbing states was not
observed. Further analysis is needed to clarify the possible conditions (if any) for two subsequent phase
transitions in these systems.
The unusual response for invasion rate asymmetries can also be observed in three-strategy evolution-
ary Prisoner’s Dilemma games (discussed in Sec. 6.10) where cyclic dominance occurs. For example, if the
original strategy adoption mechanism among defectors (D), cooperators (C), and ”Tit-for-Tat” strategists
(T ) (recall that D beats C beats T beats D) is superimposed externally by an additional probability of
replacing randomly chosen T strategists by C strategists, then it is D who eventually beneﬁts (Szab´o et al.,
2000). In voluntary Public Good (Hauert et al., 2002; Szab´o and Hauert, 2002b) or Prisoner’s Dilemma
(Szab´o and Hauert, 2002a) games the defector, cooperator, and loner strategies dominate cyclically each
other. For all these models, the increase of the defector’s income [i.e., the “temptation to defect” param-
eter b in Eq. (130)] yields a decrease in the concentration of defectors, whereas the concentration of the
corresponding predator (”Tit-for-Tat” or loner) increases, as was shown in Fig. 41.
7.8. Cyclic dominance for Q > 3 states
The three-state Rock-Scissors-Paper game can be generalized straightforwardly to Q > 3 states. For in-
stance, cyclic dominance for four strategies was discussed by Nowak and Sigmund (2004). They considered
a game where unconditional defectors (AllD) get replaced by the more successful Tit-for-Tat players, who
are transformed into Generous Tit-for-Tat strategists due to environmental noise. They, in turn, get con-
95

quered by unconditional cooperators (AllC) not incurring the cost of inspection, but who are ﬁnally invaded
by AllD strategists again. Traulsen and Schuster (2003) faced a conceptually similar case when studied a
simpliﬁed four-strategy version of the tag-based cooperation model studied earlier by Riolo et al. (2001) and
Nowak and Sigmund (1998).
In the general case Q diﬀerent states (types, strategies, species) are allowed for each site (si = 1, 2, ..., Q),
and these states dominate each other cyclically (i.e., 1 beats 2, 2 beats 3, ...., and ﬁnally Q beats 1). In the
simplest case predator invasion occurs on two (randomly chosen) neighboring sites if these are occupied by
a predator-prey pair, otherwise nothing happens. The interface is blocked between neutral pairs [e.g., (1,3)
or (2,4)]. Evidently, the possible types of frozen (blocked) interfaces increase with Q.
Considering this model on the d-dimensional hyper-cubic lattice Frachebourg and Krapivsky (1998) showed
that the spatial distribution evolves toward a frozen domain pattern if Q exceeds a d-dependent threshold
value. In the one-dimensional case growing domains can be found if Q < 5, and a ﬁnite system develops into
one of the homogeneous states (Bramson and Griﬀeath, 1989; Fisch, 1990). During these domain growing
processes (for Q = 3 and 4) the formation of super-domains were studied by Frachebourg et al. (1996a).
They found that the concentrations of the moving and standing interfaces vanish algebraically with diﬀerent
exponents.
On the one-dimensional lattice for Q ≥5, the invasion front moves until it collides with another interface.
Evidently, if two oppositely moving interfaces meet, they annihilate each other. At the same time, the
collision of a standing and a moving interface creates a third type of interface, which is either an oppositely
moving or a standing one, as is shown in Fig. 54. Finally, all moving interfaces vanish and domain evolution
halts.
0
50
100
150
0
20
40
60
80
x
t, [MCS]
Fig. 54. Time evolution of domain structure for ﬁve-species cyclic dominance in the one-dimensional system.
Similar ﬁxation occurs for higher spatial dimension d if Q ≥Qth(d). Using the pair approximation
Frachebourg and Krapivsky (1998) found that Qth(2) = 14 on the square lattice, and Qth(3) = 23 on the
simple cubic lattice. In these calculations the numerical solution of the corresponding equations of motion
were restricted to random uncorrelated initial distribution, and the following symmetries were assumed:
p1(1) = p1(2) = · · · = p1(Q) = 1
Q ,
(150)
p2(s1, s2) = p2(s2, s1) ,
(151)
and
p2(s1, s2) = p2(s1 + α, s2 + α) ,
(152)
where the state variables (e.g., s1 + α; 1 ≤α < Q) are taken modulo Q. The above predictions of the
pair approximation for the threshold values of Q were conﬁrmed by extensive Monte Carlo simulations
(Frachebourg and Krapivsky, 1998).
96

For Q = 4 the mean-ﬁeld approximation leads to the following equations of motion (mean-ﬁeld equations):
˙p1(1) = p1(1)p1(2) −p1(1)p1(4) ,
˙p1(2) = p1(2)p1(3) −p1(2)p1(1) ,
˙p1(3) = p1(3)p1(4) −p1(3)p1(2) ,
˙p1(4) = p1(4)p1(1) −p1(4)p1(3) .
(153)
These diﬀerential equations conserve the quantities
Q
X
s=1
p1(s) = 1
(154)
and
Q
Y
s=1
p1(s) = m .
(155)
One can also derive two other (not independent) constants of motion,
p1(1)p1(3) = m13 ,
p1(2)p1(4) = m24 ,
(156)
where m = m13m24. These constraints assure that the system evolves along closed orbits, i.e., the concen-
trations return periodically to the initial state.
Notice that the equations of motion (153) are satisﬁed by the usual trivial stationary solutions: the
central solution p1(1) = p1(2) = p1(3) = p1(4) = 1/4, and by the four homogeneous absorbing solutions,
e.g., p1(1) = 1 and p1(2) = p1(3) = p1(4) = 0. Beside these, Eqs. (153) have three continuous sets of
stationary solutions, which can be parameterized by a single continuous parameter ρ. The ﬁrst two with
0 < ρ < 1 are trivial solutions,
p1(1) = ρ, p1(2) = 0, p1(3) = 1 −ρ, p1(4) = 0,
(157)
and
p1(1) = 0, p1(2) = ρ, p1(3) = 0, p1(4) = 1 −ρ.
(158)
The third with 0 ≥ρ ≥1/2 is non-trivial (Sato et al., 2002):
p1(1) = p1(3) = ρ ,
p1(2) = p1(4) = 1
2 −ρ .
(159)
The generalization of the mean-ﬁeld equations (153) is straightforward for Q > 4. In these cases the sum
and the product of the strategy concentrations are trivial constants of motion. Evidently, the corresponding
homogeneous and central stationary solutions exist, as well as the mixed states involving neutral species in
arbitrary concentrations [see Eqs. (157) and (158)]. For even Q, the suitable version of (159) also remains
valid. The diﬀerence between odd and even Q shows up in the generalization of the constraints (156). This
generalization is only possible for Q even, and the corresponding formulae express that the product of
concentrations for even (or odd) label species remains constant during evolution.
In fact, all the above stationary solutions can be realized in lattice models, independently of the spatial
dimension. The stability of these phases and their spatial competition will be studied later in Sec. 8.
Many aspects of cyclic Q-species predator-prey systems have not been investigated yet. Like for the Rock-
Scissors-Paper game, it would be important to understand, how the topological features of the background
97

graph can eﬀect the emergence of global oscillations and the phenomenon of ﬁxation in these more general
systems.
The emergence of rotating spirals in a four-strategy evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma game was studied
by Traulsen and Claussen (2004) using both synchronous and asynchronous updates on the square lattice.
The four-color domain structure can be characterized by the distribution of (three- and four-edge) vortices.
In this case, however, we have to distinguish a large number of diﬀerent vortex types, not like in the three-
state system where there are only two types, the vortex and anti-vortex. For the classiﬁcation of vortices
Traulsen and Claussen (2004) used the concept of a topological charge. The spatial distribution of the
vortices indicated that generally two cyclically dominated four-edge vortices split into three-edge vortices
[with an edge separating the odd (even) label states]. Similar splitting of four-edge vortices was observed by
Lin et al. (2000), when they studied the four-phase pattern of a reaction-diﬀusion system driven externally
by a periodic perturbation.
The lack of additional constants of motion for odd number of species implies a parity eﬀect that becomes
more striking when we consider the eﬀect of diﬀerent invasion rates. Sato et al. (2002) studied what happens
if the invasion rate from species 1 to 2 is varied [w12 = α in the notation of Eq. (146)], while others are
chosen to be unity [w23 = w34 = . . . = wQ1 = 1 for Q > 3]. Monte Carlo simulations were performed on a
square lattice for Q = 3, 4, 5, and 6. For Q = 5 the results were similar to those described above for Q = 3,
i.e., the modiﬁcation of α is beneﬁcial for the predator of the seemingly favored species. In other words,
although invasion rates with α > 1 seem to provide faster spreading for species 1, its ultimate concentration
in the stationary state is the lowest among the species, whereas its predator (species 5) is present with the
highest concentration. At the same time the concentration of species 3 is also enhanced, and this variation is
accompanied by a reduction in concentration for the remaining species. The magnitude of the concentration
variations is approximately proportional to α −1, implying reversed tendencies for α < 1. The prediction of
the mean-ﬁeld approximation for the central stationary solution,
p1(1) = p1(2) = p1(4) =
1
3 + 2α ,
p1(3) = p1(5) =
α
3 + 2α ,
(160)
agrees qualitatively well with the Monte Carlo data as demonstrated in Fig. 55. The more general solution
for diﬀerent invasion rates is given in the paper of Sato et al. (2002).
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
α
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
concentration
Fig. 55. Concentration of states as a function of α in the ﬁve-state model introduced by Sato et al. (2002). The Monte Carlo
data are denoted by circles, pluses, squares, Xs, and diamonds for the states from 1 to 5. The solid lines show the prediction
of the mean-ﬁeld theory given by Eq. (160).
98

A drastically diﬀerent behavior is predicted by the mean-ﬁeld approximation for even Q (Sato et al.,
2002). When α > 1, the even label species die out after some transient phenomenon and ﬁnally the odd
label species form a frozen mixed state. Conversely, if α < 1 all odd label species become extinct. Thus,
according to the mean-ﬁeld approximation, the ”central” solution p1(1) = . . . = p1(Q) = 1/Q only exists
if α = 1 for even Q. Early Monte Carlo simulations, performed for the discrete α values, α = 1 ± 0.2k
(k = 0, 1, 2, 3), seemed to conﬁrm this prediction (Sato et al., 2002). However, repeating the simulations on
a ﬁner grid around α = 1, we can observe the coexistence of all species for Q = 4 as is shown in Fig. 56. The
stationary concentration of species 1 and 3 increase monotonously above α1 ≃0.86, until even label species
die out simultaneously around the second threshold value α2 ≃1.18. According to our preliminary Monte
Carlo results both extinction processes exhibit a similar power law behavior, p1(1) ≃p1(3) ≃(α −α1)β and
p1(2) ≃p1(4) ≃(α2 −α)β, where β ≃0.55(5) in the close vicinity of the thresholds. A rigorous investigation
of the universal features of these transitions is in progress.
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
α
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
concentration
Fig. 56. Concentration of states vs. α characterizing the modiﬁed invasion rate from state 1 to 2 in the four-state cyclic
predator-prey model. The Monte Carlo data are denoted by circles, pluses, triangles, and crosses for the states labeled from 1
to 4.
For Q = 6 simulations indicate a very similar picture to that in Fig. 56. A remarkable diﬀerence is due
to the fact that small islands of odd label species can remain frozen in large domains of even label species
(e.g., species 1 survives forever within domains of species 4, and vice versa), therefore the value of p1(1),
p1(3), and p1(5) remains ﬁnite below the ﬁrst threshold value.
A similar parity eﬀect was described by Kobayashi and Tainaka (1997) who considered a lattice version of
the Lotka-Volterra model with a linear food web of Q species. In this predator-prey model species 1 invades
2, 2 invades 3, ..., and (Q −1) invades Q with all rates chosen to be 1 except for the last one parameterized
by r. On the square lattice invasions between randomly chosen neighboring sites govern evolution. It is
assumed, furthermore, that the top predator (species 1) dies randomly with a certain probability and its
body is directly transformed into species Q. This model was investigated by using Monte Carlo simulations
and mean-ﬁeld approximations. Although the spatial eﬀects are capable to stabilize the coexistence of
species through the formation of a self-organizing pattern, Kobayashi and Tainaka (1997) have discovered
fundamental diﬀerences depending on the parity of the number of species in these ecosystems.
The most relevant feature of the observed parity law can be interpreted as an interference phenomenon
between direct and indirect eﬀects (Kobayashi and Tainaka, 1997). Assume that the concentration of one of
the species is increased or decreased directly. This variation results in an opposite eﬀect in the concentration
of the corresponding prey and this indirect eﬀects propagates through the cyclic food web. For even Q the
indirect eﬀect will strengthen the direct modiﬁcation, and the corresponding positive feedback can even
eliminate the minority species. In contrast with this, for odd Q the ecosystem exhibits an unusual response
similar to the one described for the Rock-Scissors-Paper game with diﬀerent invasion rates.
99

8. Competing Associations
We know that in classical game theory the number of Nash equilibria can be larger than one. In general,
the number of Nash equilibria (and ESSs in evolutionary games) rapidly increases with the number of pure
strategies Q for an arbitrary payoﬀmatrix (Broom, 2000). The situation becomes more complicated in
spatial evolutionary games, where each player follows one of the pure strategies, and interacts with a limited
number of co-players. Particularly for large Q, the players can only experience a limited portion of all the
possible constellations, and this intrinsic constraint aﬀects the evolutionary process. Monte Carlo simulations
demonstrated that the dynamical rule (as a way of optimization) can lead to many diﬀerent stationary states
in small systems. For large spatial models, these phases occur locally in the initial transient regime, and the
neighboring phases compete with each other along the boundary separating them. The long-run state of the
system develops as a result of random and/or deterministic invasion processes, and may have very complex
spatio-temporal structure.
The large number of possible stationary states in these models was already seen in the mean-ﬁeld de-
scription. In many of these solutions several strategies are missing, and these states can be considered as
solutions to sub-games, in which the missing strategies are excluded by default. Henceforth, the possible
stationary solutions will be considered as “associations of species”.
For ecological systems the relevance of complex spatio-temporal structures (Watt, 1947) and associations
of species have been studied for a long time [for a survey and further references see Johnson and Boerlijst
(2002)]. In the subsequent sections we will discuss several simple models to demonstrate the surprisingly rich
variety of behavior that can occur for predator-prey interactions. In these systems the survival of a species
is strongly related to the existence of a suitable association that can provide a higher stability comparing to
other possibilities.
8.1. A four-species cyclic predator-prey model with local mixing
Let us ﬁrst study the eﬀect of local mixing in the four-species cyclic predator-prey model discussed in
Section 7.8. In this model each site x of a square lattice can be occupied by an individual belonging to one
of four species (sx = 1, . . . , 4). The cyclic predator-prey relation is deﬁned as above, i.e., 1 invades 2 invades
3 invades 4 invades 1. The evolutionary process repeats the following steps:
1) Choose two neighboring sites at random;
2) If these sites are occupied by a predator–prey pair, the oﬀspring of the predator occupies the prey’s site
[e.g., (1, 2) →(1, 1)];
3) If the sites are occupied by a neutral pair of species, they exchange their sites with probability µ < 1 [e.g.,
(1, 3) →(3, 1)];
4) Nothing happens if the states are identical.
Starting from a random initial state these steps are repeated many times, and after a suitable thermaliza-
tion time we determine the one- and two-site conﬁguration probabilities, p1(s) and p2(s, s′); s, s′ = 1, . . . , 4,
respectively, by averaging over a suﬃciently long sampling time.
The value of µ characterizes the strength of local mixing. If µ = 0, the model is equivalent to those
discussed in Section 7.8, and a typical snapshot is shown in the upper right part of Fig. 57. As described
above, this self-organizing pattern is sustained by traveling invasion fronts. Similar spatio-temporal pattern
can be observed below a threshold value of mixing, µ < µcr = 0.02662(2) (Szab´o, 2005). As µ approaches the
threshold value, the irregularity of the interfaces separating neutral species increases, and one can observe
the formation of small islands occupied by only two (neutral) species within the well-mixed state.
For µ < µcr all the four species survive with the same concentration, p1(s) = 1/4, while the probability
pnp = p2(1, 3) + p2(3, 1) + p2(2, 4) + p2(4, 2)
(161)
of ﬁnding neutral pairs (np) on neighboring sites decreases as µ increases. At the same time, the Monte
Carlo simulations indicate a decrease in the frequency of invasions. This quantity is nicely characterized by
the probability of predator-prey pairs (ppp), deﬁned as
100

Fig. 57. The large snapshot (L = 160) shows the formation of the associations of neutral pairs during the domain growth
process for µ = 0.05. Cyclic dominance in the food web is indicated in the lower right plot. The smaller snapshot (upper right)
illustrates a typical distribution of species in the absence of site exchange, µ = 0.
pppp = p2(1, 2) + p2(2, 3) + p2(3, 4) + p2(4, 1) +
p2(2, 1) + p2(3, 2) + p2(4, 3) + p2(1, 4) .
(162)
The Monte Carlo data indicates a ﬁrst-order phase transition at µ = µcr.
Above the threshold value of µ, simulations display a domain growth process, which is analogous to the
one described by the kinetic Ising model below its critical temperature (Glauber, 1963). As illustrated in
Fig. 57, there are two types of growing domains, formed from odd and even label species. These domains
are separated by a boundary layer where the four species invades cyclically each other. This boundary layer
serves as a ”species reservoir”, sustaining the symmetric composition within domains. In agreement with
theoretical expectations (Bray, 1994), the typical domain size increases with time as l(t) ∼
√
t. Thus, for
any ﬁnite size this system develops into a mono-domain state, consisting of two neutral species with equal
concentrations. Since there are no invasion events within this state, pppp can be considered as an order
parameter that becomes zero in the stationary state for µ > µcr. Due to the site exchange mechanism the
distribution of the two neutral species evolves into an uncorrelated (symmetric) state [e.g., p1(1) = p1(3) =
1/2 and p2(1, 1) = p2(3, 3) = p2(1, 3) = p2(3, 1) = 1/4].
The traditional mean-ﬁeld approximation cannot account for site exchange, therefore the corresponding
equations of motion are the same as those in Eqs. (153) of Sec. 7.8. The two- and four-site approximations
also fail, despite the fact that they directly involve the eﬀect of site exchange. A qualitatively correct
prediction can be achieved when the generalized mean-ﬁeld approximation is performed on a 3 × 3 cluster.
This discrepancy may indicate the strong relevance of complex processes (represented by several consecutive
elementary steps in time and/or strongly correlated local structures), whose correct description would require
larger cluster sizes beyond those analyzed thus far.
Let us recall that this system has four homogeneous stationary states, two continuous sets with two-species,
and one symmetric stationary solution with four-species. Despite the large number of possible solutions,
simulations only realize the symmetric four-species solution for µ < µcr, excepting situations when the
system is started from some strongly correlated (almost homogeneous) initial states. The preference for
two-species states for µ > µcr is due to a particular feature of the food web. Namely, participants of these
spatial associations mutually protect each other against all possible external invaders. For example, if an
individual of species 1, who belongs to the well-mixed association of species 1 and 3, is invaded by an external
invader of species 4, then one of its neighbors of species 3 will recapture the lost site within a short time.
The individuals of species 1 will guard their partners of species 3 in the same way against attacks by species
2. For this reason, such states will be called ”defensive alliances” in the sequel.
101

The present model has two equivalent defensive alliances, because members of the well-mixed association
of species 2 and 4 can also protect each other against their respective predators using the above mechanism.
Such defensive alliances are preferred to all other states when the mixing µ exceeds a threshold value.
The spatial competition of diﬀerent associations can be visualized directly by Monte Carlo simulations, if
the initial state is artiﬁcially set to contain large domains of two diﬀerent associations. For example, one can
study a strip-like initial structure, where parallel domains are occupied alternately by four-species (cyclic)
and two-species (e.g., 1+3) associations. The linear variation of pppp with time measures the speed of the
invasion process along the boundary, and we can determine the average velocity vinv of the invasion front.
For µ < µcr the four-species association expands, but its average invasion velocity vanishes linearly as the
critical mixing rate is approached (Szab´o and Sznaider, 2004),
vinv ∼(µcr −µ).
(163)
For µ > µcr the application of this approach is less reliable. It seems to be strongly limited to those regions,
where the spontaneous nucleation rate is very slow. The linear scaling of the average invasion velocity is
accompanied by a divergence in the relaxation time as µ →µcr, and we need very long run times in the
vicinity of the threshold. On the other hand, Eq. (163) can be used to improve the accuracy of µcr by
deducing vinv from short time runs further away from µcr. This approach becomes particularly eﬃcient for
situations, when the stationary state of the competing associations is not aﬀected by the parameters (e.g.,
the mixed state is independent of µ).
The emergence of defensive alliances seems to be very robust, and is not related to the simplicity of the
present model. Similar phenomena were found for another model, where local mixing was built in in the form
of random (nearest-neighbor) jumps to vacant sites (Szab´o and Sznaider, 2004). Using similar dynamical
rules He et al. (2005) reported the formation of two defensive alliances (consisting of species with odd or even
labels) in a cyclic six-species spatial predator-prey model. In a more realistic computer simulation Sznaider
(2003) observed the spatial formation of defensive alliances on a continuous plane, where four species (with
cyclic dominance) moved randomly, and created oﬀsprings after they had catched and consumed a prey
within a given distance.
8.2. Defensive alliances
In the previous section we discussed a spatial four-species cyclic predator-prey model, where two equivalent
defensive alliances can exist. Their stability is supported by local mixing, i.e., site exchange between neutral
pairs. The robustness of the formation of such types of defensive alliances was also conﬁrmed for the six-
and eight-species versions of the model. Evidently, larger Q gives rise to more stationary states that consist
of mutually neutral species. Nevertheless, Monte Carlo simulations indicate that only two types of states
(associations) can survive after an evolutionary competition. If the mixing probability µ is smaller then a
Q-dependent threshold µcr(Q), all species can coexist by forming a self-organizing pattern characterized by
perpetual cyclic invasions. In the opposite case, µ > µcr(Q), one of the two equivalent defensive alliances
conquer the system in the end of a domain growth process. The two equivalent defensive alliances are
composed of species with only odd and even labels, respectively. In the well-mixed phase, above µcr, their
stability is provided by a similar mechanism as for Q = 4. In fact these are the only associations, which
can protect themselves against attacks from the rest of the species. The threshold value µcr decreases for
increasing Q. According to the Monte Carlo simulations, µcr(Q = 6) = 0.0065(1) and µcr(Q = 8) =
0.0028(1). Numerical studies face diﬃculties for Q > 8, because the domain growth velocity decreases as Q
increases.
The formation of defensive alliances seems to require local mixing. This is the reason why these states
become dominant if µ exceeds a suitable threshold value. Cyclic dominance, however, may inherently imply
another mechanism for the emergence of defensive alliances which is not necessarily based on local mixing
(Boerlijst and Hogeweg, 1991; Szab´o and Cz´ar´an, 2001b,a).
In order to see this, notice that within a self-organizing spatial pattern each individual has a ﬁnite life-
time, because it will be consumed by its predator sooner or later. Assume now that there is an association
102

composed of cyclically dominating species (to be called a cyclic defensive alliance). An external invader sex,
outside the association, who is a predator of the internal species s is eliminated from the system within
the life-time, if the internal predator of s also consumes sex. As an example Fig. 58 shows a six-species
predator-prey system. The food web gives rise to two cyclic defensive alliances, whose spatial competitions
for diﬀerent mixing rates is also depicted.
Fig. 58. A six-species predator-pray model deﬁned by the food web on the right. Members of the two possible cyclic defensive
alliances are connected by thick dotted lines. Left panels show snapshots of the domain growth process for two diﬀerent rates
of mixing (left: µ = 0, right: µ = 0.08).
In this six-species model each species has two predators and two prey in a way deﬁned by the food web
in Fig. 58 (Szab´o, 2005). The odd (even) label species can build up a self-organizing structure controlled by
cyclic invasions. The members of these associations protect cyclically each other against external invaders as
mentioned above. In the absence of local mixing, the Monte Carlo simulations on the square lattice visualize
how domains of these defensive alliances grow (for an intermediate state see the upper snapshot in Fig. 58).
Eventually the system develops into one of the ”mono-domain” (mono-alliance) states.
The spatio-temporal structure of these associations seems to play a decisive role in the protection mech-
anism, because the corresponding mean-ﬁeld approach cannot describe the extinction of external invaders.
Contrary to the simulation results, the numerical solution of the mean-ﬁeld equations predicts periodic
oscillations. Very recently the relevance of the spatial structure was conﬁrmed by Kim et al. (2005), who
demonstrated that the formation of these defensive alliances can be impeded on complex networks, where a
suﬃciently large portion of the links is rewired.
Simulations on the square lattice show a strikingly diﬀerent behavior, when we allow site exchange between
neutral pairs (e.g., the black and white species in Fig. 58). This process favors the formation of two-species
domains composed from a neutral pair of species. Surprisingly, these mixed states can also be considered
as defensive alliances. Consequently, for suﬃciently large mixing rate µ, one can observe the formation of
domains of all three two-species associations (see the right snapshot in Fig. 58).
According to the simulations a ﬁnite system evolves into one of the two cyclic three-species defensive
alliances if µ < µcr = 0.0559(1). Due to the absence of neutral species the ﬁnal self-organizing spatio-
temporal structure is independent of µ, and is equivalent to the one discussed in Section 7.1. In the opposite
case, µ > µcr, the ﬁnite lattice evolves into an uncorrelated distribution of two neutral species, e.g., p1(1) =
p1(4) = 1/2 and p2(1, 1) = p2(4, 4) = p2(1, 4) = p2(4, 1) = 1/4 (Szab´o and Sznaider, 2004).
In this predator-prey system, either below or above µcr, the domain growth process is controlled by the
random motion of boundaries separating equivalent associations. In the next section we will consider what
happens if the coexisting associations are diﬀerent and/or cyclically dominate each other.
8.3. Cyclic dominance between associations in a six-species predator-prey model
In order to demonstrate the rich variety of possible complex behaviors for associations, now we consider
in detail a six-species spatial predator-prey model embedding the features of the previous models (Szab´o,
103

2005). The present system has six species, whose individuals are distributed on a square lattice in such a
way that each site is occupied by one of the species. Each species has two predators and two prey according
to the food web plotted in Fig. 59. The invasion rates between any predator-prey pairs are chosen to be
unity. Choosing suﬃciently large system sizes with periodic boundary condition the system is started from
a random initial state. Evolution is controlled by sequential invasion events if two neighboring sites, chosen
at random, are occupied by a predator-prey pair. If the sites are occupied by a neutral pair, they will
exchange their positions with a probability µ characterizing the strength of local mixing. After a suitable
thermalization time the system evolves into a state that we consider.
Before reporting the results of the Monte Carlo simulations it will be illuminating to recall the possible
stationary states. This system has six homogeneous states which are unstable against invasions of the
corresponding predators. There exist three two-species states, consisting of neutral pairs of species like
1+4, 2+6, and 3+5, with ﬁxed composition, whose spatial distribution is frozen (becomes uncorrelated)
for µ = 0 (µ > 0). Two subsystems, composed of species 2+3+4 or 1+5+6, are equivalent to the spatial
Rock-Scissors-Paper game. One of the four-species subsystem (1+3+4+5) is analogous to those discussed in
Section 8.1. The existence of these states are conﬁrmed by the mean-ﬁeld approximation, which also allows
the coexistence of all six species with the same ﬁxed concentration, p1(s) = 1/6 for s = 1, . . . , 6, or with
oscillating concentrations.
µ=0.038
µ=0
µ=0.03
µ=0.08
1
2
6
4
3
5
Fig. 59. Distribution of species in four typical stationary states obtained by simulations for values of µ given for each snapshot.
The color of the labeled species and the predator-prey relations are deﬁned by the food web.
According to the simulations performed on small systems (L ≃10), evolution ends in one of the one- or
two-species absorbing states, and selection is hardly aﬀected by the presence of local mixing. Unfortunately,
the eﬀect of system size on the transition from a random initial state into one of the absorbing (or even
meta-stable) states is not yet considered rigorously. However, this type of investigation could be useful for
understanding the specialization (diﬀerentiation) of biological cells.
On suﬃciently large systems the prevalence of the homogeneous state can never be observed. The ultimate
behavior is determined uniquely by the value of µ (for snapshots see Fig. 59). In the absence of local mixing
(µ = 0) two species (2 and 6 or black and white on the snapshot) die out within a short time and the
surviving species form a self-organizing pattern maintained by cyclic invasions. We have to emphasize that
this subsystem can be considered as a defensive alliance, whose stability is supported by its self-organizing
pattern in the present six-species model. For example, if an external intruder of species 2 attacks a member
of species 3 (or 5) then the oﬀsprings will be eliminated by their common predator 1 (or 4).
For small µ values local mixing is not able to prevent the extinction of species 2 and 6, and the behavior of
the resultant subsystem becomes equivalent to the cyclic four-species predator-prey model discussed above.
104

This means that the self-organizing structure is eroded by the local mixing and the well-mixed associations
of the neutral species (1+4 or 3+5) become favored above the ﬁrst threshold value, µc1 = 0.0265, given in
Section 8.1. Thus, for the region µc1 < µ < µc2 the ﬁnal state of the system consists of only two neutral
species, as shown by the snapshots in Fig. 59 for µ = 0.03.
The velocity of the segregation process increases with µ. As a result, for µ > µc2 small (well-mixed)
domains of species 1 and 4 (or 3 and 5) can form before the rest of the species (2 and 6) become extinct.
The occurrence of these domains help minority species to survive, because both species 1 and 4 (3 and 5)
are prey for species 6 (2). The largest snapshot, consisting of 400 × 400 lattice sites in Fig. 59 depicts the
successive events controlling the evolution of this self-organizing pattern. In this snapshot there are only a
few black and white sites (species 2 and 6) who invade (without hindrance) the territory occupied only by
their two prey. Behind these invasion fronts the occupied territory is re-invaded by their predators, whose
territory is again attacked by their respective predators, etc.
Although, as discussed above, the food web allows the formation of many other three- and four-species
”cyclic” patterns, the present dynamics prefers four-species cyclic defensive alliance (1+3+4+5) to any other
cyclic associations. On longer time scales, however, the strong mixing transforms these (cyclic) four-species
domains into two-species associations consisting of neutral species, which can be invaded again by one of
the minority species.
Notice that the above successive cyclic process is much more complicated than the simple invasion process
modeled by the spatial Rock-Scissors-Paper game or even by the forest-ﬁre model. In the present system
two types of cycles, (1 + 3 + 4 + 5) →(1 + 4) →6 →(1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6) →(1 + 3 + 4 + 5) and
(1 + 3 + 4 + 5) →(3 + 5) →2 →(1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5 + 6) →(1 + 3 + 4 + 5), are entangled. The boundaries
between the territories of associations are fuzzy. Furthermore, transitions from an association into another
have diﬀerent time scales and characteristics depending on µ. As a result, the concentration of the six
species varies with µ if µc2 < µ < µc3 = 0.0581(1). Within this region the concentrations of the species 2
and 6 increase with µ monotonously (as illustrated by the Monte Carlo data in Fig. 60), and above the third
threshold value they can form a mixed state prevailing the whole system. In fact, the well-mixed distribution
of species 2 and 6 also satisﬁes the criteria of defensive alliances, because they mutually protect each other
against the rest of the species.
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
µ
0.0
0.2
0.4
concentration
Fig. 60. Concentration of species vs. µ. Monte Carlo data are denoted by diamonds, large circles, squares, crosses, pluses, and
small circles for the six species labeled from 1 to 6, respectively. Arrows indicate the three transition points.
Determination of the second transition point is made diﬃcult by increasing ﬂuctuations in the concen-
trations when µc2 is approached from above. Contrary to many critical phase transitions, where ﬂuctuation
of the vanishing order parameter diverges, here the largest concentration ﬂuctuations are found for the ma-
jority species. Visualization of the spatial evolution indicates that the invasions of minority species (2 and
6) give rise to fast variations with large ﬂuctuations and increasing correlation lengths if µ →µc2+. Due to
the mentioned technical diﬃculties the characteristic features of this transition are not yet fully clariﬁed.
105

It is interesting that in the given model the coexistence of all species is only possible within a limited
range of mixing, µc2 < µ < µc3. The steady-state concentrations are determined by the cyclic invasion rates
between the (multi-species) associations. As discussed in Section 7.8, this type of self-organizing patterns
can be maintained for various invasion rates and mechanism, depending on the strength of mixing. This
phenomenon is not unique as similar features were observed for another six-species model (Szab´o, 2005).
These results suggest that the stability of very complex ecological and catalytic chemical systems can be
enhanced by cycles in the spatio-temporal pattern [for an early survey see the book by Eigen and Schuster
(1979)].
The above six-species states can be viewed as composite associations, which consist of simpler associations
dominating cyclically each other. Following this procedure one can construct a hierarchy of associations,
which is able to sustain bio-diversity at a very high level. In the last sections the analysis has been restricted to
those systems, where only predator-prey interactions and local mixing were permitted. We expect, however,
that suitable extensions of the evolutionary dynamics may induce an even larger variety of behaviors.
It is widely accepted that self-organization plays a crucial role in pre-biotical evolution. Self-organizing
processes can provide a way for transforming nonliving matter to living organisms [for a brief survey of
recent research see Rasmussen et al. (2004)]. The systematic investigation of simpliﬁed evolutionary games
as toy models can serve as a bottom-up approach that helps us clarifying theoretically the fundamental
phenomena, mechanisms, and environmental requirements needed for creating living systems.
9. Conclusions and outlook
In this article we reviewed our current understanding of evolutionary games that have become of increased
interest to biologists, economists, and social scientists in recent years. Following a pedagogical way we
surveyed the most relevant elements of the classic theory of games, as well as the main components of
evolutionary game theory. One of the principal goals was to demonstrate the applicability of concepts and
approaches originally developed in statistical physics to study many-particle systems. For this purpose
we investigated in detail some representative games like the Prisoner’s Dilemma and the Rock-Scissors-
Paper game for diﬀerent connectivity structures and evolutionary rules. The analysis of these games nicely
illustrated the possible richness of behavior. Evolutionary games can exhibit diﬀerent stationary states and
phase transitions when fundamental parameters like the payoﬀs, the level of noise, the dimensionality or the
connectivity structure are varied.
In comparison with physical systems, evolutionary games can show more complicated behaviors which
depend sensitively on the applied dynamic rules and the topological features of the underlying social graph.
Usually the behavior of a physical system can be reproduced qualitatively well by the traditional mean-ﬁeld
approximation. However, the appropriate description of an evolutionary game requires more sophisticated
techniques, taking the ﬁne details appearing both in the model and in the conﬁguration space into account.
Although, extended versions of the mean-ﬁeld technique are useful and are capable of providing correct results
on a high enough level, they should frequently be complemented by time-consuming numerical calculations.
Most of our discussion focused on inﬁnitely large systems where the concept of phase transitions is ap-
plicable. We have to emphasize, however, that for many realistic systems ﬁnite-size models and approaches
(e.g., Moran process, ﬁxation) can give more appropriate descriptions. At the same time the corresponding
techniques are capable of deducing simple analytical relations [see (Nowak, 2006b)]. The clariﬁcation of
ﬁnite-size eﬀects is especially needed for those systems which have two (or more) time and/or spatial scales.
Unfortunately, systematic investigations are strongly limited by the wide variety of microscopic rules and
the large number of parameters. For example, at the beginning many questions in social dilemmas were
only investigated within the framework of the Prisoner’s Dilemma, although similar problems and questions
naturally arise for the Hawk-Dove and some other games too [see the papers by Nowak and May (1993);
Killingback and Doebeli (1996); Hauert and Doebeli (2004); Doebeli and Hauert (2005); Sysi-Aho et al. (2005);
Tomassini et al. (2006)]. The extension of research towards these models in recent years has started to pro-
vide a more complete picture about the emergence of cooperation in social dilemmas in general (Santos et al.,
2006b; Hauert et al., 2006; Ohtsuki et al., 2006)).
106

One of the most striking features of evolutionary games is the occurrence of self-organizing patterns. These
patterns can be characterized by additional (internal) parameters (e.g., average time period of local oscilla-
tions, geometrical properties of the spatial patterns, etc). We hope that future eﬀorts will reveal the detailed
relationships between these internal properties. The appearance of self-organization is strongly related to the
absence of detailed balance in the microscopic states. This feature can be described by introducing a ”proba-
bility current” between microscopic states. The investigation of the distribution of probability currents (the
”vorticity structure”) (Schnakenberg, 1976; Zia and Schmittmann, 2006) can provide further information
about the possible relations between microscopic mechanisms and the resulting spatial structures.
The present review is far from being complete. Missing related topics include minority games, games with
random payoﬀs, quantum games, and those systems where the payoﬀs come from multi-person (e.g. Public
Good) games. About minority games, as mentioned previously, the reader can ﬁnd detailed discussions in
the books by Challet et al. (2004) and by Coolen (2005). Methods developed originally within spin glass
theory [for reviews see (M´ezard et al., 1987; Gy¨orgyi, 2001)] are used successfully by Berg and Engel (1998);
Berg and Weigt (1999), who studied the properties of two-player games with random payoﬀs in the limit
Q →∞.
Many aspects of evolutionary game theory are utilized directly in the developments of computational
learning algorithms [for a survey see the paper by Wolpert et al. (2004) and further references therein]. In
these systems the players represent algorithms, and the Darwinian selection among the diﬀerent mutants
are controlled by some utility function (payoﬀ). Thus, this research area combines three ﬁelds: game theory,
machine learning, and optimization theory.
Another perspective research topic is quantum game theory which involves the quantum superposition of
pure strategies [for a brief overview we suggest Lee and Johnson (2001, 2002) and further references therein].
Utilizing the quantum entanglement this extension may oﬀer strategies more favorable than classical ones (for
a nice example see the description of the Quantum Penny Flip in Appendix A.9). As quantum entanglement
enforces common interest, the Pareto optimum can be easily achieved by using quantum strategies even
for the Prisoner’s Dilemma, as was discussed by Eisert et al. (1999). Players can avoid the dilemma if they
both follow quantum strategies. This two-person quantum game was experimentally realized by Du et al.
(2002) on a nuclear magnetic resonance quantum computer. It is believed that the deeper understanding of
quantum games can inspire the development of eﬃcient evolutionary rules for achieving the optimal global
payoﬀin social dilemmas.
Acknowledgments
Enlightening discussions with Tibor Antal, Ulf Dieckmann, Attila Szolnoki, Arne Traulsen, and Jeromos
Vukov are gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported by the Hungarian National Research Fund
(OTKA T-47003).
Appendix A. Games
A.1. Battle of the Sexes
This game is a typical (asymmetric) Coordination game. Imagine a wife and a husband who forget whether
they have agreed to attend an opera production or a sports event in the evening. Both events are unique
and they should decide simultaneously without communication where to go. The husband prefers the sports
event, his wife the opera, but both prefer being together rather than alone. The payoﬀmatrix is:
107

Wife
Opera Sports
Opera
(1,2)
(0,0)
Husband
Sports
(0,0)
(2,1)
(A.1)
Note that Battle of the Sexes is a completely diﬀerent game in the biology literature (Hofbauer and Sigmund,
1998). That game is structurally similar to Matching Pennies.
A.2. Chicken game
Bertrand Russell, in his book “Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare” (Russell, 1959), describes the game
as follows: “... a sport which, I am told, is practised by some youthful degenerates. This sport is called
”Chicken!” It is played by choosing a long straight road with a white line down the middle and starting two
very fast cars towards each other from opposite ends. Each car is expected to keep the wheels of one side
on the white line. As they approach each other, mutual destruction becomes more and more imminent. If
one of them swerves from the white line before the other, the other, as he passes, shouts ”Chicken!” and the
one who has swerved becomes an object of contempt....”
Chicken is mathematically equivalent to the Hawk-Dove game and to the Snowdrift game.
A.3. Coordination game
Whenever players should choose an identical action, whatever it is, to receive high payoﬀ, we speak about
a Coordination game. As a typical example think about competing technologies like video standards (VHS vs
Betamax) or storage formats (Blue-ray vs HD DVD). When ﬁrms are capable of agreeing on the technology
to apply, market sales and thus proﬁts are high. However, in the lack of a common technology standard the
market is full of compatibility problems, and buyers are reluctant to purchase. Sales and proﬁts are low for
all producers. Ironically, the actual technology chosen has less importance, and it may well happen that the
market coordinates on an inferior product, as was undoubtedly the case for the QWERTY keyboard system.
The Coordination game is also the adequate mathematical metaphor behind social conventions such as
our collective choice of the side of the road we drive on, the time zones we deﬁne, or the signs we associate
with given meanings in our linguistic communication.
In general, the players can have Q > 2 options, and the Nash equilibria can be achieved by agreeing
on which one to use. For diﬀerent payoﬀs (see Battle of the Sexes) the players can prefer diﬀerent Nash
equilibria.
A.4. Hawk-Dove game
Assume a population of animals (birds or others) where individuals are equal in almost all biological
properties except one: their aggressiveness in interactions with others. This behavioral attribute is genetically
coded, and animals exist in two forms: the aggressive type, to be called Hawk, and the cooperative type, to
be called Dove. Assume that each time two animals meet, they compete for a resource R that can represent
food. When two Doves meet they simply share the resource. When two Hawks meet they ﬁght, and one of
them (randomly) gets seriously injured, while the other takes the resource. Finally if a Dove meets a Hawk,
the Dove escapes without ﬁghting, and the Hawk takes the full resource without injury. The payoﬀmatrix
is
108

Animal 2
Hawk
Dove
Hawk
V −C
2
, V −C
2

(V, 0)
Animal 1
Dove
(0, V )
V
2 , V
2

(A.2)
where C > V is the cost of injury. The game assumes darwinian evolution, in which ﬁtness is associated
with average payoﬀin the population.
The Hawk-Dove game is mathematically equivalent to economists’ Chicken and Snowdrift games.
A.5. Matching Pennies
This is a 2 × 2 zero-sum matrix game. The players ﬁrst determine who will be the winner for an outcome
with the ”same” or ”diﬀerent” sides of the coins. Then, each player conceals in her palm a penny either with
its face up or down. The players reveal their choices simultaneously. If the pennies match (both are head or
both are tail), the player ”Same” receives one dollar from player ”Diﬀerent”. Otherwise, player ”Diﬀerent”
wins and receives one dollar from the other player. The payoﬀmatrix is
Diﬀerent
Head
Tail
Head
(1, −1) (−1, 1)
Same
Tail
(−1, 1) (1, −1)
(A.3)
The Nash equilibrium of this game is a mixed strategy: each player chooses heads or tails with equal
probability.
This game is equivalent to ”Throwing Fingers” and ”Odds or Evens”.
A.6. Minority game
In this N-person game (N is odd) the players should choose between two options simultaneously and only
that action is successful which is chosen by the minority. Such a situation can occur in ﬁnancial markets
where agents choose between ”selling” and ”buying”, or in traﬃc when drivers choose from two possible
roads to take. The original version of the game, suggested by Arthur (1994), used as an example the El Farol
bar in Santa Fe, where Irish music is only enjoyable if the bar is not too crowded, and agents should decide
whether to visit the bar or stay at home. The evolutionary version was introduced by Challet and Zhang
(1997). Many aspects of the game are discussed in two recent books by Challet et al. (2004) and by Coolen
(2005).
A.7. Prisoner’s Dilemma
The story for this game was invented by the mathematician Albert Tucker in 1950, when he wished to
illustrate the diﬃculty of analyzing certain kinds of games studied previously by Melvin Dresher and Merill
Flood (scientist at RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California). Tucker’s paradox has since given rise
to an enormous literature in areas as diverse as philosophy, biology, economics, behavioral and political
sciences, as well as game theory itself. The story of the ”Prisoner’s Dilemma” is the following:
109

Two burglars are arrested after their joint burglary and held separately by the police. However, the police
does not have suﬃcient proof in order to have them convicted, therefore the prosecutor visits each of them
and oﬀers the same deal: if one confesses (called defection in the context of game theory) and the other
remains silent (cooperation – with the other prisoner), the silent accomplice receives a three-year sentence
and the confessor goes free. If both stay silent then the police can only give both burglars one year for a
minor charge. If both confess, each burglar receives a two-year sentence.
According to the traditional notation the payoﬀmatrix is
Prisoner 2
Defect Cooperate
Defect
(P, P)
(T, S)
Prisoner 1
Cooperate
(S, T )
(R, R)
(A.4)
where P means ”Punishment for mutual defection”, T ”Temptation to defect”, S ”Sucker’s payoﬀ”, and R
”Reward for mutual cooperation”. The matrix elements satisfy the following rank ordering: S < P < R < T .
For the repeated version (Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma) usually the additional constraint, T + S < 2R, is
also assumed. This ensures the long-run advantage of mutual cooperation against a strategy proﬁle where
players cooperate and defect alternatively in opposite phase.
The reader can ﬁnd further details about the history of this game in the book by Poundstone (1992),
together with many important applications. Experimental investigations of human behavior in Prisoner’s
Dilemma situations have been expanding since the works of Trivers (1971) and Wedekind and Milinski
(1996).
A.8. Public Good game
In an experimental realization of the Public Good game (Ledyard, 1995; Hauert et al., 2002), an experi-
menter gives some money c to each of N players. The players decide independently and simultaneously how
much to invest (if any) to a common pool. The collected sum is multiplied by a factor r ( 1 < r < N −1)
and is redistributed to the N players equally, independently of their individual contributions. The maximum
total income is achieved if all players contribute maximally. In this case each player receives rc, thus the
ﬁnal payoﬀis (r −1)c. Players are faced with the temptation of being free-riders, i.e., to take advantage
of the common pool without contributing to it. In other words, any individual investment is a loss for the
player because only a portion r/N < 1 will be repaid. Consequently, rational players invest nothing and the
corresponding state is known as the ”Tragedy of the Commons” (Hardin, 1968). In the game theory litera-
ture this game is frequently referred to as the Tragedy of the Commons, the Free Rider problem, the Social
Dilemma, or the Multi-person Prisoner’s Dilemma. The large variety of names reﬂects the large number of
situations when members of a society can beneﬁt from the eﬀorts of others, while having a temptation not
to pay the cost of these eﬀorts (Baumol, 1952; Samuelson, 1954; Hardin, 1971).
Evidently, if there are only two players whose choices are restricted to two options (to invest nothing or all)
then this game becomes a Prisoner’s Dilemma. Conversely, the N-person round robin Prisoner’s Dilemma
game is equivalent to a Public Good game.
A.9. Quantum Penny Flip
This game was played by Captain Picard (P) and Q (two characters in the American TV series Star Trek:
The Next Generation) on the bridge of the Starship Enterprise. Q oﬀers his help to the crew provided that
P can beat him. In this game ﬁrst P puts a penny head up into a box, thereafter they can reverse the penny
without seeing it (ﬁrst Q, then P, and ﬁnally Q again). In this two-person zero-sum game Q wins if the
110

penny is head up when opening the box. Between two classical players this game has a Nash equilibrium
when each player selects one of the two possibilities randomly in subsequent steps. In the present situation,
however, Q possesses a curious capability: he can create a quantum superposition state of the penny (we can
think of the quantum coin as the spin of an electron). Meyer (1999) shows that due to this advantage Q can
always win this game, if he puts the coin into a quantum state, i.e., an equal mixture of head (1, 0)T and
tail (0, 1)T [i.e., a(1, 0)T + b(0, 1)T , where a and b are C numbers satisfying the conditions a¯a + b¯b = 1 and
|a| = |b| = 1/
√
2]. In the next step P can only perform a classical spin reversal or leave the quantum coin
unchanged. Q wins because the second quantum operation allows him to rotate the coin into its original
(head up) state independently of the action of P.
In the quantum mechanical context (Lee and Johnson, 2002) the 1/2 spin has two pure states: pointing up
or down along the z axis. The classical spin ﬂip made (or not) by P rotates the spin along the x axis. In his
ﬁrst action Q performs a Hadamard operation creating a spin state pointing along the +x axis. This state
cannot be aﬀected by P so Q can easily restore the initial (spin up) state by the second (inverse Hadamard)
operation.
A.10. Rock-Scissors-Paper game
The Rock-Scissors-Paper game is a two-person, zero-sum game with three pure strategies (items) named
“rock”, “scissors”, and “paper”. After a synchronization procedure depending on culture, the two players
have to choose a strategy simultaneously and show it by their hands. If the players form the same item then
it is a tie, and the round is repeated once again. In this game each item is superior to one other, and inferior
to the third one: rock beats scissors beat paper beats rock. In other words, rock (indicated by keeping the
hand in a ﬁst) crushes scissors, scissors (by extending the ﬁrst two ﬁngers and holding them apart) cut
paper, and paper (by holding the hand ﬂat) covers rock.
Several extensions of this game have been invented and are played occasionally word wide. These may
allow further choices. For example, in the Rock-Scissors-Paper-Spock-Lizard game each item beats two others
and is beaten by the remaining two ones, that is, scissors cut paper covers rock crushes lizard poisons Spock
smashes scissors decapitate lizard eats paper disproves Spock vaporizes rock crushes scissors.
A.11. Snowdrift game
Two drivers are trapped on opposite sides of a snowdrift. They have to choose between two options: (1) to
get out and start shoveling (cooperate); (2) to remain in the car (defect). If both drivers are willing to shovel
then each one has the beneﬁt b of getting home and they share the cost c of the work, i.e., each receives
the reward of mutual cooperation R = b −c/2. If both drivers choose defection then they do not get home
and obtain zero beneﬁt (P = 0). If only one of them shovels then both get home, however, the defector
income (T = b) is not reduced by the cost of shoveling, whereas the cooperator gets S = b −c. This 2 × 2
matrix game becomes equivalent to the Prisoner’s Dilemma in Eq. (A.4) when 2b > c > b > 0. However, for
b > c > 0 the payoﬀs generate the Snowdrift game, which is in fact equivalent to the Hawk-Dove game. Two
diﬀerent versions of the spatial evolutionary Snowdrift game were very recently introduced and studied by
Hauert and Doebeli (2004) and Sysi-Aho et al. (2005).
A.12. Stag Hunt game
The story of the Stag Hunt game was brieﬂy described by Rousseau in A Discourse on Inequality (1755).
In Maurice Cranston’s translation deer means stag:
If it was a matter of hunting a deer, everyone well realized that he must remain faithfully at his post; but
if a hare happened to pass within the reach of one of them, we cannot doubt that he would have gone oﬀin
pursuit of it without scruple and, having caught his own prey, he would have cared very little about having
caused his companions to lose theirs.
111

Each hunter prefers stag to hare and hare to nothing. In the context of game theory this means that the
highest income is reached if each hunter chooses hunting deer. The chance of a successful deer hunt increases
with the number of hunters, and practically there is no chance of bagging a deer by oneself. At the same
time the chance of getting a hare is independent of what others do. Consequently, for two hunters the payoﬀs
can be given by a bi-matrix as
Hunter 2
Hare Stag
Hare
(1, 1) (2, 0)
Hunter 1
Stag
(0, 2) (3, 3)
(A.5)
The Stag Hunt game is a prototype of the social contract, it is in fact a special case of Coordination
games.
A.13. Ultimatum game
In the Ultimatum game two players have to agree on how to share a sum of money. One of the randomly
chosen players (called proposer) makes an oﬀer and the other (responder) can either accept or reject it.
If the oﬀer is accepted, the money is shared accordingly; if rejected, both players receive nothing. In the
one-shot game rational responders should accept any positive oﬀer, while the best choice for the proposer
is to oﬀer the minimum (positive) sum (Gintis, 2000). In human experiments (G¨uth et al., 1982; Thaler,
1988; Henrich et al., 2001) the majority of proposers oﬀer 40 to 50% of the total sum, and the responders
frequently reject oﬀers below 30%. This human behavior can be reproduced by several evolutionary versions
of the Ultimatum game (Nowak et al., 2000; Page and Nowak, 2000; S´anchez and Cuesta, 2005). A spatial
version of the game was studied by Page et al. (2000).
Appendix B. Strategies
B.1. Pavlovian strategies
The Pavlov strategy was introduced in the context of the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma. By deﬁnition
Pavlov works according to the following algorithm: “repeat your latest action if that produced one of the
two highest possible payoﬀs, and switch to the other possible action, if your last round payoﬀwas one
of the two lowest possible payoﬀs”. As such Pavlov belongs to the more general class of Win-Stay-Lose-
Shift strategies, which deﬁne a direct payoﬀcriterium (aspiration level) for strategy change. An alternative
deﬁnition frequently appearing in the literature is “cooperate if and only if you and your opponent used the
same move in the previous round”. Of course, this translates into the same rule for the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
For a general discussion of Pavlovian strategies see Kraines and Kraines (1989).
B.2. Tit-for-Tat
The Tit-for-Tat strategy suggested by Anatol Rapoport become world-wide known after winning the
computer tournaments conducted by Axelrod (1984). For the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma this strategy
starts by cooperating in the ﬁrst step and afterwards repeats the previous decision of the opponent.
Tit-for-Tat cooperates mutually with all so-called “nice” strategies, and it is never the ﬁrst to defect. On
long time scales the Tit-for-Tat strategy cannot be exploited, because any defection is retaliated by playing
defection until the co-player chooses cooperation again. Then the opponent’s extra income gained at the
ﬁrst defection is returned to Tit-for-Tat. At the same time, it is a forgiving strategy, because it is willing
112

to cooperate again until the next defection of its opponent. Against a Tit-for-Tat the best choice is mutual
cooperation. In multi-agent evolutionary Prisoner’s Dilemma games the Tit-for-Tat strategy helps eﬀectively
to maintain cooperative behavior. Axelrod (1984) concluded that individuals should follow this strategy in
a declarative way in all repeated decision situations analogous to the Prisoner’s Dilemma.
This deterministic strategy, however, has a drawback in noisy environments, where two Tit-for-Tat strate-
gists may easily end up alternating cooperation and defection in opposite phase without real hope to get
out from this deadlock. Most of the modiﬁed versions of Tit-for-Tat were introduced to eliminates or re-
duce this shortcoming. For example, Tit for Two Tats only defects if its opponent has defected twice in a
row; Generous (Forgiving) Tit-for-Tat cooperates with some probability even if the co-player has defected
previously, etc.
B.3. Win stay lose shift
It seems that the Win-Stay-Lose-Shift (WSLS) idea as a learning rule was originally introduced as early
as 1911 by Thorndike (1911). WSLS strategies use a heuristic update rule which depends on a direct payoﬀ
criterium, a so-called aspiration level, dictating the agent when to change her intended action. If the payoﬀ
average of recent rounds is above the aspiration level the agent keeps her original action, otherwise she
switches to a new one. As such the aspiration level distinguishes between winning and losing situations. In
the case when there are more than one alternatives to switch for, the choice can be random. The simplest
example of a WSLS-type strategy is Pavlov, introduced in the context of the Iterated Prisoner’s Dilemma.
Pavlov was demonstrated to be able to defeat Tit-for-Tat in noisy environments (Nowak and Sigmund, 1993;
Kraines and Kraines, 1993), thanks to its ability to correct mistakes and exploit unconditional cooperators
better than Tit-for-Tat.
B.4. Stochastic reactive strategies
Decision in reactive strategies only depend on the previous move of the opponent. As suggested by
Nowak and Sigmund (1989b,a) in the context of the Prisoner’s Dilemma game, these strategies are char-
acterized by two parameters, p and q (0 ≤p, q ≤1), which denote the probability to cooperate after the
opponent has cooperated or defected. The deﬁnition of these strategies is made complete by introducing
a third parameter u characterizing the probability of cooperation in the ﬁrst step. For many evolutionary
rules the value of u becomes irrelevant in the stationary population of reactive strategies (u, p, q). Evidently,
for p = q the decision is independent of the opponent’s choice and the strategy (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) represents a
completely random decision. The strategies (0, 0, 0) and (1, 1, 1) are equivalent to unconditional defection
(AllD) and unconditional cooperation (AllC), respectively. Tit-for-Tat and Suspicious Tit-for-Tat can be
represented as (1, 1, 0) and (0, 1, 0).
The above class of reactive strategies was extended by Nowak and Sigmund (1995) in a way that allows
diﬀerent cooperation probabilities for all possible outcomes realized in the previous step. This strategy can
be represented as (p1, p2, p3, p4) where p1, p2, p3, and p4 denote the cooperation probability after the players’
previous decisions (C, C), (C, D), (D, C), and (D, D), respectively. (For noisy systems we can ignore the
probability u of cooperating in the ﬁrst step.) Evidently, some elements of this wider set of strategies can
also be related to other strategies. For example, Tit-for-Tat corresponds to (1, 0, 1, 0).
Appendix C. Generalized mean-ﬁeld approximations
Now we give a simple and concise introduction to the use of the generalized mean-ﬁeld technique on such
lattice systems where the spatial distribution of Q diﬀerent states is described by a set of site variables
denoted shortly as sx = 1, . . . , Q. For the sake of simplicity the present description will be formulated on a
square lattice at the levels of one-, two-, and four-site approximations.
In this approach the translation and rotation invariant states of the system are described by a set con-
ﬁguration probabilities on compact clusters of sites with diﬀerent sizes (and forms). The time-dependence
113

of these conﬁguration probabilities is not denoted. Thus, the one-site conﬁguration probability p1(s1) char-
acterizes the probability of ﬁnding state s1 for any site x of the lattice. Similarly, p2(s1, s2) indicates the
conﬁguration probability of a pair of states (s1, s2) on two neighboring sites independently of both the po-
sition and direction of the two-site cluster. These quantities satisfy the compatibility conditions that obey
simple forms if translation invariance holds, i.e.,
p1(s1) =
X
s2
p2(s1, s2)
=
X
s2
p2(s2, s1) .
(C.1)
On the square lattices the quantities p4(s1, s2, s3, s4) describe all the possible four-site conﬁguration proba-
bilities on the 2×2 clusters of sites. In this notation the horizontal and vertical pairs are (s1, s2), (s3, s4), and
(s1, s3), (s2, s4), respectively. Evidently, these quantities are related to the pair conﬁguration probabilities
via the following compatibility conditions:
p2(s1, s2) =
X
s3,s4
p4(s1, s2, s3, s4)
=
X
s3,s4
p4(s3, s4, s1, s2)
=
X
s3,s4
p4(s1, s3, s2, s4)
=
X
s3,s4
p4(s3, s4, s1, s2) .
(C.2)
The above compatibility conditions [including the normalization P
s1 p1(s1) = 1] allow us to reduce the
number of parameters in the description of all the possible conﬁguration probabilities. For example, assuming
translation and rotation symmetry in a two-state (Q = 2) system, the one- and two-site conﬁguration
probabilities can be characterized by two parameters,
p1(1) = ̺ ,
p1(2) = 1 −̺ ,
(C.3)
p2(1, 1) = ̺2 + q ,
p2(1, 2) = ̺(1 −̺) −q ,
p2(2, 1) = ̺(1 −̺) −q ,
p2(2, 2) = (1 −̺)2 + q ,
(C.4)
where 0 ≤̺ ≤1 means the average concentration of state 1, and q denotes the deviation from the prediction
of the mean-ﬁeld approximation [−min(̺2, (1 −̺)2) ≤q ≤̺(1 −̺)]. The reader can easily check that
under the same conditions the four-site conﬁguration probabilities can be described by introducing three
additional parameters. Notice that this type of parametrization reduces the number of variables we have
to determine by solving a suitable set of equations of motion. Evidently, signiﬁcantly more parameters are
necessary for Q > 2 despite the possible additional symmetries (e.g., cyclic symmetry in the Rock-Scissors-
Paper game) reducing the number of independent conﬁguration probabilities. The choice of an appropriate
parametrization can signiﬁcantly simplify the calculations.
Within the framework of the traditional mean-ﬁeld theory the conﬁguration probabilities on a given
cluster are approximated by a product of one-site conﬁguration probabilities, i.e., p2(s1, s2) ≃p1(s1)p1(s2)
[corresponding to q = 0 in Eqs. (C.4)] and p4(s1, s2, s3, s4) ≃p1(s1)p1(s2)p1(s3)p1(s4). For this approach
the compatibility conditions remain self-consistent and the normalization is conserved.
Adopting the Bayesian extension process (Gutowitz et al., 1987) we can construct a better approximation
for the conﬁguration probabilities on large clusters by building them from conﬁguration probabilities on
114

smaller clusters. For example, on three subsequent sites the conﬁguration probability can be constructed
from two two-site conﬁguration probabilities as
p3(s1, s2, s3) ≃p2(s1, s2)p2(s2, s3)
p1(s2)
.
(C.5)
At the level of the pair approximation on k (k > 2) subsequent sites (positioned linearly) the corresponding
expression obeys the following form:
pk(s1, . . . , sk) ≃p2(s1, s2)
k−1
Y
n=2
p2(sn, sn+1)
p1(sn)
.
(C.6)
This equation predicts exponentially decreasing conﬁguration probabilities for a homogeneous distribution
on a k-site block. For example,
pk(1, . . . , 1) ≃p1(1)
p2(1, 1)
p1(1)
k
= p1(1)e−k/ξ1 ,
(C.7)
where ξ1 = −1/ ln(p2(1, 1)/p1(1)) characterizes the typical size of the homogeneous domain.
Knowing the pair conﬁguration probabilities the autocorrelation functions can be expressed as
Cs(x) =
X
s2,...,sx−1
px+1(s, s2, . . . , sx−1, s) −p1(s)p1(s) .
(C.8)
For the parametrization given by Eqs. (C.3) and (C.4) in a two-state system this autocorrelation function
obeys a simple form, Cs(x = 1) = q. Using successive iterations one can easily derive the following relation:
Cs(x) = ̺(1 −̺)

q
̺(1 −̺)
x
= ̺(1 −̺)e−x/ξ ,
(C.9)
where the correlation length is
ξ = −
1
ln
q
̺(1−̺)
.
(C.10)
On a 3×2 cluster the six-site conﬁguration probabilities can be approximated as a product of two four-site
conﬁguration probabilities,
p6(s1, . . . , s6) ≃p4(s1, s2, s4, s5)p4(s2, s3, s5, s6)
p2(s2, s5)
,
(C.11)
where the conﬁguration probability on the overlapping region of the two clusters appears in the denominator.
The above expressions can be represented graphically as shown in Fig. C.1. In this representation the
solid lines and squares represent two- and four-site conﬁguration probabilities (in the nominator) with
site variables at the connected sites (indicated by pluses), while the same quantities in the denominator
are plotted by dashed lines. At the same time the quantities p1(s2) are denoted by closed (open) circles
at the suitable sites if they appear in the nominator (denominator) of the corresponding products. In
these constructions the compatibility conditions are not satisﬁed completely, although the normalization is
conserved. For example, the compatibility condition is broken for the second-neighbor pair conﬁguration
probabilities because P
s2 p3(s1, s2, s3) deviates from those predicted by Eq. (C.5), P
s2 p2(s1, s2)p2(s2, s3)],
while it remains valid for the nearest-neighbor pair conﬁgurations.
Each elementary step in the variation of the spatial distribution of states will modify the above conﬁgu-
ration probabilities. In the knowledge of the dynamical rules we can derive a set of the equations of motion
that summarizes the contributions of all types of elementary steps with the suitable weight. In order to
demonstrate the essence of the derivation of these equations now we choose a very simple model.
Let us consider a three-species, cyclic predator-prey model (also called spatial Rock-Scissors-Paper game)
on a square lattice where species 1 invades species 2 invades species 3 invades species 1 with the same
115

s1
s2
s3
(a)
s1
s2
s3
s4
s5
s6
(b)
Fig. C.1. Graphical representation of the construction of a conﬁguration probability from conﬁguration probabilities on smaller
clusters for a three-site (a) and a six-site cluster (b).
invasion rates chosen to be unity. We assume that the evolution is governed by random sequential updates.
More precisely, a randomly chosen species can be invaded by one of the four neighbors chosen randomly
with a probability of 1/4.
s1
s2
(a)
s1
s2
(b)
s1
s2
(c)
s1
s2
(d)
Fig. C.2. The possible invasion processes from s2 to s1 which modify the one-site conﬁguration probabilities.
When a predator s2 invades the site of its neighboring prey s1 then this process decreases the value
of p1(s1) and simultaneously increases p1(s2) with the same magnitude whose rate becomes unity with a
suitable choice of the time scale. Due to the symmetries, all the four possible invasion processes (see Fig. C.2)
give the same contribution to the time derivative of the one-site conﬁguration probabilities. Consequently,
the derivative of p1(s1) with respect to time can be expressed as
˙p1(s1) = −
X
sx
p2(s1, sx)Γrsp(s1 →sx)
+
X
sx
p2(sx, s1)Γrsp(sx →s1)
(C.12)
where Γrsp(sx →sy) = 1 if the species sy is the predator of species sy and Γrsp(sx →sy) = 0 otherwise.
In fact, the above general mathematical formulae hide the simplicity of both the calculation and results
because the corresponding three equations for s1 = 1, 2, and 3 obey the following forms:
˙p1(1) = p2(1, 3) −p2(1, 2) ,
˙p1(2) = p2(2, 1) −p2(2, 3) ,
˙p1(3) = p2(3, 2) −p2(3, 1) .
(C.13)
Notice that the time-derivative of the functions p1(s1) depend on the two-site conﬁguration probabilities
p2(s1, s2). For the traditional mean-ﬁeld approximations the two-site conﬁguration probabilities are approx-
imated as p2(s1, s2) = p1(s1)p1(s2). This approximation yields Eqs. (134) and the solutions are discussed in
the section 7.2.
More accurate results can be obtained by deriving further set of equations of motion for p2(s1, s2) to
improve the present approach. In analogy with the derivation of Eqs. (C.12) we can sum up the contributions
of all the elementary processes (see Fig. C.3).
Within a horizontal pair there are two types of internal invasions [processes (a) and (b) in Fig. C.3] aﬀect-
ing the conﬁguration probability p2(s1, s2). Their contribution to the function ˙p2(s1, s2) is not inﬂuenced
116

s1
s2
(a)
s1
s2
(b)
s1
s2
s3
(c)
s1
s2
s3
(d)
s1
s2
s3
(e)
s1
s2
s3
(f)
s1
s2
s3
(g)
s1
s2
s3
(h)
Fig. C.3. The horizontal two-site conﬁguration probabilities p2(s1, s2) are modiﬁed by the possible invasion processes indicated
by arrows.
by the surrounding states, and therefore it is proportional to the probability of the initial pair conﬁgu-
ration p2(s1, s2). The contribution of the external invasions [processes (c) - (h) in Fig. C.3], however, are
proportional to the corresponding three-site conﬁguration probabilities that can be constructed from pair
conﬁguration probabilities as described above. This approximation neglects the shape diﬀerences between
the three-site clusters. In this case the approximative equation of motions for p2(s1, s2) can be given as
˙p2(s1, s2) = −1
4p2(s1, s2)Γrsp(s2 →s1)
−1
4p2(s1, s2)Γrsp(s1 →s2)
+ 1
4δ(s1, s2)
X
s3
p2(s1, s3)Γrsp(s3 →s1)
+ 1
4δ(s1, s2)
X
s3
p2(s3, s2)Γrsp(s3 →s2)
−3
4
X
s3
p2(s3, s1)p2(s1, s2)
p1(s1)
Γrsp(s1 →s3)
−3
4
X
s3
p2(s1, s2)p2(s2, s3)
p1(s2)
Γrsp(s2 →s3)
+ 3
4
X
s3
p2(s1, s3)p2(s3, s2)
p1(s3)
Γrsp(sx →s1)
+ 3
4
X
s3
p2(s1, s3)p2(s3, s2)
p1(s3)
Γrsp(sx →s2) ,
(C.14)
where δ(s1, s2) denotes the Kronecker delta. Here it is worth mentioning that the right hand side of Eq.
(C.14) only depends on the pair conﬁguration probabilities if the compatibility conditions Eq. (C.1) are
taken into consideration.
A more complicated set of equations of motion can be derived for those systems where the probability of
the elementary invasion (strategy adoption) processes depends not only on the given two site variables but on
their surroundings too. Such a situation is illustrated in Fig. C.4 where the probability of strategy adoption
from one of the randomly chosen neighbors (e.g., s2 is substituted for s1) depends on the neighborhood
(s3, . . . , s8).
In this case the negative ∆s1→s2 contribution of this elementary process to ˙p2(s1, s2) is
∆s1→s2 = −
X
s3,s4,s5,
s6,s7,s8
p8(s1, . . . , s8)Γ(s1 →s2),
(C.15)
117

s1
s2
s5
s6
s3
s4
s7
s8
Fig. C.4. The horizontal two-site conﬁguration probabilities p2(s1, s2) are modiﬁed by the internal invasion process (indicated
by the arrow) with a probability depending on all the labeled sites. The graphical representation of the construction of the
corresponding eight-site conﬁguration probabilities from pair conﬁguration probabilities is illustrated as above.
where some possible deﬁnitions for Γ(s1 →s2) are discussed in Section 4.3 [for a deﬁnite expression see Eq.
(124)]. Simultaneously, these processes give opposite (−∆s1→s2) contribution to ˙p2(s2, s2). According to the
above graphical representation, at the pair approximation level the eight-site conﬁguration probabilities can
be approximated as
p8(s1, . . . , s8) ≃p2(s1, s2)p2(s1, s3)p2(s1, s5)p2(s1, s7)
p3
1(s1)
·p2(s2, s4)p2(s2, s6)p2(s2, s8)
p3
1(s2)
,
(C.16)
where the contributions of the denominator are indicated by the three concentric circles at the sites s1 and
s2 in Fig. C.4. Similar terms describe the contributions of the opposite strategy adoption (s2 →s1, as well
as of those processes where an external strategy will be substituted for either s1 or s2 (e.g., s1 →s3). Thus,
the complete set of the equations of motion for p2(s1, s2) can be obtained by summing up the contributions
of each possible elementary process. Despite the simplicity of the derivation of the corresponding diﬀerential
equations, the ﬁnal formulae become very lengthy even with the use of sophisticated notations. This is the
reason why we do not display the whole formulae. It is emphasized, however, that this diﬃculty becomes
irrelevant in the numerical solutions, because eﬃcient algorithms can be developed to derive the equations
of motion.
For a small number of independent conﬁguration probabilities we always have some chance to ﬁnd ana-
lytical solutions. Besides this two methods are used to solve numerically the resultant set of equations of
motions. In the ﬁrst case the diﬀerential equations are integrated numerically (with respect to time) starting
from an initial state with conﬁguration probabilities satisfying the symmetry conditions. This is the only
way if the system tends to a limit cycle. In general, the initial state can be any uncorrelated state with
arbitrary concentration of states. Special initial states can be chosen if we wish to study the competition
between two types of ordered domains which do not have common conﬁgurations. Using this approach, we
can study the average velocity of interfaces separating two diﬀerent homogeneous states. For example, at
the level of the pair approximation in a one-dimensional, two-state system the evolution can be started from
a state: p2(1, 0) = p2(0, 1) = ǫ and p2(0, 0) = p2(1, 1) = 1/2 −ǫ, where 0 < ǫ << 1 means the density of
(0, 1 and (1, 0) domain walls. After some transient events the quantity ˙p1(1)/2ǫ characterizes the average
velocity of the growth of large domains of state 1.
In the second case the stationary solution(s) ( ˙p2(s1, s2)=0) can be found by using the standard Newton-
Raphson method (Ralston, 1965). The eﬃciency of this method can be increased by reducing the number
of independent conﬁguration probabilities by taking all symmetries into consideration. For this iteration
technique the solution algorithm should be started from a state staying within the region of convergence.
Sometimes it is convenient to ﬁnd a solution by using the above mentioned numerical integration for a given
values of parameters, and afterward we can repeat the Newton-Raphson method whereas parameters are
varied very slowly. It is emphasized that this method can ﬁnd the unstable solutions too.
At the level of two-site approximation the construction of the conﬁguration probabilities on large clusters
neglects several pair correlations that may be important for some models (e.g., the construction represented
118

graphically in Fig. C.4 does not involve explicitly the pair correlations between the states s3 and s4). The
best way to overcome this diﬃculty is to extend further the method. The larger the cluster size we use in
this technique, the higher the accuracy we can achieve. Sometimes the gradual increase of the cluster size
results in qualitative improvement in the prediction as discussed in Secs. 6.6 and 7.3. The investigation of
the conﬁguration probabilities on 2 × 2 (or larger) clusters becomes important for models where the local
structure of distribution, the motion of invasion fronts, and/or the long range correlations play relevant roles.
The corresponding set of the equations of motion can be derived via the straightforward generalization of
the method described above. That is, we sum the contributions to the time-derivative of conﬁguration
probabilities coming from all the possible elementary processes.
s1
s2
s7
s8
s3
s4
s5
s6
s9
s10
s11
s12
Fig. C.5. Strategy adoption from s2 to s1 will modify all the four four-site conﬁguration probabilities on the 2 × 2 blocks
including the sites s1.
Evidently, the contributions to ˙p4(s1, s2, s3, s4) are determined by the strategy distributions on larger
clusters. However, the corresponding conﬁguration probabilities can be constructed from four-site conﬁg-
uration probabilities as shown in Fig. C.5, where we assumed that the invasion rates are aﬀected by the
surrounding sites. Using this trick the quantities ˙p4(s1, s2, s3, s4) can be expressed as nonlinear functions of
p4(s1, s2, s3, s4). The above symmetric construction takes explicitly into account all the relevant four-site
correlations, while the condition of normalization for the large clusters are no longer valid. Generally this
shortcoming of the present construction does not cause diﬃculties in the calculations.
The applicability of this method is limited by the large number of diﬀerent conﬁguration probabilities
which increases exponentially with the cluster size and also by the increasing number of terms in the corre-
sponding equations of motion. Current computer facilities allow us to perform such numerical investigations
on even 3 × 3 clusters if the dynamical rule is not very complicated (Szolnoki and Szab´o, 2005). For the
one-dimensional systems this method is used successfully up to cluster size 11 (Dickman, 2002) for the
investigation of a three-state stochastic sandpile model, and even longer clusters could be studied for some
two-state systems (Szolnoki, 2002).
Knowing the conﬁguration probabilities for the diﬀerent phases one can give an estimation for the velocity
of interface separating two stationary domains. The method suggested by Ellner et al. (1998) is based on
the pair correlations in the confronting phases. This approach proved to be successful for an evolutionary
prisoner’s Dilemma on the one-dimensional lattice (Szab´o et al., 2000) and also for a driven lattice gas model
(Dickman, 2001).
Disregarding technical diﬃculties this method can be easily adapted either for other (spatial) lattice
structures with arbitrary dimensions or for Bethe lattices (Szab´o, 2000). In fact, the pair approximation
(with a construction represented in Fig. C.4) is expected to give a better prediction on Bethe lattices,
because here the correlation between two sites can be mediated along only a single path.
The above description was only concentrated on the eﬀect of asynchronous nearest-neighbor invasions
(strategy adoptions). With suitable modiﬁcations, however, this method can be adjusted to consider other
local dynamical rules, such as the appearance of mutants and the strategy exchange or diﬀusion when two
site variables change simultaneously.
Variants of this method can be used to study stationary states (evolved from a random initial state) for
deterministic or stochastic cellular automata (Gutowitz et al., 1987; Atman et al., 2003). In this case one
119

should derive a set of recursion equations for the conﬁguration probabilities at a discrete time t + 1 as a
function of the conﬁguration probabilities at time t. Using the above described construction of conﬁguration
probabilities we can obtain a ﬁnite set of equations whose stationary solution can be found analytically or
numerically. In this case diﬃculties can arise for those constructions which do not conserve normalization
(such an example is shown in Fig. C.5).
References
Abramson, G., Kuperman, M., 2001. Social games in a social network. Phys. Rev. E 63, 030901(R).
Ahmed, E., Hegazi, A. S., Elettreby, M. F., Askar, S. S., 2006. On multi-team games. Physica A 369, 809–816.
Aktipis, C. A., 2004. Known when to walk away: contingent movement and the evolution of cooperation. J.
Theor. Biol. 231, 249–260.
Albert, R., Barab´asi, A.-L., 2002. Statistical mechanics of complex networks. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47–97.
Alexander, R. D., 1987. The biology of moral systems. Aldinee de Gruyter, New York.
Alonso-Sanz, R., Mart´ın, C., Mart´ın, M., 2001. The eﬀect of memory in the spatial continuous-valued
prisoner’s dilemma. Int. J. Bifurcat. Chaos 11, 2061–2083.
Amaral, L. N. A., Scala, A., Barth´el´emy, M., Stanley, H. E., 2000. Classes of small-world networks. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11149–11152.
Antal, T., Droz, M., 2001. Phase transitions and oscillations in a lattice prey-predator model. Phys. Rev. E
63, 056119.
Antal, T., Scheuring, I., 2006. Fixation of strategies for an evolutionary game in ﬁnite populations. Bull.
Math. Biol. 68, 1923–1944.
Arthur, W. B., 1994. Inductive reasoning and bounded rationality. Am. Econ. Rev. 84, 406–411.
Ashlock, D., Smucker, M. D., Stanley, E. A., Tesfatsion, L., 1996. Preferential partner selection in an evo-
lutionary study of prisoner’s dilemma. BioSystems 37, 99–125.
Atman, A. P. F., Dickman, R., Moreira, J. G., 2003. Phase diagram of a probabilistic cellular automaton
with three-site interactions. Phys. Rev. E 67, 016107.
Aumann, R. J., 1992. Irrationality in game theory. In: Dasgupta, P., Gale, D., Hart, O., Maskin, E. (Eds.),
Economic Analysis of Markets and Games: Essays in Honor of Frank Hahn. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
p. 214227.
Axelrod, R., 1980a. Eﬀective choice in the prisoner’s dilemma. J. Conﬂ. Resol. 24, 3–25.
Axelrod, R., 1980b. More eﬀective choice in the prisoner’s dilemma. J. Conﬂ. Resol. 24, 379–403.
Axelrod, R., 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. Basic Books, New York.
Axelrod, R., 1986. An evolutionary approach to norms. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 80, 1095–1111.
Axelrod, R., Axelrod, D. E., Pienta, K. J., 2006. Evolution of cooperation among tumor cells. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 103, 13474–13479.
Axelrod, R., Dion, D., 1988. The further evolution of cooperation. Science 242, 1385–1390.
Axelrod, R., Hamilton, W. D., 1981. The evolution of cooperation. Science 211, 1390–1396.
Bak, P., Chen, K., Tang, C., 1990. A forest-ﬁre model and some thoughts on turbulence. Phys. Lett. A 147,
297–300.
Bala, V., Goyal, S., 2000. A noncooperative model of network formation. Econometrica 68, 1181–1229.
Balkenborg, D., Schlag, K. H., 1995. Evolutionary stability in asymmetric population games.
URL http://www.wiwi.uni-bonn.de/sfb/papers/1995/b/bonnsfb314.ps
Ball, P., 2004. Critical mass: how one thing leads another. William Heinemann, London.
Barab´asi, A.-L., Albert, R., 1999. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286, 509–512.
Bascompte, J., Sol´e, G. (Eds.), 1998. Modeling Spatiotemporal Dynamics in Ecology. Springer, New York.
Baumol, W. J., 1952. Welfare Economics and the Theory of the State. Harward University Press, Cambridge,
MA.
Ben-Naim, E., Frachebourg, L., Krapivsky, P. L., 1996a. Coarsening and persistence in the voter model.
Phys. Rev. E 53, 3078–3087.
120

Ben-Naim, E., Redner, S., Krapivsky, P. L., 1996b. Two scales in asynchnonous ballistic annihilation. J.
Phys. A: Math. Gen. 29, L561–L568.
Benaim, M., Weibull, J., 2003. Deterministic approximation of stochastic evolution in games. Econometrica
71, 873–903.
Benzi, R., Parisi, G., Sutera, A., Vulpiani, A., 1982. Stochastic resonance in climatic change. TELLUS 34,
10–16.
Berg, J., Engel, M., 1998. Matrix games, mixed strategies, and statistical mechanics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81,
4999–5002.
Berg, J., Weigt, M., 1999. Entropy and typical properties of Nash equilibria in two-player games. Europhys.
Lett. 48, 129–135.
Bidaux, R., Boccara, N., Chat´e, H., 1989. Order of the transition versus space dimension in a family of
cellular automata. Phys. Rev. A 39, 3094–3105.
Biely, C., Dragosits, K., Thurner, S., 2007. The prisoner’s dilemma on co-evolving networks under perfect
rationality. Physica D 228, 40–48.
Binder, K., M¨uller-Krumbhaar, H., 1974. Investigations of metastable states and nucleation in the kinetic
Ising model. Phys. Rev. B 9, 2328–2353.
Binmore, K. G., 1994. Playing fair: game theory and the social contract. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Binmore, K. G., Samuelson, L., 1992. Evolutionary stability in repeated games played by ﬁnite automata.
J. Econ. Theory 57, 278–305.
Binmore, K. G., Samuelson, L., Vaughan, R., 1995. Musical chairs: Modeling noisy evolution. Games Econ.
Behav. 11, 1–35.
Bishop, T., Cannings, C., 1978. A generalized war of attrition. J. Theor. Biol. 70, 85–124.
Blarer, A., Doebeli, M., 1999. Resonance eﬀects and outbreaks in ecological time series. Ecol. Lett. 2, 167–
177.
Blume, L., Durlauf, S., 2003. Equilibrium concepts for social interaction models. International Game Theory
Review 5, 193–209.
Blume, L. E., 1993. The statistical-mechanics of strategic interactions. Games Econ. Behav. 5, 387–424.
Blume, L. E., 1995. The statistical-mechanics of best-response strategy revision. Games Econ. Behav. 11,
111–145.
Blume, L. E., 1998. Population games. In: Arthur, W. B., Lane, D., Durlauf, S. (Eds.), The Economy as a
Complex Adaptive System II. Addison-Wesley.
Blume, L. E., 2003. How noise matters. Games Econ. Behav. 44, 251–271.
Boccaletti, S., Latora, V., Moreno, Y., Chavez, M., Hwang, D., 2006. Complex networks: Structure and
dynamics. Phys. Rep. 424, 175–308.
Boerlijst, M. C., Hogeweg, P., 1991. Spiral wave structure in pre-biotic evolution: Hypercycles stable against
parasites. Physica D 48, 17–28.
Boerlijst, M. C., Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 1997. The logic of contrition. J. Theor. Biol. 185, 281–293.
Bollob´as, B., 1985. Random Graphs. Academic Press, New York.
Bollob´as, B., 1998. Modern Graph Theory. Springer, New York.
Bomze, I., 1983. Lotka-volterra equations and replicator dynamics: A two-dimensional classiﬁcation. Biol.
Cybern. 48, 201–211.
Bomze, I. M., 1995. Lotka-Volterra equation and replicator dynamics: New issues in classiﬁcation. Biol.
Cybern. 72, 447–453.
Bradley, D. I., Clubb, D. O., Fisher, S. N., Gu´enault, A. M., Haley, R. P., Matthews, C. J., Pickett, G. R.,
Tsepelin, V., Zaki, K., 2005. Emission of discerete vortex rings by vibrating grid in superﬂuid 3He-B: A
precursor to quantum turbulence. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 035302.
Bramson, M., Griﬀeath, D., 1989. Flux and ﬁxation in cyclic particle systems. Ann. Prob. 17, 26–45.
Brauchli, K., Killingback, T., Doebeli, M., 1999. Evolution of cooperation in spatially structured populations.
J. Theor. Biol. 200, 405–417.
Bray, A. J., 1994. Theory of phase ordering kinetics. Adv. Phys. 43, 357–459.
Broom, M., 2000. Bounds on the number of esss of a matrix game. Math. Biosci. 167, 163–175.
Brosig, J., 2002. Identifying cooperative behavior: some experimental results in a prisoner’s dilemma game.
121

J. Econ. Behav. Org. 47, 275–290.
Brower, R. C., Kessler, D. A., Koplik, J., Levin, H., 1984. Geometrical models of interface evolution. Phys.
Rev. A 29, 1335–1342.
Brown, G. W., 1951. Iterative solution of games by ﬁctious play. In: Koopmans, T. C. (Ed.), Activity Analysis
of Production and Allocation. Wiley, New York, pp. 373–376.
Busse, F. H., Heikes, K. E., 1980. Convection in a rotating layer: a simple case of turbulence. Science 208,
173–175.
Camerer, C. F., Thaler, R. H., 1995. Anomalies: Ultimatums, dictators and manners. J. Econ. Persp. 9 (2),
209–219.
Cardy, J. L., T¨auber, U. C., 1996. Theory of branching and annihilating random walks. Phys. Rev. Lett.
77, 4780–4783.
Cardy, J. L., T¨auber, U. C., 1998. Field theory of branching and annihilating random walks. J. Stat. Phys.
90, 1–56.
Challet, D., Marsili, M., Zhang, Y.-C., 2004. Minority Games: Interacting Agents in Financial Markets.
Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Challet, D., Zhang, Y.-C., 1997. Emergence of cooperation and organization in an evolutionary game. Physica
A 246, 407–418.
Chandler, D., 1987. Introduction to Modern Statistical Mechanics. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Cheng, S.-F., Reeves, D. M., Vorobeychik, Y., Wellman, M. P., 2004. Notes on equilibria in symmetric games.
In: AAMAS-04 Workshop on Game-Theoretic and Decision-Theoretic Agents. New York.
Chiappin, J. R. N., de Oliveira, M. J., 1999. Emergence of cooperation among interacting individuals. Phys.
Rev. E 59, 6419–6421.
Cliﬀord, P., Sudbury, A., 1973. A model for spatial conﬂict. Biometrika 60, 581–588.
Colman, A., 1995. Game theory and its application. Butterworth–Heinemann, Oxford, UK.
Conlisk, J., 1996. Why bounded rationality? J. Econ. Lit. XXXIV, 669–700.
Coolen, A. C. C., 2005. The Mathematical Theory of Minority Games: Statistical Mechanics of Interacting
Agents. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Coricelli, G., Fehr, D., Fellner, G., 2004. Partner selection in public goods experiments. J. Conﬂict Resol.
48, 356–378.
Cressman, R., 2003. Evolutionary Dynamics and Extensive Form Games. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Cross, M. C., Hohenberg, P. C., 1993. Pattern formation outside of equilibrium. Rev. Mod. Phys. 65, 851–
1112.
Cz´ar´an, T. L., Hoekstra, R. F., Pagie, L., 2002. Chemical warfare between microbes promotes biodiversity.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 786–790.
Dawkins, R., 1976. The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Der´enyi, I., Palla, G., Vicsek, T., 2005. Clique percolation in random networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 160202.
Dickman, R., 2001. First- and second-order phase transitions in a driven lattice gas with nearest-neighbor
exclusion. Phys. Rev. E 64, 016124.
Dickman, R., 2002. n-site approximations and coherent-anomaly-method analysis for a stochastic sandpile.
Phys. Rev. E 66, 036122.
Dieckmann, U., Metz, J. A. J., 1996. The dynamical theory of coevolution: a derivation from stochastic
ecological processes. J. Math. Biol. 34, 579–612.
Doebeli, M., Hauert, C., 2005. Models of cooperation based on prisoner’s dilemma and snowdrift game. Ecol.
Lett. 8, 748–766.
Domany, E., Kinzel, W., 1984. Equivalence of cellular automata to Ising models and directed percolation.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 311–314.
Dornic, I., Chat´e, H., Chave, J., Hinrichsen, H., 2001. Critical coarsening without surface tension: The
universality class of the voter model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 045701.
Dorogovtsev, S. N., Mendes, J. F. F., 2003. Evolution of Networks: From Biological Nets to the Internet and
WWW. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Dorogovtsev, S. N., Mendes, J. F. F., Samukhin, A. N., 2001. Size-dependent degree distribution of a scale-
free growing network. Phys. Rev. E 63, 062101.
122

Douglass, J. K., Wilkens, L., Pantazelou, E., Moss, F., 1993. Noise enhancement of information transfer in
crayﬁsh mechanoreceptors by stochastic resonance. Nature 365, 337–340.
Drossel, B., 2001. Biological evolution and statistical physics. Adv. Phys. 50, 209–295.
Drossel, B., Schwabl, F., 1992. Self-organized critical forest-ﬁre model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 1629–1732.
Du, J., Li, H., Xu, X., Shi, M., Wu, J., Zhou, X., Han, R., 2002. Experimental realization of quantum games
on a quantum computer. Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 137902.
Dugatkin, L. A., Mesterton-Gibbons, M., 1996. Cooperation among unrelated individuals: reciprocial altru-
ism, by-product mutualism and group selection in ﬁshes. BioSystems 37, 19–30.
Duran, O., Mulet, R., 2005. Evolutionary prisoner’s dilemma in random graphs. Physica D 208, 257–265.
Durrett, R., 2002. Mutual invadability implies coexistence in spatial models. American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI.
Durrett, R., Levin, S., 1997. Allelopathy in spatial distributed populations. J. Theor. Biol. 185, 165–171.
Durrett, R., Levin, S., 1998. Spatial aspects of interspeciﬁc competition. Theor. Pop. Biol. 53, 30–43.
Dutta, B., Jackson, M. O., 2003. Models of the Formation of Networks and Groups. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Ebel, H., Bornholdt, S., 2002. Coevolutionary games on networks. Phys. Rev. E 66, 056118.
Eigen, M., Schuster, P., 1979. The Hypercycle, A Principle of Natural Self-Organization. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Eisert, J., Wilkens, M., Lewenstein, M., 1999. Quantum games and quantum strategies. Phys. Rev. Lett.
83, 3077–3080.
Ellner, S. P., Sasaki, A., Haraguchi, Y., Matsuda, H., 1998. Word-of-mouth communication and social
learning. J. Math. Biol. 36, 469–484.
Equ´ıluz, V. M., Zimmermann, M. G., Cela-Conde, C. J., San Miguel, M., 2005. Cooperation and the emer-
gence of role diﬀerentiation in the dynamics of social networks. Am. J. Sociology 110, 977–1008.
Erd˝os, P., R´enyi, A., 1959. On random graphs. Publ. Math. Debrecen 6, 290–297.
Fehr, E., Fischbacher, U., 2003. The nature of human altruism. Nature 425, 785–791.
Field, R. J., Noyes, R. M., 1974. Oscillations in chemical systems. IV. limit cycle behavior in a model of real
chemical reaction. J. Chem. Phys. 60, 1877–1884.
Fisch, R., 1990. Cyclic cellular automata and related processes. Physica D 45, 19–25.
Fisher, R. A., 1930. The genetical theory of natural selection. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
F¨ollmer, H., 1974. Random economics with noisy interacting agents. J. Math. Econ. 1, 51–62.
Forsythe, R., Horowitz, J. L., Savin, N. E., Sefton, M., 1994. Fairness in simple bargaining experiments.
Games Econ. Behav. 6, 347–369.
Fort, H., Viola, S., 2005. Spatial patterns and scale freedom in prisoner’s dilemma cellular automata with
Pavlovian strategies. J. Stat. Mech. Theor. Exp. 2, P01010.
Foster, D., Young, P., 1990. Stochastic evolutionary game dynamics. Theor. Pop. Biol. 38, 219–232.
Frachebourg, L., Krapivsky, P. L., 1998. Fixation in a cyclic Lotka-Volterra model. J. Phys. A 31, L287–L293.
Frachebourg, L., Krapivsky, P. L., Ben-Naim, E., 1996a. Segregation in a one-dimensional model of inter-
acting species. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 2125–2128.
Frachebourg, L., Krapivsky, P. L., Ben-Naim, E., 1996b. Spatial organization in cyclic Lotka-Volterra sys-
tems. Phys. Rev. E 54, 6186–6200.
Frean, M., Abraham, E. D., 2001. Rock-scissors-paper and the survival of the weakest. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.
B 268, 1–5.
Freidlin, M. I., Wentzell, A. D., 1984. Random Perturbations of Dynamical Systems. Springer-Verlag, New
York.
Frick, T., Schuster, S., 2003. An example of the prisoner’s dilemma in biochemistry. Naturwissenschaften
90, 327–331.
Friedman, J., 1971. A non-cooperative equilibrium for supergames. Review of Economic Studies 38, 1–12.
Fudenberg, D., Levine, D., 1998. The Theory of Learning in Games. MIT Press, Cambridge MA.
Fudenberg, D., Maskin, E., 1986. The folk theorem in repeated games with discounting and incomplete
information. Econometrica 54, 533–554.
Fudenberg, D., Tirole, J., 1991. Game Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fuks, H., Lawniczak, A. T., 2001. Individual-based lattice model for spatial spread of epidemics. Discr. Dyn.
123

Nat. Soc. 6, 191–200.
Gambarelli, G., Owen, G., 2004. The coming of game theory. Theor. Decis. 56, 1–18.
Gammaitoni, L., H¨anggi, P., Jung, P., Marchasoni, F., 1998. Stochastic resonance. Rev. Mod. Phys. 70,
223–287.
Gao, P., 1999. Direct integration method and ﬁrst integrals for three-dimensional Lotka-Volterra systems.
Phys. Lett. A 255, 253–258.
Gao, P., 2000. Hamiltonian structure and ﬁrst integrals for the Lotka-Volterra systems. Phys. Lett. A 273,
85–96.
Gardiner, C. W., 2004. Handbook of Stochastic Methods, 3rd Edition. Springer.
Gardner, M., 1970. Mathematical games: the fantastic combination of John Conway’s new solitary game
’life’. Sci. Am. 223, 120–123.
Gatenby, R. A., Maini, P. K., 2003. Cancer summed up. Nature 421, 321–321.
Geritz, S. A. H., Metz, J. A. J., Kisdi, E., Mesz´ena, G., 1997. Dynamics of adaptation and evolutionary
branching. Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2024–2027.
Gibbons, R., 1992. Game Theory for Applied Economists. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Gilpin, M. E., 1975. Limit cycles in competition communities. Am. Nat. 108, 207–228.
Gintis, H., 2000. Game Theory Evolving. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Glauber, R. J., 1963. Time-dependent statistics of the Ising model. J. Math. Phys 4, 294–307.
G´omez-Garde˜nez, J., Campillo, M., Flor´ıa, L. M., Moreno, Y., 2007. Dynamical organization of cooperation
in complex topologies. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 108103.
Gould, S. J., Eldredge, N., 1993. Punctuated equilibrium comes of age. Nature 366, 223–227.
Grassberger, P., 1982. On phase-transitions in Schl¨ogl 2nd model. Z. Phys. B 47, 365–374.
Grassberger, P., 1993. On a self-organized critical forest-ﬁre model. J. Phys. A 26, 2081–2089.
Greenberg, J. M., Hastings, S. P., 1978. Spatial patterns for discrete models of diﬀusion in exitable media.
SIAM J. Appl. Math. 34, 515–523.
Grim, P., 1995. The greater generosity of the spatialized prisoner’s dilemma. J. Theor. Biol. 173, 353–359.
Grim, P., 1996. Spatialization and greater generosity in stochastic prisoner’s dilemma. BioSystems 37, 3–17.
Guan, J.-Y., Wu, Z.-X., Huang, Z.-G., Xu, X.-J., Wang, Y.-H., 2006. Promotion of cooperation induced by
nonlinear attractive eﬀect in spatial prisoner’s dilemma game. Europhys. Lett. 76, 1214–1220.
G¨uth, W., Schmittberger, R., Schwarze, B., 1982. An experimental analysis of ultimatum bargaining. J.
Econ. Behav. Org. 24, 153–172.
Gutowitz, H. A., Victor, J. D., Knight, B. W., 1987. Local structure theory for cellular automata. Physica
D 28, 18–48.
Gy¨orgyi, G., 2001. Techniques of replica symmetry breaking and the storage problem of the McCulloch-Pitts
neuron. Phys. Rep. 342, 263–392.
Haken, H., 1988. Information and Self-organization. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Hales, D., 2000. Cooperation without space or memory: Tags, groups and the prisoner’s dilemma. In: Moss, S.,
Davidsson, P. (Eds.), Multi-Agent-Based Simulation. Vol. 1979 of Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 157–166.
Hamilton, W. D., 1964a. Genetical evolution of social behavior I. J. Theor. Biol. 7, 1–16.
Hamilton, W. D., 1964b. Genetical evolution of social behavior II. J. Theor. Biol. 7, 17–52.
Hanaki, N., Peterhansl, A., Dodds, P. S., Watts, D. J., 2006. Cooperation in evolving social networks.
Management Science (in press).
Hardin, G., 1968. The tragedy of the commons. Science 162, 1243–1248.
Hardin, R., 1971. Collective action as an aggregeable n-prisoner’s dilemma. Behav. Sci. 16, 472–481.
Harris, T. E., 1974. Contect interactions on a lattice. Ann. Prob. 2, 969–988.
Harsanyi, J. C., Selten, R., 1988. A General Theory of Equilibrium Selection in Games. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Hauert, C., 2001. Fundamental clusters in spatial 2 × 2 games. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 268, 761–769.
Hauert, C., 2002. Eﬀects of space in 2 × 2 games. Int. J. Bifurc. Chaos 12, 1531–1548.
Hauert, C., 2006. Spatial eﬀects in social dilemmas. J. Theor. Biol 240, 627–636.
Hauert, C., De Monte, S., Hofbauer, J., Sigmund, K., 2002. Volunteering as Red Queen mechanism for
124

cooperation in public goods game. Science 296, 1129–1132.
Hauert, C., Doebeli, M., 2004. Spatial structure often inhibits the evolution of cooperation in the snowdrift
game. Nature 428, 643–646.
Hauert, C., Michor, F., Nowak, M. A., Doebeli, M., 2006. Synergy and discounting of cooperation in social
dilemmas. J. Theor. Biol 239, 195–202.
Hauk, E., Nagel, R., 2001. Choice of partners in multiply two-person prisoner’s dilemma games: Experimental
study. J. Conﬂict Resol. 45, 770–793.
He, M., Cai, Y., Wang, Z., Pan, Q.-H., 2005. The inﬂuence of species’ number and the density of vacant
sites on the defensive alliance. Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 16, 1861–1868.
Helbing, D., 1996. A stochastic behavioral model and a microscopic foundation of evolutionary game theory.
Theor. Decis. 40, 149–179.
Helbing, D., 1998. Microscopic foundation of stochastic game dynamical equations. In: Leinfellner, W.,
K¨ohler, E. (Eds.), Game Theory, Experience, Rationality. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, pp. 211–224,
cond-mat/9805395.
Helbing, D., Sch¨onhof, M., Stark, H.-U., Holyst, J. A., 2005. How individuals learn to take turns: Emergence
of alternating cooperation in a congestion game and the prisoner’s dilemma. Adv. Complex Syst. 8, 87–116.
Hempel, H., Schimansky-Geier, L., Garcia-Ojalvo, J., 1999. Noise-sustained pulsating patterns and global
oscillations in subexitable media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3713–3716.
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., Gintis, H., McElreath, R., 2001. In search of homo
economicus: behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. Am. Econ. Rev. 91, 73–78.
Hinrichsen, H., 2000. Non-equilibrium critical phenomena and phase transitions into absorbing states. Adv.
Phys. 49, 815–958.
Hofbauer, J., Hutson, V., Vickers, G. T., 1997. Travelling waves for games in economics and biology. Nonlin.
Anal. 30, 1235–1244.
Hofbauer, J., Sigmund, K., 1988. The Theory of Evolution and Dynamical Systems. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Hofbauer, J., Sigmund, K., 1998. Evolutionary Games and Population Dynamics. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Hofbauer, J., Sigmund, K., 2003. Evolutionary game dynamics. Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 40, 479–519.
Holland, J. H., 1995. Hidden order: How adaption builds complexity. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
Holley, R., Liggett, T. M., 1975. Ergodic theorems for weakly interacting systems and the voter model. Ann.
Probab. 3, 643–663.
Holme, P., Trusina, A., Kim, B. J., Minnhagen, P., 2003. Prisoner’s dilemma in real-world acquintance
networks: Spikes and quasiequilibria induced by the interplay between structure and dynamics. Phys.
Rev. E 68, 030901.
Huberman, B., Glance, N., 1993. Evolutionary games and computer simulations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
90, 7716–7718.
Ifti, M., Bergersen, B., 2003. Survival and extension in cyclic and neutral three-species systems. Eur. Phys.
J. E 10, 241–248.
Ifti, M., Killingback, T., Doebeli, M., 2004. Eﬀects of neighbourhood size and connectivity on the spatial
prisoner’s dilemma. J. Theor. Biol. 231, 97–106.
Imhof, L. A., Fudenberg, D., Nowak, M. A., 2005. Evolutionary cycles of cooperation and defection. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 10797–10800.
Jackson, M. O., 2005. A survey of models of network formation: Stability and eﬃciency. In: Demange, G.,
Wooders, M. (Eds.), Group formation in economics : networks, clubs and coalitions. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 11–57.
Jansen, V. A. A., Baalen, M., 2006. Altruism through beard chromodynamics. Nature 440, 663–666.
Janssen, H. K., 1981. On the non-equilibrium phase-transition in reaction-diﬀusion systems with an absorbing
state. Z. Phys. B 42, 151–154.
Jensen, I., 1991. Universality class of a one-dimensional cellular automaton. Phys. Rev. A 43, 3187–3189.
Johnson, C. R., Boerlijst, M. C., 2002. Selection at the level of the community: the importance of spatial
structures. Trends Ecol. Evol. 17, 83–90.
125

Johnson, C. R., Seinen, I., 2002. Selection for restraint in competitive ability in spatial competition systems.
Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 269, 655–663.
Joo, J., Lebowitz, J. L., 2004. Pair approximation of the stochastic susteptible-infected-recovered-susceptible
epidemic node on the hypercubic lattice. Phys. Rev. E 70, 036114.
Jung, P., Mayer-Kress, G., 1995. Spatiotemporal stochastic resonance in excitable media. Phys. Rev. Lett.
74, 2130–2133.
Kandori, M., Mailath, G. J., Rob, R., 1993. Learning, mutation, and long-run equilibria in games. Econo-
metrica 61, 29–56.
Katz, S., Lebowitz, J. L., Spohn, H., 1983. Phase transitions in stationary nonequilibrium states of model
lattice systems. Phys. Rev. B 28, 1655–1658.
Katz, S., Lebowitz, J. L., Spohn, H., 1984. Nonequilibrium steady states of stochastic lattice gas models of
fast ionic conductors. J. Stat. Phys. 34, 497–537.
Kawasaki, K., 1972. Kinetics of Ising models. In: Domb, C., Green, M. S. (Eds.), Phase Transitions and
Critical Phenomena, Vol. 2. Academic Press, London, pp. 443–501.
Kelly, F. P., 1979. Reversibility and Stochastic Networks. John Wiley, London.
Kermack, W. O., McKendrick, A. G., 1927. Contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proc.
Roy. Soc. Lond. A 115, 700–721.
Kerr, B., Riley, M. A., Feldman, M. W., Bohannan, B. J. M., 2002. Local dispersal promotes biodiversity
in a real-life game of rock-paper-scissors. Nature 418, 171–174.
Killingback, T., Doebeli, M., 1996. Spatial evolutionary game theory: Hawks and doves revisited. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B 263, 1135–1144.
Killingback, T., Doebeli, M., 1998. Self-organized criticality in spatial evolutionary game theory. J. Theor.
Biol. 191, 335–340.
Killingback, T., Doebeli, M., Knowlton, N., 1999. Variable investment, the continuous prisoner’s dilemma,
and the origin of cooperation. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 266, 1723–1728.
Kim, B. J., Liu, J., Um, J., Lee, S.-I., 2005. Instability of defensive alliances in the predator-prey model on
complex networks. Phys. Rev. E 72, 041906.
Kim, B. J., Trusina, A., Holme, P., Minnhagen, P., Chung, J. S., Choi, M. Y., 2002. Dynamic instabilities
induced by asymmetric inﬂuence: Prisoner’s dilemma game in small-world networks. Phys. Rev. E 66,
021907.
Kinzel, W., 1985. Phase transitions of cellular automata. Z. Phys. B 58, 229–244.
Kirchkamp, O., 2000. Spatial evolution of automata in the prisoner’s dilemma. J. Econ. Behav. Org. 43,
239–262.
Kirkup, B. C., Riley, M. A., 2004. Antibiotic-mediated antagonism leads to a bacterial game of rock-paper-
scissors in vivo. Nature 428, 412–414.
Kittel, C., 2004. Introduction to Solid State Physics, 8th edition. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.
Kobayashi, K., Tainaka, K., 1997. Critical phenomena in cyclic ecosystems: Parity law and selfstructuring
extinction pattern. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 66, 38–41.
Kraines, D., Kraines, V., 1989. Pavlov and the prisoner’s dilemma. Theor. Decis. 26, 47–79.
Kraines, D., Kraines, V., 1993. Learning to cooperate with pavlov an adaptive strategy for the iterated
prisoner’s dilemma with noise. Theor. Decis. 35, 107–150.
Krapivsky, P. L., Redner, S., Leyvraz, F., 2000. Connectivity of growing random networks. Phys. Rev. Lett.
85, 4629–4632.
Kreft, J.-U., 2004. Bioﬁlms promote altruism. Microbiology 150, 2751–2760.
Kreps, D. M., Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., Wilson, R., 1982. Rational cooperation in the ﬁnitely repeated
prisoners-dilemma. J. Econ. Theor. 27, 245–252.
Kuperman, M., Abramson, G., 2001. Small world eﬀects in an epidemiological model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,
2909–2912.
Kuznetsov, Y. A., 1995. Elements of Applied Bifurcation Theory. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Ledyard, J. O., 1995. Public goods: A survey of experimental research. In: Kagel, J. H., Roth, A. E. (Eds.),
The Handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 111–194.
Lee, C. F., Johnson, N. F., 2001. Playing by quantum rules. Nature 414, 244–245.
126

Lee, C. F., Johnson, N. F., 2002. Let the quantum games begin. Phys. World 15, 25–29.
Lee, I. H., Valentinyi, ´A., 2000. Interactive contagion. Rev. Econ. Stud. 67, 47–66.
Lewontin, 1961. Evolution and the theory of games. J. Theor. Biol. 1, 382–403.
Lieberman, E., Hauert, C., Nowak, M. A., 2005. Evolutionary dynamics on graphs. Nature 433, 312–316.
Liggett, T. M., 1985. Interacting Particle Systems. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Lim, Y. M., Chen, K., Jayaprakash, C., 2002. Scale-invariant behavior in a spatial game of prisoner’s
dilemma. Phys. Rev. E 65, 026134.
Lin, A. I., Hagberg, A., Ardelea, A., Bertram, M., Swinney, H. L., Meron, E., 2000. Four-phase patterns in
forced oscillatory systems. Phys. Rev. E 62, 3790–3798.
Lindgren, K., 1997. Evolutionary dynamics in game-theoretic models. In: Arthur, W. B., Durlauf, S., Lane,
D. A. (Eds.), The economy as an evolving complex system II. Santa Fe Institute, Perseus Books, Reading,
Mass.
Lindgren, K., Nordahl, M. G., 1994. Evolutionary dynamics of spatial games. Physica D 75, 292–309.
MacLean, R. C., Gudelj, I., 2006. resource competition and social conﬂict in experimental populations of
yeast. Nature 441, 498–501.
Macy, M. W., Flache, A., 2002. Learning dynamics in social dilemmas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99,
7229–7236.
Marro, J., Dickman, R., 1999. Nonequilibrium Phase Transitions in Lattice Models. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Marsili, M., Zhang, Y.-C., 1997. Fluctuations around Nash equilibria in game theory. Physica A 245, 181–188.
Martins, C. J. A. P., Moore, J. N., Shellard, E. P. S., 2004. Uniﬁed model for vortex-string network evolution.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 251601.
Masuda, N., Aihara, K., 2003. Spatial prisoner’s dilemma optimally played in small-world networks. Phys.
Lett. A 313, 55–61.
Masuda, N., Konno, N., 2006. Networks with dispersed degrees save stable coexistence of species in cyclic
competition. Phys. Rev. E 74, 066102.
May, R. M., Leonard, W. J., 1975. Nonlinear aspects of competition between three species. SIAM J. Appl.
Math. 29, 243–253.
Maynard Smith, J., 1978. The evolution of behaviors. Sci. Am. 239, 176–192.
Maynard Smith, J., 1982. Evolution and the theory of games. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Maynard Smith, J., Price, G. R., 1973. The logic of animal conﬂict. Nature 246, 15–18.
Meron, E., Pelc´e, P., 1988. Model for spiral wave formation in exitable media. Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 1880–1883.
Metz, J. A. J., Geritz, S. A. H., Mesz´ena, G., Jacobs, F. J. A., van Heerwaarden, J. S., 1996. Adaptive
dynamics, a geometrical study of the consequences of nearly faithful reproduction. In: van Strien, S. J.,
Lunel, S. M. V. (Eds.), Stochastic and spatial structures of dynamical systems. North Holland, p. 183231.
Meyer, D. A., 1999. Quantum strategies. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1052–1055.
M´ezard, M., Parisi, G., Virasoro, M. A., 1987. Spin Glass Theory and Beyond. World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
Mi¸ekisz, J., 2004a. Statistical mechanics of spatial evolutionary games. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 37, 9891–9906.
Mi¸ekisz, J., 2004b. Stochastic stability in spatial games. J. Stat. Phys. 117, 99–110.
Mi¸ekisz, J., 2004c. Stochastic stability in spatial three-player games. Physica A 343, 175–184.
Milgram, S., 1967. The small world problem. Psychol. Today 2, 60–67.
Mobilia, M., Georgiev, I. T., T¨auber, U. C., 2006a. Fluctuations and correlations in lattice models for
predator-prey interaction. Phys. Rev. E 73, 040903(R).
Mobilia, M., Georgiev, I. T., T¨auber, U. C., 2006b. Phase transitions and spatio-temporal ﬂuctuations in
stochastic lattice Lotka-Volterra models. J. Stat. Phys. in press.
Molander, P., 1985. The optimal level generosity in a selﬁsh, uncertain environment. J. Conﬂict Resolut. 29,
611–618.
Monderer, D., Shapley, L. S., 1996. Potential games. Games Econ. Behav. 14, 124–143.
Moran, P. A. P., 1962. The Statistical Processes of Evolutionary Theory. Clarendon, Oxford, UK.
Mukherji, A., Rajan, V., Slagle, J. R., 1996. Robustness of cooperation. Nature 125, 125–126.
Nakamaru, M., Iwasa, Y., 2000. Competition by allelopathy proceeds in traveling waves: Colicin-immune
strain aids collicin-sensitive strain. Theor. Pop. Biol. 57, 131–144.
127

Nakamaru, M., Matsuda, H., Iwasa, Y., 1997. The evolution of cooperation in a lattice-structured population.
J. Theor. Biol. 184, 65–81.
Nash, J., 1950. Equilibrium points in n-person games. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 36, 48–49.
Neumann, G., Schuster, S., 2007. Continuous model for the rock-scissors-paper game between bacteriocin
producing bacteria. J. Math. Biol. in press.
Newman, M. E. J., 2002. Spread of epidemic disease on networks. Phys. Rev. E 66, 016128.
Newman, M. E. J., 2003. The structure and function of complex networks. SIAM Review 45, 167–256.
Newman, M. E. J., Watts, D. J., 1999. Scaling and percolation in the small-world network model. Phys.
Rev. E 60, 7332–7342.
Nowak, M., 1990a. An evolutionary stable strategy may be inaccessible. J. Theor. Biol. 142, 237–241.
Nowak, M., Sigmund, K., 1989a. Game-dynamical aspects of the prisoner’s dilemma. Appl. Math. Comp.
30, 191–213.
Nowak, M., Sigmund, K., 1989b. Oscillation in the evolutionary reciprocity. J. Theor. Biol. 137, 21–26.
Nowak, M., Sigmund, K., 1990. The evolution of stochastic strategies in the prisoner’s dilemma. Acta Appl.
Math. 20, 247–265.
Nowak, M. A., 1990b. Stochastic strategies in the prisoner’s dilemma. Theor. Pop. Biol. 38, 93–112.
Nowak, M. A., 2006a. Evolutionary Dynamics. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nowak, M. A., 2006b. Five rules for the evolution of cooperation. Science 314, 1560–1563.
Nowak, M. A., Bonhoeﬀer, S., May, R. M., 1994a. More spatial games. Int. J. Bifurcat. Chaos 4, 33–56.
Nowak, M. A., Bonhoeﬀer, S., May, R. M., 1994b. Spatial games and the maintenance of cooperation. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 4877–4881.
Nowak, M. A., May, R. M., 1992. Evolutionary games and spatial chaos. Nature 359, 826–829.
Nowak, M. A., May, R. M., 1993. The spatial dilemmas of evolution. Int. J. Bifurcat. Chaos 3, 35–78.
Nowak, M. A., Page, K. M., Sigmund, K., 2000. Fairness versus reason in the ultimatum game. Science 289,
1773–1775.
Nowak, M. A., Sasaki, A., Taylor, C., Fudenberg, D., 2004. Emergence of cooperation and evolutionary
stability in ﬁnite populations. Nature 428, 646–650.
Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 1992. Tit for tat in heterogeneous population. Nature 355, 250–253.
Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 1993. A strategy of win-stay, lose-shift that outperforms tit-for-tat in the
prisoner’s dilemma game. Nature 364, 56–58.
Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 1995. Invasion dynamics of the ﬁnitely repeated prisoner’s dilemma. Games
Econ. Behav. 11, 364–390.
Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 1998. Evolution of indirect reciprocity by image scoring. Nature 393, 573–577.
Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 1999. Phage-lift for game theory. Nature 399, 367–368.
Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 2004. Evolutionary dynamics of biological games. Science 303, 793–799.
Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 2005. Evolution of indirect reciprocity. Nature 437, 1291–1298.
Ohta, T., 2002. Near-neutrality in evolution of genes and gene regulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99,
16134–16137.
Ohtsuki, H., Hauert, C., Lieberman, E., Nowak, M. A., 2006. A simple rule for the evolution of cooperation
on graphs and social networks. Nature 441, 502–505.
Ohtsuki, H., Nowak, M. A., Pacheco, J. M., 2007a. Breaking the symmetry between interaction and replace-
ment in evolutionary graph theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 108106.
Ohtsuki, H., Pacheco, J. M., Nowak, M. A., 2007b. Evolutionary graph theory: breaking the symmetry
between interaction and replacement. J. Theor. Biol. 246, 681–694.
Pacheco, J. M., Santos, F. C., 2005. Network dependence of the dilemmas of cooperation. In: Mendes, J.
F. F. (Ed.), Science of Complex Networks: From Biology to the Intertnet and WWW, AIP Conf. Proc.
No. 776. AIP, Melville, NY, pp. 90–100.
Pacheco, J. M., Traulsen, A., Nowak, M. A., 2006a. Active linking in evolutionary games. J. Theor. Biol.
243, 437–443.
Pacheco, J. M., Traulsen, A., Nowak, M. A., 2006b. Coevolution of strategy and structure in complex
networks with dynamical linking. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 258103.
Page, K. M., Nowak, M. A., 2000. A generalized adaptive dynamics framework can descibe the evolutionary
128

ultimatum game. J. Theor. Biol. 209, 173–179.
Page, K. M., Nowak, M. A., Sigmund, K., 2000. The spatial ultimatum game. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 267,
2177–2182.
Palla, G., Der´enyi, I., Farkas, I., Vicsek, T., 2005. Uncovering the overlapping community structure of
complex networks in nature and society. Nature 435, 814–818.
Panchanathan, K., Boyd, R., 2004. Indirect reciprocity can stabilize cooperation without the second-order
free rider problem. Nature 432, 499–502.
Perc, M., 2005. Spatial coherence resonance in excitable media. Phys. Rev. E 72, 016207.
Perc, M., 2006. Coherence resonance in spatial prisoner’s dilemma game. New J. Phys. 8, 22.
Perc, M., 2007. Premature seizure of traﬃc ﬂow due to the introduction of evolutionary games. New J. Phys.
9, 3.
Perc, M., Marhl, M., 2006. Evolutionary and dynamical coherence resonance in the pair approximated
prisoner’s dilemma game. New J. Phys. 8, 142.
Pettit, P., Sugden, R., 1989. The backward induction paradox. J. Philos. 86, 169–182.
Pfeiﬀer, T., Schuster, S., 2005. Game-theoretical approaches to studying the evolution of biochemical sys-
tems. TRENDS Biochem. Sci. 30, 20–25.
Pfeiﬀer, T., Schuster, S., Bonhoeﬀer, S., 2001. Cooperation and competition in the evolution of ATP-
producing pathways. Science 292, 504–507.
Pikovsky, A. S., Kurths, J., 1997. Coherence resonance in a noise-driven excitable system. Phys. Rev. Lett.
78, 775–778.
Posch, M., 1999. Win-stay, lose-shift strategies for repeated games–memory length, aspiration levels and
noise. J. Theor. Biol. 198, 183–195.
Posch, M., Pichler, A., Sigmund, K., 1999. The eﬃciency of adapting aspiration levels. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.
B 266, 1427–1435.
Poundstone, W., 1992. Prisoner’s Dilemma. Doubleday, New York.
Prager, T., Naundorf, B., Schimansky-Geier, L., 2003. Coupled three-state oscillators. Physica A 325, 176–
185.
Provata, A., Tsekouras, G. A., 2003. Spontaneous formation of dynamical patterns with fractal fronts in the
cyclic lattice Lotka-Volterra model. Phys. Rev. E 67, 056602.
Ralston, A., 1965. A ﬁrst course in numerical analysis. McGraw Hill, New York.
Rapoport, A., Guyer, M., 1966. A taxonomy of 2 × 2 games. Yearbook of the Society for General Systems
11, 203–214.
Rasmussen, S., Chen, L., Deamer, D., Krakauer, D. C., Packard, N. H., Stadler, P. F., Bedau, M. A., 2004.
Transition from nonliving to living matter. Science 303, 963–965.
Ravasz, M., Szab´o, G., Szolnoki, A., 2004. Spreading of families in cyclic predator-prey models. Phys. Rev.
E 70, 012901.
Reichenbach, T., Mobilia, M., Frey, E., 2006a. Coexistence versus extinction in the stochastic cyclic Lotka-
Volterra model. Phys. Rev. E 74, 011907.
Reichenbach, T., Mobilia, M., Frey, E., 2006b. Stochastic eﬀects on biodiversity in cyclic coevolutionary
dynamics. Banach Center Publications, in press.
Ren, J., Wang, W.-X., Yan, G., Wang, B.-H., 2006. Emergence of cooperation induced by preferential
learning. arXiv:physics/0603007.
Riolo, R. L., Cohen, M. D., Axelrod, R., 2001. Evolution of cooperation without reciprocity. Nature 414,
441–443.
Robson, A. J., 1990. Eﬃciency in evolutionary games: Darwin, Nash and the secret handshake. J. Theor.
Biol. 144, 379–396.
Roca, C. P., Cuesta, J. A., S´anchez, A., 2006. Time scales in evolutionary dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97,
158701.
Russell, B., 1959. Common Sense of Nuclear Warfare. George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London.
Saijo, T., Yamato, T., 1999. Voluntary participation game with a non-exludable public good. J. Econ. Theory
84, 227–242.
Samuelson, L., 1997. Evolutionary Games and Equilibrium Selection. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass.
129

Samuelson, P. A., 1954. The pure theory of public expenditure. Rev. Econ. Stat. 36, 387–389.
S´anchez, A., Cuesta, J. A., 2005. Altruism may arise from individual selection. J, Theor. Biol. 235, 233–240.
Sandholm, W. H., Dokumaci, E., 2006. Dynamo, version 1.3.3, 5/9/06. freeware software.
Santos, F. C., Pacheco, J. M., 2005. Scale-free networks provide a unifying framework for the emergence of
cooperation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 098104.
Santos, F. C., Pacheco, J. M., 2006. A new route to the evolution of cooperation. J. Evol. Biol. 19, 726–733.
Santos, F. C., Pacheco, J. M., Lenaerts, T., 2006a. Cooperation prevails when individuals adjust their social
ties. PLoS. Comput. Biol. 2, 1284–1290.
Santos, F. C., Pacheco, J. M., Lenaerts, T., 2006b. Evolutionary dynamics of social dilemmas in structured
heterogeneous populations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 3490–3494.
Santos, F. C., Rodrigues, J. F., Pacheco, J. M., 2005. Epidemic spreading and cooperation dynamics on
homogeneous small-world networks. Phys. Rev. E 72, 056128.
Santos, F. C., Rodrigues, J. F., Pacheco, J. M., 2006c. Graph topology plays a determinant role in the
evolution of cooperation. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 273, 51–55.
Sato, K., Konno, N., Yamaguchi, T., 1997. Paper-scissors-stone game on trees. Mem. Muroran Inst. Tech.
47, 109–114.
Sato, K., Yoshida, N., Konno, N., 2002. Parity law for population dynamics of n-species with cyclic advantage
competition. Appl. Math. Comp. 126, 255–270.
Schlag, K. H., 1998. Why imitate, and if so, how? a bounded rational approach to multi-armed bandits. J.
Econ. Theory 78, 130–156.
Schlag, K. H., 1999. Which one should I imitate? J. Math. Econ. 31, 493–522.
Schmittmann, B., Zia, R. K. P., 1995. Statistical mechanics of driven diﬀusive systems. In: Domb, C.,
Lebowitz, J. L. (Eds.), Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena, Vol. 17. Academic Press, London.
Schnakenberg, J., 1976. Network theory of microscopic and macroscopic behavior of master equation systems.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 48, 571–585.
Schwarz, K. W., 1982. Generation of superﬂuid turbulence deduced from simple dynamical rules. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 49, 282–285.
Schweitzer, F., Behera, L., M¨uhlenbein, H., 2002. Evolution of cooperation in a spatial prisoner’s dilemma.
Adv. Complex Systems 5, 269–299.
Schweitzer, F., Mach, R., M¨uhlebein, H., 2005. Agents with heterogeneous strategies interacting in a spatial
IPD. In: Lux, T., Reitz, S., Samanidou, E. (Eds.), Nonlinear Dynamics and Heterogeneous Interacting
Agents, Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems, Vol. 550. Springer, Berlin, pp. 87–102.
Selten, R., 1965. Spieltheoretische behandlung eines oligopolmodells mit nachfragetragheit. Z. Gesamte
Staatswiss. 121, 301–324.
Selten, R., 1980. A note on evolutionarily stable strategies in asymmetric animal conﬂict. J. Theor. Biol. 84,
93–101.
Semmann, D., Krambeck, H.-J., Milinski, M., 2003. Volunteering leads to rock-paper-scissors dynamics in a
public goods game. Nature 425, 390–393.
Shapley, L., 1964. Some topics in two person games. Ann. Math. Studies 5, 1–28.
Sigmund, K., 1993. Games of Life: Exploration in Ecology, Evolution and Behavior. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
Sigmund, K., Nowak, M. A., 2001. Tides of tolerance. Nature 414, 403–405.
Silvertown, J., Holtier, S., Johnson, J., Dale, P., 1992. Cellular automaton models of interspeciﬁc competition
of space – the eﬀect of pattern on process. J. Ecol. 80, 527–534.
Sinervo, B., Lively, C. M., 1996. The rock-paper-scissors game and the evolution of alternative male strate-
gies. Nature 380, 240–243.
Skyrms, B., 2003. Stag-Hunt Game and the Evolution of Social Structure. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Skyrms, B., Pemantle, R., 2000. A dynamic model of social network formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
97, 9340–9346.
Stanley, H. E., 1971. Introduction to Phase Transitions and Critical Phenomena. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Sysi-Aho, M., Saram¨aki, J., Kert´esz, J., Kaski, K., 2005. Spatial snowdrift game with myopic agents. Eur.
130

Phys. J. B 44, 129–135.
Szab´o, G., 2000. Branching annihilating random walk on random regular graphs. Phys. Rev. E 62, 7474–7477.
Szab´o, G., 2005. Competing associations in six-species predator-prey models. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 38,
6689–6702.
Szab´o, G., Antal, T., Szab´o, P., Droz, M., 2000. Spatial evolutionary prisoner’s dilemma game with three
strategies and external constraints. Phys. Rev. E 62, 1095–1103.
Szab´o, G., Cz´ar´an, T., 2001a. Defensive alliances in spatial models of cyclical population interactions. Phys.
Rev. E 64, 042902.
Szab´o, G., Cz´ar´an, T., 2001b. Phase transition in a spatial Lotka-Volterra model. Phys. Rev. E 63, 061904.
Szab´o, G., Hauert, C., 2002a. Evolutionary prisoner’s dilemma games with voluntary participation. Phys.
Rev. E 66, 062903.
Szab´o, G., Hauert, C., 2002b. Phase transitions and volunteering in spatial public goods games. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 89, 118101.
Szab´o, G., Santos, M. A., Mendes, J. F. F., 1999. Vortex dynamics in a three-state model under cyclic
dominance. Phys. Rev. E 60, 3776–3780.
Szab´o, G., Sznaider, G. A., 2004. Phase transition and selection in a four-species predator-prey model. Phys.
Rev. E 69, 031911.
Szab´o, G., Szolnoki, A., 2002. Three-state cyclic voter model extended with Potts energy. Phys. Rev. E 65,
036115.
Szab´o, G., Szolnoki, A., Izs´ak, R., 2004. Rock-scissors-paper game on regular small-world networks. J. Phys.
A: Math. Gen. 37, 2599–2609.
Szab´o, G., T˝oke, C., 1998. Evolutionary prisoner’s dilemma game on a square lattice. Phys. Rev. E 58,
69–73.
Szab´o, G., Vukov, J., 2004. Cooperation for volunteering and partially random partnerships. Phys. Rev. E
69, 036107.
Szab´o, G., Vukov, J., Szolnoki, A., 2005. Phase diagrams for an evolutionary prisoner’s dilemma game on
two-dimensional lattices. Phys. Rev. E 72, 047107.
Sznaider, G. A., 2003. Unpublished results.
Szolnoki, A., 2002. Dynamical mean-ﬁeld approximation for a pair contact process with a particle source.
Phys. Rev. E 66, 057102.
Szolnoki, A., Szab´o, G., 2004a. Phase transitions for rock-scissors-paper game on diﬀerent networks. Phys.
Rev. E 70, 037102.
Szolnoki, A., Szab´o, G., 2004b. Vertex dynamics during domain growth in three-state models. Phys. Rev. E
70, 027101.
Szolnoki, A., Szab´o, G., 2005. Three-state potts model in combination with the rock-scissors-paper game.
Phys. Rev. E 71, 027102.
Szolnoki, A., Szab´o, G., 2007. Cooperation enhanced by inhomogeneous activity of teaching for evolutionary
prisoner’s dilemma games. Europhys. Lett. 77, 30004.
Tainaka, K., 1988. Lattice model for the Lotka-Volterra system. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 57, 2588–2590.
Tainaka, K., 1989. Stationary pattern of vortices or strings in biological systems: lattice version of the
Lotka-Volterra model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2688–2691.
Tainaka, K., 1993. Paradoxial eﬀect in a three-candidate voter model. Phys. Lett. A 176, 303–306.
Tainaka, K., 1994. Vortices in a model ecosystem. Phys. Rev. E 50, 3401–3409.
Tainaka, K., 1995. Indirect eﬀect in cyclic voter models. Phys. Lett. A 207, 53–57.
Tainaka, K., 2001. Physics and ecology of rock-paper-scissors game. In: Marsland, T., Frank, I. (Eds.),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 2063. Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 384–395.
Tainaka, K., Itoh, Y., 1991. Topological phase transition in biological ecosystems. Europhys. Lett. 15, 399–
404.
Tang, C.-L., Wang, W.-X., Wu, X., Wang, B.-H., 2006. Eﬀects of average degree on cooperation in networked
evolutionary game. Eur. Phys. J. B 53, 411–415.
Taylor, C., Fundenberg, D., Sasaki, A., Nowak, M. M., 2004. Evolutionary game dynamics in ﬁnite popula-
tion. Bull. Math. Biol. 66, 1621–1644.
131

Taylor, P., Jonker, L., 1978. Evolutionary stable strategies and game dynamics. Math. Biosci. 40, 145–156.
Thaler, R. H., 1988. Anomalies - the ultimatum game. J. Econ. Perspect. 2, 195–206.
Thorndike, E. L., 1911. Animal Intelligence. Macmillan, New York.
Tilman, D., Kareiva, P. (Eds.), 1997. Spatial Ecology. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Tomassini, M., Luthi, L., Giacobini, M., 2006. Hawks and doves games on small-world networks. Phys. Rev.
E 73, 016132.
Tomochi, M., Kono, M., 2002. Spatial prisoner’s dilemma games with dynamic payoﬀmatrices. Phys. Rev.
E 65, 026112.
Toral, R., San Miguel, M., Gallego, R., 2000. Period stabilization in the Busse-Heikes model of the K¨uppers-
Lortz instability. Physica A 280, 315–336.
Traulsen, A., Claussen, J. C., 2004. Similarity based cooperation and spatial segregation. Phys. Rev. E 70,
046128.
Traulsen, A., Claussen, J. C., Hauert, C., 2005. Coevolutionary dynamics: From ﬁnite to inﬁnite populations.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 0238701.
Traulsen, A., Claussen, J. C., Hauert, C., 2006a. Coevolutionary dynamics in large, but ﬁnite populations.
Phys. Rev. E 74, 011901.
Traulsen, A., Nowak, M. A., 2006. Evolution of cooperation by multilevel selection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 103, 10952–10955.
Traulsen, A., Nowak, M. A., 2007. Chromodynamics of cooperation in ﬁnite populations. PLoS ONE 2 (3),
e270.
Traulsen, A., Nowak, M. A., Pacheco, J. M., 2006b. Stochastic dybamics of invasion and ﬁxation. Phys. Rev.
E 74, 011909.
Traulsen, A., Nowak, M. A., Pacheco, J. M., 2007a. Stochastic payoﬀevaluation increases the temperature
of selection. J. Theor. Biol. 244, 349–356.
Traulsen, A., Pacheco, J. M., Imhof, L. A., 2006c. Stochasticity and evolutionary stability. Phys. Rev. E 74,
021905.
Traulsen, A., Pacheco, J. M., Nowak, M. A., 2007b. Pairwise comparison and selection temperature in
evolutionary game dynamics. J. Theor. Biol. 246, 522–529.
Traulsen, A., R¨ohl, T., Schuster, H. G., 2004. Stochastic gain in population dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,
028701.
Traulsen, A., Schuster, H. G., 2003. A minimal model for tag-based cooperation. Phys. Rev. E 68, 046129.
Trivers, R., 1985. Social Evolution. Benjamin Cummings, Menlo Park.
Trivers, R. L., 1971. The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Q. Rev. Biol. 46, 35–57.
Turner, P. E., Chao, L., 1999. Prisoner’s dilemma in an RNA virus. Nature 398, 441–443.
Vainstein, M. H., Arenzon, J. J., 2001. Disordered environments in spatial games. Phys. Rev. E 64, 051905.
Vainstein, M. H., Silva, A. T. C., Arenzon, J. J., 2007. Does mobility decrease cooperation? J. Theor. Biol.
244, 722–728.
Vilenkin, A., Shellard, E. P. S., 1994. Cosmic Strings and Other Topological Defects. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
von Neumann, J., 1928. Zur theorie der gesellschaftsspiele. Mathematische Annalen 100, 295–320, english
Translation Fin Tucker, A. W. and R. D. Luce, ed., Contributions to the Theory of Games IV, Annals of
Mathematics Studies 40, 1959.
von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O., 1944. Theory of Games and Economic Behaviour. Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Vukov, J., Szab´o, G., Szolnoki, A., 2006. Cooperation in the noisy case: Prisoner’s dilemma game on two
types of regular random graphs. Phys. Rev. E 73, 067103.
Wakano, J. Y., 2006. A mathematical analysis on public goods games in the continuous space. Math. Biosci
201, 72–89.
Walker, P., 1995. An outline of the history of game theory. Working Paper, Department of Economics,
University of Canterbury, New Zealand.
Watt, A. S., 1947. Pattern and process in plant community. J. Ecol. 35, 1–22.
Watts, D. J., Strogatz, S. H., 1998. Collective dynamics of ’small world’ networks. Nature 393, 440–442.
132

Wedekind, C., Milinski, M., 1996. Human cooperation in the simultaneous and alternating prisoner’s
dilemma: Pavlov versus tit-for-tat strategies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93, 2686–2698.
Weibull, J. W., 1995. Evolutionary Game Theory. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Weibull,
J.
W.,
2004.
Testing
game
theory,
Boston
University
working
paper,
available
at
http://www.bu.edu/econ/workingpapers/papers/Jorgen12.pdf.
Weidlich, W., 1991. Physics and social-science - the approach of synergetics. Phys. Rep. 204, 1–163.
Wiener, N., Rosenblueth, A., 1946. Conduction of impulses in cardiac muscle. Arc. Inst. Cardiol. (Mexico)
16, 205–265.
Wild, G., Taylor, P. D., 2005. Fittness and evolutionary stability in game theoretic models of ﬁnite popula-
tions. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 271, 2345–2349.
Wilhelm, R., Baynes, C. F., 1977. The I Ching or Book of Changes, the R. Wilhelm translation from Chinese
to German and rendered into English by C. F. Baynes. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Winfree, A. T., Strogatz, S. H., 1984. Singular ﬁlaments organize chemical waves in three dimensions IV:
Wave taxonomy. Physica D 13, 221–233.
Wolfram, S., 1983. Statistical mechanics of cellular automata. Rev. Mod. Phys. 55, 601–644.
Wolfram, S., 1984. Universality and complexity in cellular automata. Physica D 10, 1–35.
Wolfram, S., 2002. A New Kind of Science. Wolfram Media Inc., Champaign.
Wolpert, D., Tumer, K., Bandari, E., 2004. Improving search algorithms by using intelligent coordinates.
Phys. Rev. E 69, 017701.
Wormald, N. C., 1981. The asymptotic distribution of short cycles in random regular graphs. J. Combin.
Theor. B 31, 168–182.
Wormald, N. C., 1999. Models of random regular graphs. In: Lamb, J. D., Preece, D. A. (Eds.), Surveys
in Combinatorics, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series. Vol. 267. Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, pp. 239–298.
Wu, F. Y., 1982. The Potts model. Rev. Mod. Phys. 54, 235–268.
Wu, Z.-X., Xu, X.-J., Chen, Y., Wang, Y.-H., 2005a. Spatial prisoner’s dilemma game with volunteering in
Newmann-Watts small-world networks. Phys. Rev. E 71, 037103.
Wu, Z.-X., Xu, X.-J., Wang, Y.-H., 2005b. Does the scale-free topology favor the emergence of cooperation.
arXiv:physics/0508220.
Wu, Z.-X., Xu, X.-J., Wang, Y.-H., 2006. Prisoner’s dilemma game with heterogeneous inﬂuental eﬀect on
regular small-world networks. Chin. Phys. Lett. 23, 531–534.
Young, P., 1993. The evolution of conventions. Econometrica 61, 57–84.
Zeeman, E. C., 1980. Population dynamics from game theory. In: Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 819.
Springer, New York, pp. 471–497.
Zia, R. K. P., Schmittmann, B., 2006. A possible classiﬁcation of nonequilibrium steady states. J. Phys. A:
Math. Gen. 39, L407–L413.
Zimmermann, M. G., Egu´ıluz, V., 2005. Cooperation, social networks and the emergence of leadership in a
prisoner’s dilemma with local interactions. Phys. Rev. E 72, 056118.
Zimmermann, M. G., Egu´ıluz, V., San Miguel, M., 2004. Coevolution of dynamical states and interactions
in dynamic networks. Phys. Rev. E 69, 065102(R).
Zimmermann, M. G., Egu´ıluz, V. M., San Miguel, M., 2001. Cooperation, adaption and the emergence of
leadership. In: Zimmermann, J. B., Kirman, A. (Eds.), Economics and Heterogeneous Interacting Agents.
Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 73–86.
Zimmermann, M. G., Egu´ıluz, V. M., San Miguel, M., Spadaro, A., 2000. Cooperation in adaptive net-
work. In: Ballot, G., Weisbuch, G. (Eds.), Application of Simulations in Social Sciences. Hermes Science
Publications, Paris, pp. 283–297.
133
