1164
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
Millimeter Wave Channel Modeling
and Cellular Capacity Evaluation
Mustafa Riza Akdeniz, Student Member, IEEE, Yuanpeng Liu, Mathew K. Samimi, Student Member, IEEE,
Shu Sun, Student Member, IEEE, Sundeep Rangan, Senior Member, IEEE,
Theodore S. Rappaport, Fellow, IEEE, and Elza Erkip, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—With the severe spectrum shortage in conventional
cellular bands, millimeter wave (mmW) frequencies between 30
and 300 GHz have been attracting growing attention as a possible
candidate for next-generation micro- and picocellular wireless
networks. The mmW bands offer orders of magnitude greater
spectrum than current cellular allocations and enable very high-
dimensional antenna arrays for further gains via beamforming
and spatial multiplexing. This paper uses recent real-world mea-
surements at 28 and 73 GHz in New York, NY, USA, to derive
detailed spatial statistical models of the channels and uses these
models to provide a realistic assessment of mmW micro- and
picocellular networks in a dense urban deployment. Statistical
models are derived for key channel parameters, including the path
loss, number of spatial clusters, angular dispersion, and outage.
It is found that, even in highly non-line-of-sight environments,
strong signals can be detected 100–200 m from potential cell sites,
potentially with multiple clusters to support spatial multiplexing.
Moreover, a system simulation based on the models predicts that
mmW systems can offer an order of magnitude increase in ca-
pacity over current state-of-the-art 4G cellular networks with no
increase in cell density from current urban deployments.
Index Terms—Millimeter wave radio, 3GPP LTE, cellular sys-
tems, wireless propagation, 28 GHz, 73 GHz, urban deployments.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE remarkable success of cellular wireless technologies
have led to an insatiable demand for mobile data [1], [2].
The UMTS trafﬁc forecasts [3], for example, predict that by
2020, daily mobile trafﬁc will exceed 800 MB per subscriber
leading to 130 exabits (1018) of data per year for some
operators. Keeping pace with this demand will require new
technologies that can offer orders of magnitude increases in
cellular capacity.
To address this challenge, there has been growing interest in
cellular systems based in the so-called millimeter wave (mmW)
bands, between 30 and 300 GHz, where the available band-
widths are much wider than today’s cellular networks [4]–[9].
The available spectrum at these frequencies can be easily
Manuscript received December 1, 2013; revised April 25, 2014; accepted
May 25, 2014. Date of publication June 13, 2014; date of current version
July 14, 2014. This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grants 1116589 and 1237821 and generous support
from Samsung, Nokia Siemens Networks, and InterDigital Communications.
The authors are with NYU WIRELESS, New York University Polytechnic
School of Engineering, Brooklyn, NY 11201 USA (e-mail: akdeniz@nyu.edu;
yliu20@students.poly.edu;
mathewsamimi@gmail.com;
ss7152@nyu.edu;
srangan@poly.edu; tsr@nyu.edu; elza@poly.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/JSAC.2014.2328154
200 times greater than all cellular allocations today that are
currently largely constrained to the prime RF real estate under
3 GHz [5]. Moreover, the very small wavelengths of mmW
signals combined with advances in low-power CMOS RF cir-
cuits enable large numbers (≥32 elements) of miniaturized
antennas to be placed in small dimensions. These multiple
antenna systems can be used to form very high gain, electrically
steerable arrays, fabricated at the base station, in the skin of
a cell phone, or even within a chip [6], [10]–[17]. Given the
very wide bandwidths and large numbers of spatial degrees of
freedom, it has been speculated that mmW bands will play a
signiﬁcant role in Beyond 4G and 5G cellular systems [8].
However, the development of cellular networks in the mmW
bands faces signiﬁcant technical obstacles and the precise value
of mmW systems needs careful assessment. The increase in
omnidirectional free space path loss with higher frequencies
due to Friis’ Law [18], can be more than compensated by a
proportional increase in antenna gain with appropriate beam-
forming. We will, in fact, conﬁrm this property experimentally
below. However, a more signiﬁcant concern is that mmW
signals can be severely vulnerable to shadowing resulting in
outages, rapidly varying channel conditions and intermittent
connectivity. This issue is particularly concerning in cluttered,
urban deployments where coverage frequently requires non-
line-of-sight (NLOS) links.
In this paper, we use the measurements of mmW outdoor
cellular propagation [19]–[23] at 28 and 73 GHz in New York
City to derive in detail the ﬁrst statistical channel models that
can be used for proper mmW system evaluation. The models
are used to provide an initial assessment of the potential system
capacity and outage. The NYC location was selected since it is
representative of likely initial deployments of mmW cellular
systems due to the high user density. In addition, the urban
canyon environment provides a challenging test case for these
systems due to the difﬁculty in establishing line-of-sight (LOS)
links—a key concern for mmW cellular.
Although our earlier work has presented some initial analysis
of the data in [19]–[22], this work provides much more detailed
modeling necessary for cellular system evaluation. In particular,
we develop detailed models for the spatial characteristics of
the channel and outage probabilities. To obtain these models,
we present several new data analysis techniques. In particular,
we propose a clustering algorithm that identiﬁes the group of
paths in the angular domain from subsampled spatial measure-
ments. The clustering algorithm is based on a K-means method
with additional heuristics to determine the number of clusters.
0733-8716 © 2014 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution
requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1165
Statistical models are then derived for key cluster parameters
including the number of clusters, cluster angular spread and
path loss. For the inter-cluster power fractions, we propose a
probabilistic model with maximum likelihood (ML) parameter
estimation. In addition, while standard 3GPP models such as
[24], [25] use probabilistic LOS-NLOS models, we propose to
add a third state to explicitly model the possibility of outages.
The key ﬁndings from these models are as follows:
• The omnidirectional path loss is approximately 20 to
25 dB higher in the mmW frequencies relative to current
cellular frequencies in distances relevant for small cells.
However, due to the reduced wavelength, this loss can
be completely compensated by a proportional increase in
antenna gain with no increase in physical antenna size.
Thus, with appropriate beamforming, locations that are
not in outage will not experience any effective increase in
path loss and, in fact, the path loss may be decreased [26].
• Our measurements indicate that at many locations, energy
arrives in clusters from multiple distinct angular direc-
tions, presumably through different macro-level scattering
or reﬂection paths. Locations had up to four clusters,
with an average between two and three. The presence of
multiple clusters of paths implies the possibility of both
spatial multiplexing and diversity gains—see also [27].
• Applying the derived channel models to a standard cel-
lular evaluation framework such as [24], we predict that
mmW systems can offer at least an order of magnitude
increase in system capacity under reasonable assumptions
on abundant bandwidth and beamforming. For example,
we show that a hypothetical 1 GHz bandwidth TDD mmW
system with a 100 m cell radii can provide 25 times greater
cell throughout than industry reported numbers for a 20 +
20 MHz FDD LTE system with similar cell density.
Moreover, while the LTE capacity numbers included both
single and multi-user multi-input multi-output (MIMO),
our mmW capacity analysis did not include any spatial
multiplexing gains. We provide strong evidence that these
spatial multiplexing gains would be signiﬁcant and thus
the potential gains of mmW cellular are even larger.
• The system performance appears to be robust to outages
provided they are at levels similar or even a little worse
than the outages we observed in the NYC measurements.
This robustness to outage is very encouraging since out-
ages are one of the key concerns with mmW cellular. How-
ever, we also show that should outages be signiﬁcantly
worse than what we observed, the system performance,
particularly the cell edge rate, can be greatly impacted.
In addition to the measurement studies above, some of the
capacity analysis in this paper appeared in a conference version
[28]. The current work provides much more extensive modeling
of the channels, more detailed discussions of the beamforming
and MIMO characteristics and simulations of features such as
outage.
A. Prior Measurements
Particularly with the development of 60 GHz LAN and PAN
systems, mmW signals have been extensively characterized in
Fig. 1.
Image from [19] showing typical measurement locations in NYC at
28 GHz. Similar locations were used for 73 GHz.
indoor environments [29]–[35]. However, the propagation of
mmW signals in outdoor settings for micro- and picocellular
networks is relatively less understood. Due to the lack of actual
measured channel data, many earlier studies [4], [7], [36], [37]
have thus relied on either analytic models or commercial ray
tracing software with various reﬂection assumptions. Below,
we will compare our experimental results with some of these
models.
Also, measurements in Local Multipoint Distribution Sys-
tems at 28 GHz—the prior system most close to mmW
cellular—have been inconclusive: For example, a study [38]
found 80% coverage at ranges up to 1–2 km, while [39]
claimed that LOS connectivity would be required. Our own
previous studies at 38 GHz [40]–[44] found that relatively long-
range links (> 300 m) could be established. However, these
measurements were performed in an outdoor campus setting
with much lower building density and greater opportunities
for LOS connectivity than would be found in a typical urban
deployment.
II. MEASUREMENT METHODOLOGY
To assess mmW propagation in urban environments, our
team conducted extensive measurements of 28 and 73 GHz
channels in New York City. Details of the measurements can
be found in [19]–[21]. Both the 28 and 73 GHz are natural
candidates for early mmW deployments. The 28 GHz bands
were previously targeted for Local Multipoint Distribution Sys-
tems (LMDS) systems and are now an attractive opportunity
for initial deployments of mmW cellular given their relatively
lower frequency within the mmW range. The E-Band (71–
76 GHz and 81–86 GHz) [45] has abundant spectrum and is
adaptable for dense deployment, and could accommodate fur-
ther expansion should the lower frequencies become crowded.
To measure the channel characteristics in these frequencies,
we emulated microcellular type deployments where transmit-
ters were placed on rooftops 7 and 17 meters (approximately 2
to 5 stories) high and measurements were then made at a num-
ber of street level locations up to 500 m from the transmitters
(see Fig. 1). To characterize both the bulk path loss and spatial
structure of the channels, measurements were performed with
highly directional horn antennas (30 dBm RF power, 24.5 dBi
gain at both TX and RX sides, and ≈10◦beamwidths in both

1166
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
the vertical and horizontal planes provided by rotatable horn
antennas).
Since transmissions were always made from the rooftop
location to the street, in all the reported measurements below,
characteristics of the transmitter will be representative of the
base station (BS) and characteristics of the receiver will be
representative of a mobile, or user equipment (UE). At each
transmitter (TX)—receiver (RX) location pair, the azimuth
(horizontal) and elevation (vertical) angles of both the trans-
mitter and receiver were swept to ﬁrst ﬁnd the direction of the
maximal receive power. After this point, power measurements
were then made at various angular offsets from the strongest
angular locations. In particular, the horizontal angles at both
the TX and RX were swept in 10◦steps from 0 to 360◦. Vertical
angles were also sampled, typically within a ±20◦range from
the horizon in the vertical plane. At each angular sampling
point, the channel sounder was used to detect any signal paths.
To reject noise, only paths that exceeded a 5 dB SNR threshold
were included in the power-delay proﬁle (PDP). Since the
channel sounder has a processing gain of 30 dB, only extremely
weak paths would not be detected in this system—See [19]–
[21] for more details. The power at each angular location is the
sum of received powers across all delays (i.e., the sum of the
PDP). A location would be considered in outage if there were
no detected paths across all angular measurements.
III. CHANNEL MODELING AND PARAMETER ESTIMATION
A. Distance-Based Path Loss
We ﬁrst estimated the total omnidirectional path loss as a
function of the TX-RX distance. At each location that was not
in outage, the path loss was estimated as
PL = PT X −PRX + GT X + GRX,
(1)
where PT X is the total transmit power in dBm, PRX is the
total integrated receive power over all the angular directions
and GT X and GRX are the gains of the horn antennas. For this
experiment, PT X = 30 dBm and GT X = GRX = 24.5 dBi.
Note that the path loss (1) is obtained by subtracting the
antenna gains from power measured at every pointing angle at
a particular location, and summing the powers over all TX and
RX pointing angles as shown in [46], and thus (1) represents
the path loss as an isotropic (omnidirectional, unity antenna
gain) value i.e., the difference between the average transmit
and receive power seen assuming omnidirectional antennas at
the TX and RX. The path loss thus does not include any
beamforming gains obtained by directing the transmitter or
receiver correctly—we will discuss the beamforming gains in
detail below.
A scatter plot of the omnidirectional path losses at different
locations as a function of the TX-RX LOS distance is plotted
in Fig. 2. In the measurements in Section II, each location was
manually classiﬁed as either LOS, where the TX was visible to
the RX, or NLOS, where the TX was obstructed. In standard
cellular models such as [24], it is common to ﬁt the LOS and
NLOS path losses separately.
Fig. 2.
Scatter plot along with a linear ﬁt of the estimated omnidirectional
path losses as a function of the TX-RX separation for 28 and 73 GHz.
For the NLOS points, Fig. 2 plots a ﬁt using a standard linear
model,
PL(d) [dB] = α + β10 log10(d) + ξ,
ξ ∼N(0, σ2),
(2)
where d is the distance in meters, α and β are the least square
ﬁts of ﬂoating intercept and slope over the measured distances
(30 to 200 m), and σ2 is the lognormal shadowing variance.
The values of α, β and σ2 are shown in Table I. To assess
the accuracy of the parameter estimates, a standard Cramér-Rao
calculation for a linear least squares estimates (see, e.g., [47])
shows that the standard deviation in the median path loss due to
noise was < 2 dB over the range of tested distances.
Note that for fc = 73 GHz, there were two mobile antenna
heights in the experiments: 4.02 m (a typical backhaul receiver
height) and 2.0 m (a typical mobile height). The table provides
numbers for both a mixture of heights and for the mobile only
height. Unless otherwise stated, we will use the mobile only
height in all subsequent analysis.
For the LOS points, Fig. 2 shows that the theoretical free
space path loss from Friis’ Law [18] provides a good ﬁt for the
LOS points. The values for α and β predicted by Friis’ law and
the mean-squared error σ2 of the observed data from Friis’ Law
are shown in Table I.
We should note that these numbers differ somewhat with the
values reported in earlier work [19]–[21]. Those works ﬁt the
path loss to power measurements for small angular regions.
Here, we are ﬁtting the total power over all directions. Also,
note that a close-in free space reference path loss model with a
ﬁxed leverage point may also be used. Such a ﬁt is equivalent
to using the linear model (2) with the additional constraint that
α + β10 log10(d0) has some ﬁxed value for some given refer-
ence free space distance d0. The close-in free space reference
model is often better in that it accounts for true physical-based
models [9] and [26]. Work in [44] shows that since this close-in
free space model has one less free parameter, the model is less
sensitive to perturbations in data, with only a slightly greater
(e.g., 0.5 dB standard deviation) ﬁtting error. While the analysis
below will not use this ﬁxed leverage point model, we point
this out to caution against ascribing any physical meaning to

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1167
TABLE I
PROPOSED STATISTICAL MODEL FOR THE LARGE-SCALE PARAMETERS BASED ON THE NYC DATA IN [22]
the estimated values for α or β in (2), and understanding that
the values are somewhat sensitive to the data and should not be
used outside the tested distances.
B. Spatial Cluster Detection
To characterize the spatial pattern of the antenna, we follow
a standard model along the lines of the 3GPP/ITU MIMO
speciﬁcation [24], [25]. In the 3GPP/ITU MIMO model, the
channel is assumed to be composed of a random number K
of “path clusters”, each cluster corresponding to a macro-level
scattering path. Each path cluster is described by:
• A fraction of the total power;
• Central azimuth (horizontal) and elevation (vertical) an-
gles of departure and arrival;
• Angular beamspreads around those central angles; and
• An absolute propagation time group delay of the cluster
and power delay proﬁle around the group delay.
In this paper, we develop statistical models for the cluster
power fractions and angular/spatial characteristics. However,
we do not study temporal characteristics such as the relative
propagation times or the time delay proﬁles. Due to the nature
of the measurements, obtaining relative propagation times from
different angular directions requires further analysis and will
be subject of a forthcoming paper [48]. The models here are
thus only narrowband in that they do not account for frequency
selectivity or multipath propagation time delays.
To ﬁt the cluster model to our data, our ﬁrst step was to detect
the path clusters in the angular domain at each TX-RX location
pair. As described above in Section II, at each location pair, the
Fig. 3.
RX power angular proﬁle measured at a typical TX-RX location pair at
28 GHz. Colors represent the average RX power in dBm for the horizontal AoA
and AoD ranging from 0 to 360 degrees at vertical AoAs = 2 and 12 degrees.
For space, the AoA Horizontal axis is only labeled on the vertical AoA = 2
degree plot. White areas in either plot indicate angular offsets that were either
not measured, or had too low power to be validly detected. The circles represent
the detected path cluster centers from our path clustering algorithm. The path
centers are shown on the AoA Vertical = 2 degrees which was closest to the
estimated vertical AoA for those clusters.
RX power was measured at various angular offsets. Since there
are horizontal and vertical angles at both the transmitter and
receiver, the measurements can be interpreted as a sampling of
power measurements in a four-dimensional space.
A typical measured RX proﬁle is shown in Fig. 3. Due to
time limitations, it was impossible to measure the entire four-
dimensional angular space. Instead, at each location, only a

1168
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
subset of the angular offsets were measured. For example, in
the location depicted in Fig. 3, the RX power was measured
along two strips: one strip where the horizontal (azimuth) AoA
was swept from 0 to 360 with the horizontal AoD varying in
a 30 degree interval; and a second strip where the horizontal
AoA was constant and the horizontal AoD was varied from 0 to
360. Two different values for the vertical (elevation) AoA were
taken—the power measurements in each vertical AoA shown in
different subplots in Fig. 3. The vertical AoD was kept constant
since there was less angular dispersion in that dimension. This
measurement pattern was fairly typical, although in the 73 GHz
measurements, we measured more vertical AoA points.
The locations in white in Fig. 3 represent angular points
where either the power was not measured, or the insufﬁcient
signal power was detected. Sufﬁcient receive power to consti-
tute a valid measurement was deﬁned as ﬁnding at least a single
path with 5 dB SNR above the thermal noise. The power in all
white locations was treated as zero. If no valid angular points
were detected for all angles at both TX and RX, the location
was considered to be in outage.
Detection of the spatial clusters amounts to ﬁnding regions in
the four-dimensional angular space where the received energy
is concentrated. This is a classic clustering problem, and for
each candidate number of clusters K, we used a standard
K-means clustering algorithm [49] to approximately ﬁnd K
clusters in the receive power domain with minimal angular dis-
persion. The K-means algorithm groups all the validly detected
angular points into one of K clusters. For channel modeling
in this paper, we use the algorithm to identify clusters with
minimal angular variance as weighted by the receive power.
The K-means algorithm performs this clustering by alternately
(i) identifying the power weighted centroid of each cluster
given a classiﬁcation of the angular points into clusters; and (ii)
updating the cluster identiﬁcation by associating each angular
point with its closest cluster center.
The clustering algorithm was run with increasing values
of K, stopping when either of the following conditions were
satisﬁed: (i) any two of the K detected clusters were within 2
standard deviations in all angular directions; or (ii) one of the
clusters was empty. In this way, we obtain at each location, an
estimate of the number of resolvable clusters K, their central
angles, root-mean-squared angular spreads, and receive power.
In the example location in Fig. 3, there were four detected clus-
ters. The centers are shown in the left plot in the blue circles.
C. Cluster Parameters
After detecting the clusters and the corresponding cluster
parameters, we ﬁt the following statistical models to the various
cluster features.
1) Number of Clusters: At the locations where a signal was
detected (i.e., not in outage), the number of estimated clusters
detected by our clustering algorithm, varied from 1 to 4. The
measured distribution is plotted in the bar graph in Fig. 4 in the
bars labeled “empirical”. Also, plotted is the distribution for a
random variable K of the form,
K ∼max {Poisson(λ), 1} ,
(3)
Fig. 4.
Distribution of the number of detected clusters at 28 and 73 GHz.
The measured distribution is labeled ‘Empirical’, which matches a Poisson
distribution (3) well.
where λ set to empirical mean of K. It can be seen that this
Poisson-max distribution is a good ﬁt to the true number of
detected clusters, particularly for 28 GHz.
2) Cluster Power Fraction: A critical component in the
model is the distribution of power among the clusters. In the
3GPP model [24, Section B.1.2.2.1], the cluster power fractions
are modeled as follows: First, each cluster k has an absolute
group delay, τk, that is assumed to be exponentially distributed.
Therefore, we can write τk as
τk = −rτστ log Uk
(4)
for a uniform random variable Uk ∼U[0, 1] and constants rτ
and στ. The cluster k is assumed to have a power that scales by
γ′
k = exp

τk
rτ −1
στrτ

10−0.1Zk,
Zk ∼N(0, ζ2),
(5)
where the ﬁrst term in the product places an exponential decay
in the cluster power with the delay τk, and the second term
accounts for lognormal variations in the per cluster power with
some variance ζ2. The ﬁnal power fractions for the different
clusters are then found by normalizing the values in (5) to unity,
so that the fraction of power in k-th cluster is given by
γk =
γ′
k
K
j=1 γ′
j
.
(6)
In the measurements in this study, we do not know the
relative propagation delays τk of the different clusters, so we
treat them as unknown latent variables (In subsequent work [48]
we have solved this problem and estimated the relative delays
between clusters). Substituting (4) into (5), we obtain
γ′
k =U rτ −1
k
10−0.1Zk,
Uk ∼U[0, 1],
Zk ∼N(0, ζ2).
(7)
The constants rτ and ζ2 can then be treated as model param-
eters. Note that the lognormal variations Zk in the per cluster
power fractions (7) are distinct from the lognormal variations
in total omnidirectional path loss (2).

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1169
Fig. 5.
Distribution of the fraction of power in the weaker cluster, when
K = 2 clusters were detected. Plotted are the measured distributions and the
best ﬁt of the theoretical model in (6) and (7).
For the mmW data, Fig. 5 shows the distribution of the
fraction of power in the weaker cluster in the case when
K = 2 clusters were detected. Also, plotted is the theoretical
distribution based on (6) and (7) where the parameters rτ and
ζ2 were ﬁt via an approximate maximum likelihood method.
Since the measurement data we have does not have the relative
delays of the different clusters we treat the variable Uk in (6)
as an unknown latent variable, adding to the variation in the
cluster power distributions. The estimated ML parameters are
shown in Table I, with the values in 28 and 73 GHz being very
similar.
We see that the 3GPP model with the ML parameter selection
provides an excellent ﬁt for the observed power fraction for
clusters with more than 10% of the energy. The model is likely
not ﬁtting the very low energy clusters since our cluster detec-
tion is likely unable to ﬁnd those clusters. However, for cases
where the clusters have signiﬁcant power, the model appears
accurate. Also, since there were very few locations where the
number of clusters was K ≥3, we only ﬁt the parameters based
on the K = 2 case. In the simulations below, we will assume
the model is valid for all K.
3) Angular Dispersion: For each detected cluster, we mea-
sured the root mean-squared (rms) beamspread in the different
angular dimensions. In the angular spread estimation in each
cluster, we excluded power measurements from the lowest
10% of the total cluster power. This clipping introduces a
small bias in the angular spread estimate. Although these low
power points correspond to valid signals (as described above,
all power measurements were only admitted into the data set
if the signals were received with a minimum power level),
the clipping reduced the sensitivity to misclassiﬁcations of
points at the cluster boundaries. The distribution of the angular
spreads at 28 GHz computed in this manner is shown in
Fig. 6. Based on [50], we have also plotted an exponential
distribution with the same empirical mean. We see that the
exponential distribution provides a good ﬁt of the data. Similar
distributions were observed at 73 GHz, although they are not
plotted here.
Fig. 6.
Distribution of the rms angular spreads in the horizontal (azimuth)
AoA and AoDs. Also, plotted is an exponential distribution with the same
empirical mean.
D. LOS, NLOS, and Outage Probabilities
Up to now, all the model parameters were based on locations
not on outage. That is, there was some power detected in at least
one delay in one angular location—See Section II. However,
in many locations, particularly locations > 200 m from the
transmitter, it was simply impossible to detect any signal with
transmit powers between 15 and 30 dBm. This outage is likely
due to environmental obstructions that occlude all paths (either
via reﬂections or scattering) to the receiver. The presence of
outage in this manner is perhaps the most signiﬁcant difference
moving from conventional microwave/UHF to millimeter wave
frequencies, and requires accurate modeling to properly assess
system performance.
Current 3GPP evaluation methodologies such as [24] gener-
ally use a statistical model where each link is in either a LOS
or NLOS state, with the probability of being in either state
being some function of the distance. The path loss and other
link characteristics are then a function of the link state, with
potentially different models in the LOS and NLOS conditions.
Outage occurs implicitly when the path loss in either the LOS
or NLOS state is sufﬁciently large.
For mmW systems, we propose to add an additional state,
so that each link can be in one of three conditions: LOS,
NLOS or outage. In the outage condition, we assume there
is no link between the TX and RX—that is, the path loss is
inﬁnite. By adding this third state with a random probability
for a complete loss, the model provides a better reﬂection of
outage possibilities inherent in mmW. As a statistical model, we
assume probability functions for the three states are of the form:
pout(d) = max(0, 1 −e−aoutd+bout)
(8a)
pLOS(d) = (1 −pout(d)) e−alosd
(8b)
pNLOS(d) = 1 −pout(d) −pLOS(d)
(8c)
where the parameters alos, aout and bout are parameters that are
ﬁt from the data. The outage probability model (8a) is similar
in form to the 3GPP suburban relay-UE NLOS model [24].

1170
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
Fig. 7.
The ﬁtted curves and the empirical values of pLOS(d), pNLOS(d),
and pout(d) as a function of the distance d. Measurement data is based on 42
TX-RX location pairs with distances from 30 m to 420 m at 28 GHz.
The form for the LOS probability (8b) can be derived on the
basis of random shape theory arguments [51]; see also [52] for
a discussion of outage modeling and its effect on capacity.
The parameters in the models were ﬁt based on maximum
likelihood estimation from the 42 TX-RX location pairs in the
28 GHz measurements in [23], [53]. We assumed that the same
probabilities held for the 73 GHz. The values are shown in
Table I. Fig. 7 shows the fractions of points that were observed
to be in each of the three states—outage, NLOS and LOS.
Also, plotted are the probability functions in (8) with the ML
estimated parameter values. It can be seen that the probabilities
provide an excellent ﬁt.
That being said, caution should be exercised in generalizing
these particular parameter values to other scenarios. Outage
conditions are highly environmentally dependent, and further
study is likely needed to ﬁnd parameters that are valid across
a range of circumstances. Nonetheless, we believe that the
experiments illustrate that a three state model with an explicit
outage state can provide a better description for variability in
mmW link conditions. Below, we will assess the sensitivity of
the model parameters to the link state assumptions.
E. Small-Scale Fading Simulation
The statistical models and parameters are summarized
in Table I. These parameters all represent large-scale fad-
ing characteristics, meaning they are parameters associated
with the macro-scattering environment and change relatively
slowly [18].
One can generate a random narrowband time-varying chan-
nel gain matrix for these parameters following a similar pro-
cedure as the 3GPP/ITU model [24], [25] as follows: First, we
generate random realizations of all the large-scale parameters in
Table I including the distance-based omni path loss, the number
of clusters K, their power fractions, central angles and angular
beamspreads. For the small-scale fading model, each of the K
path clusters can then be synthesized with a large number, say
L = 20, of subpaths. Each subpath will have horizontal and
vertical AoAs, θrx
kℓ, φrx
kℓ, and horizontal and vertical AoDs, θtx
kℓ,
φtx
kℓ, where k = 1, . . . , K is the cluster index and ℓ= 1, . . . , L
is the subpath index within the cluster. These angles can be
generated as wrapped Gaussians around the cluster central
angles with standard deviation given by the rms angular spreads
for the cluster. Then, if there are nrx RX antennas and ntx TX
antennas, the narrowband time-varying channel gain between a
TX-RX pair can be represented by a matrix (see, for example,
[54] for more details):
H(t)= 1
√
L
K

k=1
L

ℓ=1
gkℓ(t)urx

θrx
kℓ, φtx
kℓ

u∗
tx

θtx
kℓ, φtx
kℓ

,
(9)
where gkℓ(t) is the complex small-scale fading gain on the ℓ-th
subpath of the kth cluster and urx(·) ∈Cnrx and utx(·) ∈Cntx
are the vector response functions for the RX and TX antenna
arrays to the angular arrivals and departures. The small-scale
coefﬁcients would be given by
gkℓ(t)=¯gkℓe2πitfd max cos(ωkℓ),
¯gkℓ∼CN(0, γk10−0.1P L),
where fd max is the maximum Doppler shift, ωkℓis the angle
of arrival of the subpath relative to the direction of motion
and PL is the omnidirectional path loss. The relation between
ωkℓand the angular arrivals θrx
kℓand φrx
kℓwill depend on the
orientation of the mobile RX array relative to the motion. Note
that the model (9) is only a narrowband model since we have
not yet characterized the delay spread. As mentioned above, a
wideband statistical model has been developed in subsequent
work [48] for 28 GHz.
IV. COMPARISON TO 3GPP CELLULAR MODELS
A. Path Loss Comparison
It is useful to brieﬂy compare the distance-based path loss
we observed for mmW signals with models for conventional
cellular systems. To this end, Fig. 8 plots the median effective
total path loss as a function of distance for several different
models:
• Empirical NYC: These curves are the omnidirectional path
loss predicted by our linear model (2). Plotted is the
median path loss
PL(d) [dB] = α + 10β log10(d),
(10)
where d is the distance and the α and β parameters are the
NLOS values in Table I. For 73 GHz, we have plotted the
2.0 m UE height values.
• Free space: The theoretical free space path loss is given
by Friis’ Law [18]. We see that, at d = 100 m, the free
space path loss is approximately 30 dB less than the
model we have experimentally measured for both LOS
and NLOS channels in New York City. Thus, many of the
works such as [7], [36] that assume free space propagation
may be somewhat optimistic in their capacity predictions.
Also, it is interesting to point out that one of the models
assumed in the Samsung study [4] (PLF1) is precisely free
space propagation +20 dB—a correction factor that is also
somewhat more optimistic than our experimental ﬁndings.

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1171
Fig. 8.
Comparison of distance-based path loss models. The curves labeled
“Empirical NYC” are the mmW models derived in this paper for 28 and
73 GHz. These are compared to free space propagation for the same frequencies
and 3GPP Urban Micro (UMi) model for 2.5 GHz.
• 3GPP UMi: The standard 3GPP urban micro (UMi) path
loss model with hexagonal deployments [24] is given by
PL(d) [dB] = 22.7 + 36.7 log10(d) + 26 log10(fc),
(11)
where d is distance in meters and fc is the carrier fre-
quency in GHz. Fig. 8 plots this path loss model at
fc = 2.5 GHz. We see that our propagation models at
both 28 and 73 GHz predict omnidirectional path losses
that, for most of the distances, are approximately 20 to
25 dB higher than the 3GPP UMi model at 2.5 GHz.
However, since the wavelengths at 28 and 73 GHz are
approximately 10 to 30 times smaller, this path loss can
be entirely compensated with sufﬁcient beamforming on
either the transmitter or receiver with the same physical
antenna size. Moreover, if beamforming is applied on both
ends, the effective path loss can be even lower in the
mmW range. We conclude that, barring outage events and
maintaining the same physical antenna size, mmW signals
do not imply any reduction in path loss relative to current
cellular frequencies, and in fact, can be improved over
today’s systems [26].
B. Spatial Characteristics
We next compare the spatial characteristics of the mmW
and microwave models. To this end, we can compare the
experimentally derived mmW parameters in Table I with those,
for example, in [24, Table B.1.2.2.1-4] for the 3GPP urban mi-
crocell model—the layout that would be closest to future mmW
deployments. We immediately see that the angular spread of
the clusters are similar in the mmW and 3GPP UMi models.
While the 3GPP UMi model has somewhat more clusters, it
is possible that multiple distinct clusters were present in the
mmW scenario, but were not visible since we did not perform
any temporal analysis of the data. That is, in our clustering
algorithm above, we group power from different time delays
together in each angular offset.
Another interesting comparison is the delay scaling parame-
ter, rτ, which governs how relative propagation delays between
clusters affects their power faction. Table I shows values of rτ
of 2.8 and 3.0, which are in the same range as the values in
the 3GPP UMi model [24, Table B.1.2.2.1-4] suggesting that
the power delay may be similar. This property would, however,
require further conﬁrmation with actual relative propagation
delays between clusters.
C. Outage Probability
One ﬁnal difference that should be noted is the outage proba-
bility. In the standard 3GPP models, the event that a channel
is completely obstructed is not explicitly modeled. Instead,
channel variations are accounted for by lognormal shadowing
along with, in certain models, wall and other obstruction losses.
However, we see in our experimental measurements that chan-
nels in the mmW range can experience much more signiﬁcant
blockages that are not well-modeled via these more gradual
terms. We will quantify the effects of the outages on the system
capacity below.
V. CHANNEL SPATIAL CHARACTERISTICS
AND MIMO GAINS
A signiﬁcant gain for mmW systems derives from the ca-
pability of high-dimensional beamforming. Current technol-
ogy can easily support antenna arrays with 32 elements and
higher [6], [10]–[17]. Although our simulations below will
assess the precise beamforming gains in a micro-cellular type
deployment, it is useful to ﬁrst consider some simple spatial
statistics of the channel to qualitatively understand how large
the beamforming gains may be and how they can be practically
achieved.
A. Beamforming in Millimeter Wave Frequencies
However, before examining the channel statistics, we need
to point out two unique aspects of beamforming and spatial
multiplexing in the mmW range. First, a full digital front-end
with high resolution A/D converters on each antenna across
the wide bandwidths of mmW systems may be prohibitive in
terms of cost and power, particularly for mobile devices [4]–
[6], [55]. Most commercial designs have thus assumed phased-
array architectures where signals are combined either in RF
with phase shifters [56]–[58] or at IF [59]–[61] prior to the
A/D conversion. While greatly reducing the front-end power
consumption, this architecture may limit the number of separate
spatial streams that can be processed since each spatial stream
will require a separate phased-array and associated RF chain.
Such limitations will be particularly important at the UE.
A second issue is the channel coherence: due to the high
Doppler frequency it may not be feasible to maintain the chan-
nel state information (CSI) at the transmitter, even in TDD. In
addition, full CSI at the receiver may also not be available since
the beamforming must be applied in analog and hence the beam
may need to be selected without separate digital measurements
on the channels on different antennas.

1172
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
B. Instantaneous vs. Long-Term Beamforming
Under the above constraints, we begin by trying to assess
what the rough gains we can expect from beamforming are
as follows: Suppose that the transmitter and receiver apply
complex beamforming vectors vtx ∈Cntx and vrx ∈Cnrx,
respectively. We will assume these vectors are normalized to
unity: ∥vtx∥= ∥vrx∥= 1. Applying these beamforming vec-
tors will reduce the MIMO channel H in (9) to an effective
SISO channel with gain given by
G(vtx, vrx, H) = |v∗
rxHvtx|2 .
The maximum value for this gain would be
Ginst(H) =
max
∥vtx∥=∥vrx∥=1 G(vtx, vrx, H),
and is found from the left and right singular vectors of H. We
can evaluate the average value of this gain as a ratio:
BFGaininst := 10 log10
EGinst(H)
Gomni

,
(12)
where we have compared the gain with beamforming to the
omnidirectional gain
Gomni :=
1
nrxntx
E∥H∥2
F ,
(13)
and the expectations in (12) and (13) can be taken over the small
scale fading parameters in (9), holding the large-scale fading
parameters constant. The ratio (12) represents the maximum
increase in the gain (effective decrease in path loss) from
optimally steering the TX and RX beamforming vectors. It is
easily veriﬁed that this gain is bounded by
BFGaininst ≤10 log10(nrxntx),
(14)
with equality when H in (9) is rank one—that is, there is no
angular dispersion and the energy is concentrated in a single
direction. In mmW systems, if the gain bound (14) can be
achieved, the gain would be large: for example, if ntx = 64 and
nrx = 16, the maximum gain in (14) is 10 log10((64)(16)) ≈
30 dB. We call the gain in (12) the instantaneous gain since it
represents the gain when the TX and RX beamforming vectors
can be selected based on the instantaneous small-scale fading
realization of the channel, and thus requires CSI at both the TX
and RX. As described above, such instantaneous beamforming
may not be feasible.
We therefore consider an alternative and more conservative
approach known as long-term beamforming as described in
[62]. In long-term beamforming, the TX and RX adapt the
beamforming vectors to the large-scale parameters (which are
relatively slowly varying) but not the small-scale ones. One
approach is to simply align the TX and RX beamforming direc-
tions to the maximal eigenvectors of the covariance matrices,
Qrx := E[HH∗],
Qtx := E[H∗H],
(15)
where the expectations are taken with respect to the small-
scale fading parameters assuming the large-scale parameters
are constant. Since the small-scale fading is averaged out, these
covariance matrices are coherent over much longer periods of
time and can be estimated much more accurately.
When the beamforming vectors are held constant over the
small-scale fading, we obtain a SISO Rayleigh fading channel
with an average gain of EG(vtx, vrx, H), where the expecta-
tion is again taken over the small-scale fading. We can deﬁne
the long-term beamforming gain as the ratio between the av-
erage gain with beamforming and the average omnidirectional
gain in (13),
BFGainlong = 10 log10
EG(vtx, vrx, H)
Gomni

,
(16)
where the beamforming vectors vtx and vrx are selected
from the maximal eigenvectors of the covariance matrices Qrx
and Qtx.
The long-term beamforming gain (16) will be less than the
instantaneous gain (12). To simplify the calculations, we can
approximately evaluate the long-term beamforming gain (16),
assuming a well-known Kronecker model [63], [64],
H ≈
1
Tr(Qrx)Q1/2
rx PQ1/2
tx ,
(17)
where P is an i.i.d. matrix with complex Gaussian zero mean,
unit variance components. Under this approximate model, it is
easy to verify that the gain (16) is given by the sum
BFGainlong ≈BFGainT X + BFGainRX,
(18)
where the RX and TX beamforming gains are given by
BFGainRX = 10 log10

λmax(Qrx)
(1/nrx) 
i λi(Qrx)

(19a)
BFGainT X = 10 log10

λmax(Qtx)
(1/ntx) 
i λi(Qtx)

,
(19b)
where λi(Q) is the ith eigenvalue of Q and λmax(Q) is the
maximal eigenvalue.
Fig. 9 plots the distributions of the long-term beamforming
gains for the UE and BS using the experimentally-derived chan-
nel model for 28 GHz along with (19) (Note that BFGainRX
and BFGainT X can be used for either the BS or UE—the
gains are the same in either direction). In this ﬁgure, we have
assumed a half-wavelength 8 × 8 uniform planar array at the
BS transmitter and 4 × 4 uniform planar array at the UE re-
ceiver. The beamforming gains are random quantities since they
depend on the large-scale channel parameters. The distribution
of the beamforming gains at the TX and RX along the serving
links are shown in Fig. 9 in the curves labeled “Serving links”.
Since we have assumed nrx = 42 = 16 antennas and ntx =
82 = 64 antennas, the maximum beamforming gains possible
would be 12 and 18 dB, respectively, and we see that long-
term beamforming is typically able to get within 2–3 dB of this
maximum. The average gain for instantaneous beamforming
will be somewhere between the long-term beamforming curve
and the maximum value, so we conclude that loss from long-
term beamforming with respect to instantaneous beamforming
is typically bounded by 2–3 dB at most.
Also, plotted in Fig. 9 is the distribution of the typical
gain along an interfering link. This interfering gain provides a

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1173
Fig. 9.
Distributions of the BS and UE long-term beamforming gains on
serving and interfering links based on the 28 GHz models. Interfering link
gain is computed by independent selection of possible channel and possible
beamforming vector.
measure of how directionally isolated a typical interferer will
be. The gain is estimated by selecting the beamforming direc-
tion from a typical second-order matrix Qrx or Qtx and then
applying that beamforming direction onto a random second-
order gain with the same elevation angles. The same elevation
angles are used since the BSs will likely have the same height.
We see that the beamforming gains along these interfering
directions is signiﬁcantly lower. The median interfering beam-
forming gain is approximately 6 dB lower in the RX and 9 dB
in the TX. This difference in gains suggests that beamforming
in mmW systems will be very effective in achieving a high level
of directional isolation.
Although the plots were shown for 28 GHz, very similar
curves were observed at 73 GHz.
C. Spatial Degrees of Freedom
A second useful statistic to analyze is the typical rank of
the channel. The fact that we observed multiple path clusters
between each TX-RX location pair indicates the possibility of
gains from spatial multiplexing [54]. To assess the amount of
energy in multiple spatial streams, deﬁne
φ(r) :=
1
E∥H∥2
F
max
Vrx,Vtx E ∥V∗
rxHVtx∥2
F ,
where the maximum is over matrices Vrx ∈Cnrx×r and Vtx ∈
Cntx×r with V∗
rxVrx = Ir and V∗
txVtx = Ir. The quantity
φ(r) represents the fraction of energy that can be captured by
precoding onto an optimal r-dimensional subspace at both the
RX and TX. Under the Kronecker model approximation (17),
a simple calculation shows that this power fraction is given by
the r largest eigenvalues,
φ(r) =
r
i=1 λi(Qrx)
nrx
i=1 λi(Qrx)
 r
i=1 λi(Qtx)
ntx
i=1 λi(Qtx)

,
where Qrx and Qtx are the spatial covariance matrices (15)
and λi(Q) is the ith largest eigenvalue of Q. Since the power
Fig. 10.
Distribution of the energy fraction in r spatial directions for the
28 GHz channel model.
fraction is dependent on the second-order, long-term channel
statistics, it is a random variable. Fig. 10 plots the distribution
of φ(r) for values r = 1, . . . , 4 for the experimentally-derived
28 GHz channel model. The power fractions for the 73 GHz are
not plotted, but are similar.
If the channel had no angular dispersion per cluster, then
Qrx and Qtx would have rank one and all the energy could be
captured with one spatial dimension, i.e., φ(r) = 1 with r = 1.
However, since the channels have possibly multiple clusters
and the clusters have a non-zero angular dispersion, we see
that there is signiﬁcant energy in higher spatial dimensions. For
example, Fig. 10 shows that in the median channel, a single
spatial dimension is only able to capture approximately 50% of
the channel energy. Two degrees of freedom are needed in order
to capture 80% of the channel energy and three dimensions are
needed for 95%. These numbers suggest that many locations
will be capable of providing single-user MIMO gains with two
and even three streams. Note that further spatial degrees of
freedom are possible with multi-user MIMO beyond the rank
of the channel to any one user.
VI. CAPACITY EVALUATION
A. System Model
To assess the system capacity under the experimentally-
measured channel models, we follow a standard cellular evalu-
ation methodology [24] where the BSs and UEs are randomly
“dropped” according to some statistical model and the perfor-
mance metrics are then measured over a number of random
realizations of the network. Since we are interested in small
cell networks, we follow a BS and UE distribution similar to the
3GPP Urban Micro (UMi) model in [24] with some parameters
taken from the Samsung mmW study [4], [5]. The speciﬁc
parameters are shown in Table II. Similar to 3GPP UMi model,
the BS cell sites are distributed in a uniform hexagonal pattern
with three cells (sectors) per site covering a 2 km by 2 km area
with an inter-site distance (ISD) of 200 m. This layout leads to
130 cell sites (390 cells) per drop. UEs are uniformly distributed
over the area at a density of 10 UEs per cell—which also
matches the 3GPP UMi assumptions. The maximum transmit

1174
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
TABLE II
DEFAULT NETWORK PARAMETERS
power of 20 dBm at the UE and 30 dBm are taken from [4], [5].
Note that since our channel models were based on data from
receivers in outdoor locations, implicit in our model is that all
users are outdoors. If we included mobiles that were indoor, it
is likely that the capacity numbers would be signiﬁcantly lower
since mmW signals cannot penetrate many building materials.
These transmit powers are reasonable since current CMOS
RF power ampliﬁers in the mmW range exhibit peak efﬁcien-
cies of at least 8% [65], [66]. This implies that the UE TX power
of 20 dBm and BS TX power of 30 dBm can be achieved with
powers of 1.25 W and 12.5 W, respectively.
B. Beamforming Modeling
Although our preliminary calculations in Section V-C sug-
gest that the channel may support spatial multiplexing, we
consider only single stream processing where the RX and TX
beamforming is designed to maximize SNR without regard
to interference. That is, there is no interference nulling. It
is possible that more advanced techniques such as inter-cell
coordinated beamforming and MIMO spatial multiplexing [36],
[55] may offer further gains, particularly for mobiles close to
the cell. Indeed, as we saw in Section V-C, many UEs have
at least two signiﬁcant spatial degrees of freedom to support
single user MIMO. Multi-user MIMO and SDMA may offer
even greater opportunities for spatial multiplexing. However,
modeling of MIMO and SDMA, particularly under constraints
on the number of spatial streams requires further work and will
be studied in upcoming papers.
Under the assumption of single stream processing, the link
between each TX-RX pair can be modeled as an effective
single-input single-output (SISO) channel with an effective
path loss that accounts for the total power received on the
different path clusters between the TX and RX and the beam-
forming applied at both ends of the link. The beamforming gain
is assumed to follow the distributions derived in Section V-B.
C. MAC Layer Assumptions
Once the effective path losses are determined between all
TX-RX pairs, we can compute the average SINR at each
RX. The SINR in turn determines the rate per unit time and
bandwidth allocated to the mobile. In an actual cellular system,
the achieved rate (goodput) will depend on the average SNR
through a number of factors including the channel code per-
formance, channel quality indicator (CQI) reporting, rate adap-
tation and Hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) protocol.
In this paper, we abstract this process and assume a simpliﬁed,
but widely-used, model [67], where the spectral efﬁciency is
assumed to be given by the Shannon capacity with some loss Δ:
ρ = min

log2
	
1 + 100.1(SNR−Δ)
, ρmax

,
(20)
where ρ is the spectral efﬁciency in bps/Hz, the SNR and loss
factor Δ are in dB, and ρmax is the maximum spectral efﬁ-
ciency. Based on analysis of current LTE turbo codes, the paper
[67] suggests parameters Δ = 1.6 dB and ρmax = 4.8 bps/Hz.
Assuming similar codes can be used for a mmW system, we ap-
ply the same ρmax in this simulation, but increase Δ to 3 dB to
account for fading. This increase in Δ is necessary since the re-
sults in [67] are based on AWGN channels. The 1.4 dB increase
used here is consistent with results from link error prediction
methods such as [68]. Note that all rates stated in this paper do
not include the half duplex loss, which must be added depend-
ing on the UL-DL ratio. The one exception to this accounting is
the comparison in Section VI-D between mmW and LTE sys-
tems, where we explicitly assume a 50-50 UL-DL duty cycle.
For the uplink and downlink scheduling, we use proportional
fair scheduling with full buffer trafﬁc. Since we assume that
we cannot exploit multi-user diversity and only schedule on the
average channel conditions, the proportional fair assumption
implies that each UE will get an equal fraction of the time-
frequency resources. In the uplink, we will additionally assume
that the multiple access scheme enables multiple UEs to be
scheduled at the same time. In OFDMA systems such as LTE,
this can be enabled by scheduling the UEs on different resource
blocks. Enabling multiple UEs to transmit at the same time
provides a signiﬁcant power boost. However, supporting such
multiple access also requires that the BS can receive multi-
ple simultaneous beams. As mentioned above, such reception
would require multiple RF chains at the BS, which will add
some complexity and power consumption. Note, however, that
all processing in this study, requires only single streams at the
mobile, which is the node that is more constrained in terms of
processing power.
D. Uplink and Downlink Throughput
We plot SINR and rate distributions in Figs. 11 and 12,
respectively. The distributions are plotted for both 28 and
73 GHz and for 4 × 4 and 8 × 8 arrays at the UE. The BS
antenna array is held at 8 × 8 for all cases. There are a few
important observations we can make.
First, for the same number of antenna elements, the cell-
edge rates for 73 GHz are approximately half the ones for the
28 GHz for the same number of antenna elements. However, a

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1175
Fig. 11.
Downlink (top plot)/uplink (bottom plot) SINR CDF at 28 and
73 GHz with 4 × 4 and 8 × 8 antenna arrays at the UE. The BS antenna array
is held at 8 × 8.
4 × 4 λ/2-array at 28 GHz would take about the same area as
an 8 × 8 λ/2 array at 73 GHz. Both would be roughly 1.5 ×
1.5 cm2, which could be easily accommodated in a handheld
mobile device. In addition, we see that 73 GHz 8 × 8 rate and
SNR distributions are very close to the 28 GHz 4 × 4 distri-
butions, which is reasonable since we are keeping the antenna
size constant. Thus, we can conclude that the loss from going to
the higher frequencies can be made up from larger numbers of
antenna elements without increasing the physical antenna area.
As a second point, we can compare the SINR distributions
in Fig. 11 to those of a traditional cellular network. Although
the SINR distribution for a cellular network at a traditional fre-
quency is not plotted here, the SINR distributions in Fig. 11 are
actually slightly better than those found in cellular evaluation
studies [24]. For example, in Fig. 11, only about 5 to 10% of
the mobiles appear under 0 dB, which is a lower fraction than
typical cellular deployments. We conclude that, although mmW
systems have an omnidirectional path loss that is 20 to 25 dB
worse than conventional microwave frequencies, short cell radii
combined with highly directional beams are able to completely
compensate for the loss.
As one ﬁnal point, Table III provides a comparison of
mmW and current LTE systems. The LTE capacity numbers
Fig. 12.
Downlink (top plot)/uplink (bottom plot) rate CDF at 28 and 73 GHz
with 4 × 4 and 8 × 8 antenna arrays at the UE. The BS antenna array is held
at 8 × 8.
are taken from the average of industry reported evaluations
given in [24]—speciﬁcally Table 10.1.1.1-1 for the downlink
and Table 1.1.1.3-1 for the uplink. The LTE evaluations include
advanced techniques such as SDMA, although not coordinated
multipoint. For the mmW capacity, we assumed 50-50 UL-DL
TDD split and a 20% control overhead in both the UL and
DL directions. Note that in the spectral efﬁciency numbers for
the mmW system, we have included the 20% overhead, but
not the 50% UL-DL split. Hence, the cell throughput is given
by C = 0.5ρW, where ρ is the spectral efﬁciency, W is the
bandwidth, and the 0.5 accounts for the duplexing.
Under these assumptions, we see that the mmW system for
either the 28 GHz 4 × 4 array or 73 GHz 8 × 8 array provides
a signiﬁcant > 25-fold increase of overall cell throughput over
the LTE system. Of course, most of the gains are simply coming
from the increased spectrum: the operating bandwidth of mmW
is chosen as 1 GHz as opposed to 20 + 20 MHz in LTE—so
the mmW system has 25 times more bandwidth. However, this
is a basic mmW system with no spatial multiplexing or other
advanced techniques—we expect even higher gains when ad-
vanced technologies are applied to optimize the mmW system.
While the lowest 5% cell edge rates are less dramatic, they still
offer a 10 to 13 fold increase over the LTE cell edge rates.

1176
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
TABLE III
mmW AND LTE CELL THROUGHPUT/CELL EDGE RATE COMPARISON
E. Directional Isolation
In addition to the links being in a relatively high SINR, an
interesting feature of mmW systems is that thermal noise domi-
nates interference. Although the distribution of the interference
to noise ratio is not plotted, we observed that in 90% of the
links, thermal noise was larger than the interference—often dra-
matically so. We conclude that highly directional transmissions
used in mmW systems combined with short cell radii result in
links that are in relatively high SINR with little interference.
This feature is in stark contrast to current dense cellular deploy-
ments where links are overwhelmingly interference-dominated.
F. Effect of Outage
One of the signiﬁcant features of mmW systems is the
presence of outage—the fact that there is a non-zero probability
that the signal from a given BS can be completely blocked
and hence not detectable. The parameters in the hybrid LOS-
NLOS-outage model (8) were based on our data in one region
of NYC. To understand the potential effects of different outage
conditions, Fig. 13 shows the distribution of rates under vari-
ous NLOS-LOS-outage probability models. The curve labeled
“hybrid, dshift = 0” is the baseline model with parameters
provided in Table I that we have used up to now. These are
the parameters based on ﬁtting the NYC data. This model is
compared to two models with heavier outage created by shifting
pout(d) to the left by 50 m and 75 m, shown in the second
and third curves. The fourth curve labeled “NLOS + outage,
dshift = 50 m” uses the shifted outage and also removes all
the LOS links—hence all the links are either in an outage or
NLOS state. In all cases, the carrier frequency is 28 GHz and
we assumed a 4 × 4 antenna array at the UE. Similar ﬁndings
were observed at 73 GHz and 8 × 8 arrays.
We see that, even with a 50 m shift in the outage curve (i.e.,
making the outages occur 50 m closer than predicted by our
model), the system performance is not signiﬁcantly affected.
However, when we increase the outage even more by dshift =
75 m, we start to see that many UEs cannot establish a con-
Fig. 13.
Downlink (top plot)/uplink (bottom plot) rate CDF under the link
state model with various parameters. The carrier frequency is 28 GHz. dshift is
the amount by which the outage curve in (8a) is shifted to the left.
nection to any BS since the outage radius becomes comparable
to the cell radius, which is 100 m. In other words, there is a
non-zero probability that mobiles physically close to a cell may
be in outage to that cell. These mobiles will need to connect

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1177
to a much more distant cell. Therefore, we see the dramatic
decrease in edge cell rate. Note that in our model, the front-to-
back antenna gains are assumed to be inﬁnite, so mobiles that
are blocked to one sector of a cell site cannot see any other
sectors.
Fig. 13 also shows that the throughputs are greatly beneﬁted
by the presence of LOS links. Removing the LOS links so
that all links are in either a NLOS or outage states results
in a signiﬁcant drop in rate. However, even in this case, the
mmW system offers a greater than 20 fold increase in rate over
the current LTE system. It should be noted that the capacity
numbers reported in [9], which were based on an earlier version
of this paper, did not include any LOS links.
We conclude that, in environments with outages condition
similar to, or even somewhat worse than the NYC environment
where our experiments were conducted, the system will be
very robust to outages. This is extremely encouraging since
signal outage is one of the key concerns for the feasibility
of mmW cellular in urban environments. However, should
outages be dramatically worse than the scenarios in our exper-
iments (for example, if the outage radius is shifted by 75 m),
many mobiles will indeed lose connectivity even when they
are near a cell. In these circumstances, other techniques such
as relaying, denser cell placement or fallback to conventional
frequencies will likely be needed. Such “near cell” outage
will likely be present when mobiles are placed indoors, or
when humans holding the mobile device block the paths to
the cells. These factors were not considered in our mea-
surements, where receivers were placed at outdoor locations
with no obstructions near the cart containing the measurement
equipment.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have provided the ﬁrst detailed statistical mmW channel
models for several of the key channel parameters including
the path loss, spatial characteristics and outage probabilities.
The models are based on real experimental data collected in
New York City at 28 and 73 GHz. The models reveal that
signals at these frequencies can be detected at least 100 m to
200 m from the potential cell sites, even in absence of LOS
connectivity. In fact, through building reﬂections, signals at
many locations arrived with multiple path clusters to support
spatial multiplexing and diversity.
Simple statistical models, similar to those in current cellular
standards such as [24] provide a good ﬁt to the observations.
Cellular capacity evaluations based on these models predict
an order of magnitude increase in capacity over current state-
of-the-art 4G systems under reasonable assumptions on the
antennas, bandwidth and beamforming. These ﬁndings provide
strong evidence for the viability of small cell outdoor mmW
systems even in challenging urban canyon environments such
as New York City.
The most signiﬁcant caveat in our analysis is the fact that
the measurements, and the models derived from those mea-
surements, are based on outdoor street-level locations. Typical
urban cellular evaluations, however, place a large fraction of
mobiles indoors, where mmW signals will likely not penetrate.
Complete system evaluation with indoor mobiles will need
further study. Also, indoor locations and other coverage holes
may be served either via multihop relaying or fallback to
conventional microwave cells and further study will be needed
to quantify the performance of these systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to deeply thank several students
and colleagues for providing the path loss data [19]–[22] that
made this research possible: Yaniv Azar, Felix Gutierrez,
DuckDong Hwang, Rimma Mayzus, George MacCartney,
ShuaiNie,JocelynK.Schulz,KevinWang,GeorgeN.Wong,and
Hang Zhao. This work also beneﬁted signiﬁcantly from dis-
cussions with our industrial partners in the NYU WIRELESS
program including Samsung, Qualcomm, NSN, and Intel.
REFERENCES
[1] Cisco Visual Network Index: Global Mobile Trafﬁc Forecast Update,
Cisco, San Jose, CA, USA, 2013.
[2] “Trafﬁc and market data report,” Kista, Sweden, 2011.
[3] “MOBILE trafﬁc forecasts: 2010–2020 report,” in Proc. UMTS Forum
Rep., Zürich, Switzerland, 2011, vol. 44, pp. 1–92.
[4] F. Khan and Z. Pi, “Millimeter-wave Mobile Broadband (MMB): Un-
leashing 3–300 GHz spectrum,” in Proc. IEEE Sarnoff Symp., Mar. 2011,
pp. 1–6.
[5] F. Khan and Z. Pi, “An introduction to millimeter-wave mobile broadband
systems,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 101–107, Jun. 2011.
[6] T. S. Rappaport, J. N. Murdock, and F. Gutierrez, “State of the art in
60-GHz integrated circuits and systems for wireless communications,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 99, no. 8, pp. 1390–1436, Aug. 2011.
[7] P. Pietraski, D. Britz, A. Roy, R. Pragada, and G. Charlton, “Millimeter
wave and terahertz communications: Feasibility and challenges,” ZTE
Commun., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3–12, Dec. 2012.
[8] F. Boccardi, R. W. Heath, Jr., A. Lozano, T. L. Marzetta, and P. Popovski,
“Five disruptive technology directions for 5G,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 74–80, Feb. 2014.
[9] S. Rangan, T. S. Rappaport, and E. Erkip, “Millimeter-wave cellular wire-
less networks: Potentials and challenges,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 102, no. 3,
pp. 366–385, Mar. 2014.
[10] C. Doan, S. Emami, D. Sobel, A. Niknejad, and R. Brodersen, “Design
considerations for 60 GHz CMOS radios,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42,
no. 12, pp. 132–140, Dec. 2004.
[11] C. Doan, S. Emami, A. Niknejad, and R. Brodersen, “Millimeter-wave
CMOS design,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 144–155,
Jan. 2005.
[12] Y.-P. Zhang and D. Liu, “Antenna-on-chip and antenna-in-package solu-
tions to highly integrated millimeter-wave devices for wireless communi-
cations,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2830–2841,
Oct. 2009.
[13] F. Gutierrez, S. Agarwal, K. Parrish, and T. S. Rappaport, “On-chip inte-
grated antenna structures in CMOS for 60 GHz WPAN systems,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1367–1378, Oct. 2009.
[14] J. Nsenga, A. Bourdoux, and F. Horlin, “Mixed analog/digital beamform-
ing for 60 GHz MIMO frequency selective channels,” in Proc. IEEE ICC,
2010, pp. 1–6.
[15] S. Rajagopal, S. Abu-Surra, Z. Pi, and F. Khan, “Antenna array design for
multi-gbps mmwave mobile broadband communication,” in Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[16] K.-C. Huang and D. J. Edwards, Millimetre Wave Antennas for Gigabit
Wireless Communications: A Practical Guide to Design and Analysis in a
System Context.
Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2008.
[17] F. Rusek et al., “Scaling up MIMO: Opportunities and challenges with
very large arrays,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 40–60,
Jan. 2013.
[18] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice,
2nd ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
[19] Y. Azar et al., “28 GHz propagation measurements for outdoor cellular
communications using steerable beam antennas in New York City,” in
Proc. IEEE ICC, 2013, pp. 5143–5147.

1178
IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 32, NO. 6, JUNE 2014
[20] H. Zhao et al., “28 GHz millimeter wave cellular communication mea-
surements for reﬂection and penetration loss in and around buildings in
New York City,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, 2013, pp. 5163–5167.
[21] M. K. Samimi et al., “28 GHz angle of arrival and angle of departure anal-
ysis for outdoor cellular communications using steerable beam antennas
in New York City,” in Proc. IEEE VTC, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[22] T. S. Rappaport et al., “Millimeter wave mobile communications for 5G
cellular: It will work!” IEEE Access, vol. 1, pp. 335–349, May 2013.
[23] S. Sun and T. S. Rappaport, “Multi-beam antenna combining for
28 GHz cellular link improvement in urban environments,” in Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM, Atlanta, GA, USA, Dec. 2013, pp. 3859–3864.
[24] “Further advancements for E-UTRA physical layer aspects,” Sophia-
Antipolis, France, TR 36.814 (release 9), 2010.
[25] “M.2134: Requirements related to technical performance for IMT-
advanced radio interfaces,” Geneva, Switzerland, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[26] T. S. Rappaport, R. W. Heath, Jr., R. Daniels, and J. Murdock,
Millimeter Wave Wireless Communications.
Upper Saddle River, NJ,
USA: Prentice-Hall, 2015.
[27] A. Adhikary et al., “Joint spatial division and multiplexing for mm-wave
channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., to be published.
[28] M. R. Akdeniz, Y. Liu, S. Rangan, and E. Erkip, “Millimeter wave
picocellular system evaluation for urban deployments,” in Proc. IEEE
Globecom Workshops, Dec. 2013, pp. 105–110.
[29] T. Zwick, T. Beukema, and H. Nam, “Wideband channel sounder with
measurements and model for the 60 GHz indoor radio channel,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1266–1277, Jul. 2005.
[30] F. Giannetti, M. Luise, and R. Reggiannini, “Mobile and personal commu-
nications in 60 GHz band: A survey,” Wirelesss Pers. Commun., vol. 10,
no. 2, pp. 207–243, Jul. 1999.
[31] C. R. Anderson and T. S. Rappaport, “In-building wideband partition loss
measurements at 2.5 and 60 GHz,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 3,
no. 3, pp. 922–928, May 2004.
[32] P. Smulders and A. Wagemans, “Wideband indoor radio propagation mea-
surements at 58 GHz,” Electron. Lett., vol. 28, no. 13, pp. 1270–1272,
Jun. 1992.
[33] T. Manabe, Y. Miura, and T. Ihara, “Effects of antenna directiv-
ity and polarization on indoor multipath propagation characteristics at
60 GHz,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 441–448,
Apr. 1996.
[34] E. Ben-Dor, T. S. Rappaport, Y. Qiao, and S. J. Lauffenburger,
“Millimeter-wave 60 GHz outdoor and vehicle AOA propagation
measurements using a broadband channel sounder,” in Proc. IEEE
GLOBECOM, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[35] H. Xu, V. Kukshya, and T. S. Rappaport, “Spatial and temporal character-
istics of 60 GHz indoor channel,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 620–630, Apr. 2002.
[36] H. Zhang, S. Venkateswaran, and U. Madhow, “Channel modeling and
MIMO capacity for outdoor millimeter wave links,” in Proc. IEEE
WCNC, Apr. 2010, pp. 1–6.
[37] S. Akoum, O. E. Ayach, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Coverage and capacity
in mmWave cellular systems,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst.
Comput., Paciﬁc Grove, CA, USA, Nov. 2012, pp. 688–692.
[38] A. Elrefaie and M. Shakouri, “Propagation measurements at 28 GHz for
coverage evaluation of local multipoint distribution service,” in Proc.
Wireless Commun. Conf., Aug. 1997, pp. 12–17.
[39] S. Seidel and H. Arnold, “Propagation measurements at 28 GHz
to investigate the performance of Local Multipoint Distribution Ser-
vice (LMDS),” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Nov. 1995,
pp. 754–757.
[40] T. S. Rappaport et al., “Broadband millimeter-wave propagation mea-
surements and models using adaptive-beam antennas for outdoor urban
cellular communications,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 61, no. 4,
pp. 1850–1859, Apr. 2013.
[41] T. S. Rappaport, E. Ben-Dor, J. Murdock, and Y. Qiao, “38 GHz and
60 GHz angle-dependent propagation for cellular and peer-to-peer wire-
less communications,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Jun. 2012, pp. 4568–4573.
[42] T. S. Rappaport, E. Ben-Dor, J. Murdock, Y. Qiao, and J. Tamir, “Cellular
broadband millimeter wave propagation and angle of arrival for adaptive
beam steering systems,” in Proc. IEEE RWS, Jan. 2012, pp. 151–154.
[43] J. Murdock, E. Ben-Dor, Y. Qiao, J. Tamir, and T. S. Rappaport, “A
38 GHz cellular outage study for an urban outdoor campus environment,”
in Proc. IEEE WCNC, Apr. 2012, pp. 3085–3090.
[44] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., J. Zhang, S. Nie, and T. S. Rappaport, “Path loss
models for 5G millimeter wave propagation channels in urban micro-
cells,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2013, pp. 3109–3121.
[45] J. A. Wells, “Faster than ﬁber: The future of multi-Gb/s wireless,” IEEE
Microw. Mag., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 104–112, May 2009.
[46] G. R. MacCartney, Jr., M. K. Samimi, and T. S. Rappaport, “Omnidirec-
tional path loss models in New York City at 28 GHz and 73 GHz,” in
Proc. IEEE PIMRC, Washington, DC, USA, Sep. 2014, to be published.
[47] H. L. Van Trees, Detection, Estimation and Modulation Theory, Part I.
New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2001.
[48] M. K. Samimi and T. S. Rappaport, “Ultra-wideband statistical channel
model for non line of sight millimeter-wave urban channels,” in Proc.
IEEE GLOBECOM, Exhib. Ind. Forum, to be published.
[49] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning.
New York,
NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2006, ser. Information Science and Statistics.
[50] P. Kyösti et al., WINNER II Channel Models Part II Radio Channel
Measurement and Analysis Results, 2007, IST-4-027756 WINNER II
D1.1.2 V1.0.
[51] T. Bai and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Coverage and Rate Analysis for Millimeter
Wave Cellular Networks,” Mar. 2014, arXiv:1402.6430v2 [cs.ITpey1a].
[52] T. Bai, R. Vaze, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Analysis of Blockage Effects on
Urban Cellular Networks,” Sep. 2013, arXiv preprint arXiv:1309.4141.
[53] S. Nie, G. R. MacCartney, Jr., S. Sun, and T. S. Rappaport, “28 GHz and
73 GHz signal outage study for millimeter wave cellular and backhaul
communications,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, to be published.
[54] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication.
Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007.
[55] A. Alkhateeb, O. E. Ayach, G. Leus, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Hybrid precod-
ing for millimeter wave cellular systems with partial channel knowledge,”
in Proc. ITA Workshop, Feb. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[56] D. Parker and D. Z. Zimmermann, “Phased arrays-Part I: Theory and
architecture,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 678–
687, Mar. 2002.
[57] K.-J. Koh and G. M. Rebeiz, “0.13-μm CMOS phase shifters for X-, Ku-
and K-band phased arrays,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 11,
pp. 2535–2546, Nov. 2007.
[58] K.-J. Koh and G. M. Rebeiz, “A millimeter-wave (40–45 GHz) 16-element
phased-array transmitter in 0.18-μm SiGe BiCMOS technology,” IEEE J.
Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 1498–1509, May 2009.
[59] P. E. Crane, “Phased array scanning system,” U.S. Patent 4 731 614,
Mar. 15, 1988.
[60] S. Raman, N. S. Barker, and G. M. Rebeiz, “A W-band dielectric lens-
based integrated monopulse radar receive,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
Tech., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 2308–2316, Dec. 1998.
[61] X. Guan, H. Hashemi, and A. Hajimiri, “A fully integrated 24-GHz eight-
element phased-array receiver in silicon,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,
vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 2311–2320, Dec. 2004.
[62] A. Lozano, “Long-term transmit beamforming for wireless multicasting,”
in Proc. IEEE ICASSP, 2007, vol. 3, pp. III-417–III-420.
[63] J. P. Kermoal, L. Schumacher, K. I. Pedersen, P. E. Mogensen, and
F. Frederiksen, “A stochastic MIMO radio channel model with experi-
mental validation,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1211–
1226, Aug. 2002.
[64] D. McNamara, M. Beach, and P. Fletcher, “Spatial correlation in indoor
MIMO channels,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, 2002, vol. 1, pp. 290–294.
[65] S. Pinel et al., “A 90 nm CMOS 60 GHz radio,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-
State Circuits Conf., 2008, pp. 130–601.
[66] C. Marcu et al., “A 90 nm CMOS low-power 60 GHz transceiver with in-
tegrated baseband circuitry,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 12,
pp. 3434–3447, Dec. 2009.
[67] P. Mogensen et al., “LTE capacity compared to the Shannon bound,” in
Proc. IEEE VTC, 2007, pp. 1234–1238.
[68] J. C. Ikuno, C. Mehlfuhrer, and M. Rupp, “A novel link error predic-
tion model for OFDM systems with HARQ,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, 2011,
pp. 1–5.
Mustafa Riza Akdeniz (S’09) received the B.S.
degree in electrical and electronics engineering from
Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, in 2010. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electri-
cal and computer engineering at New York Univer-
sity Polytechnic School of Engineering, Brooklyn,
NY, USA, with Prof. Rangan. His research interests
include wireless communications, channel modeling,
and information theory.

AKDENIZ et al.: MILLIMETER WAVE CHANNEL MODELING AND CELLULAR CAPACITY EVALUATION
1179
Yuanpeng Liu received the B.S. degree from the
University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Chengdu, China, in 2007 and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees from New York University (NYU)
Polytechnic School of Engineering, Brooklyn, NY,
USA, in 2009 and 2013, respectively, all in electrical
engineering. His research at NYU was primarily
focused on information theoretic study of wireless
channels and millimeter-wave broadband access sys-
tem design.
Mathew K. Samimi (S’13) received the B.S. de-
gree in applied physics in 2012 from Columbia Uni-
versity, New York, NY, USA, and the M.S. degree
in electrical engineering in 2014 from New York
University
Polytechnic
School
of
Engineering,
Brooklyn, NY, USA, where he is currently work-
ing toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engi-
neering with Prof. Rappaport in developing future
millimeter-wave statistical spatial channel models
for next-generation ultrawideband mobile cellular in
dense urban environments.
Shu Sun (S’13) received the B.S. degree in ap-
plied physics from Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China, in 2012. She is currently working
toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at
New York University Polytechnic School of Engi-
neering, Brooklyn, NY, USA. Since August 2012,
she has been with NYU WIRELESS, New York
University Polytechnic School of Engineering. She
has coauthored two conference publications and
is now working on a millimeter-wave (mmWave)
propagation measurements campaign for 5G cellular
mmWave communication systems.
Sundeep
Rangan
(M’02–SM’14)
received
the
B.A.Sc. degree from the University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada, and the M.Sc. and Ph.D.
degrees from the University of California, Berkeley,
CA, USA, all in electrical engineering. He has held
postdoctoral appointments with the University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, and Bell Labo-
ratories. In 2000, he cofounded (with four others)
Flarion Technologies, a spin-off of Bell Laborato-
ries that developed Flash OFDM, the ﬁrst cellular
OFDM data system. In 2006, Flarion was acquired
by Qualcomm Technologies. He was a Director of Engineering at Qualcomm
involved in OFDM infrastructure products. In 2010, he joined the Department
of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New York University Polytechnic
School of Engineering, Brooklyn, NY, USA, where he is currently an Asso-
ciate Professor. His research interests are in wireless communications, signal
processing, information theory, and control theory.
Theodore
(Ted)
S.
Rappaport
(S’83–M’84–
SM’91–F’98)
is
the
David
Lee/Ernst
Weber
Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering
with New York University (NYU) Polytechnic
School of Engineering, Brooklyn, NY, USA, and
is the Founding Director of NYU WIRELESS. He
also holds professorships with Courant Institute of
Mathematical Sciences and the School of Medicine,
NYU. He founded major wireless research centers at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA, USA; The University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX, USA; and New York University, New York, NY, USA, and
founded two wireless technology companies that were sold to publicly traded
ﬁrms. He is a highly sought-after Technical Consultant, having testiﬁed before
the U.S. Congress and having served the ITU. He has advised more than 100
students, has more than 100 patents issued and pending, and has authored or
coauthored several books, including the best seller Wireless Communications:
Principles and Practice, Second Edition (Prentice Hall, 2002). His latest book,
Millimeter Wave Wireless Communications, is the ﬁrst comprehensive text on
the subject and is published by Pearson/Prentice Hall.
Elza Erkip (S’93–M’96–SM’05–F’11) received the
B.S. degree in electrical and electronics engineer-
ing from Middle East Technical University, Ankara,
Turkey, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electri-
cal engineering from Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA. Currently, she is a Professor of elec-
trical and computer engineering with New York
University
Polytechnic
School
of
Engineering,
Brooklyn, NY, USA. Her research interests are in
information theory, communication theory and wire-
less communications.
Dr. Erkip is a Member of the Science Academy Society of Turkey. She
received the National Science Foundation CAREER award in 2001, the
IEEE Communications Society Stephen O. Rice Paper Prize in 2004, the
IEEE ICC Communication Theory Symposium Best Paper Award in 2007,
and the IEEE Communications Society Award for Advances in Communi-
cation in 2013. She coauthored a paper that received the IEEE International
Symposium on Information Theory Student Paper Award in 2007. Currently,
she is a Distinguished Lecturer and a Member of the Board of Governors of
IEEE Information Theory Society. Dr. Erkip is a Guest Editor of the IEEE
JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS in 2014. She was an
Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY
from 2009 to 2011, an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
COMMUNICATIONS from 2006 to 2008, a Publications Editor of the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 2006 to 2008 and a Guest
Editor of the IEEE Signal Processing Magazine in 2007. She was a General
Chair of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory in 2013;
a Technical Program Chair of the International Symposium on Modeling and
Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks (WiOpt) in 2011; a
Technical Program Chair of the IEEE GLOBECOM Communication Theory
Symposium in 2009; the Publications Chair of the IEEE Information Theory
Workshop, Taormina, in 2009; the Technical Area Chair for the MIMO Com-
munications and Signal Processing track of Asilomar Conference on Signals,
Systems, and Computers in 2007; and a Technical Program Chair of the IEEE
Communication Theory Workshop in 2006.
