RESEARCH
Open Access
A refined compilation of implementation strategies:
results from the Expert Recommendations for
Implementing Change (ERIC) project
Byron J Powell1*, Thomas J Waltz2, Matthew J Chinman3,4, Laura J Damschroder5, Jeffrey L Smith6,
Monica M Matthieu6,7, Enola K Proctor8 and JoAnn E Kirchner6,9
Abstract
Background: Identifying, developing, and testing implementation strategies are important goals of implementation
science. However, these efforts have been complicated by the use of inconsistent language and inadequate
descriptions of implementation strategies in the literature. The Expert Recommendations for Implementing Change
(ERIC) study aimed to refine a published compilation of implementation strategy terms and definitions by
systematically gathering input from a wide range of stakeholders with expertise in implementation science and
clinical practice.
Methods: Purposive sampling was used to recruit a panel of experts in implementation and clinical practice who
engaged in three rounds of a modified Delphi process to generate consensus on implementation strategies and
definitions. The first and second rounds involved Web-based surveys soliciting comments on implementation
strategy terms and definitions. After each round, iterative refinements were made based upon participant feedback.
The third round involved a live polling and consensus process via a Web-based platform and conference call.
Results: Participants identified substantial concerns with 31% of the terms and/or definitions and suggested five
additional strategies. Seventy-five percent of definitions from the originally published compilation of strategies were
retained after voting. Ultimately, the expert panel reached consensus on a final compilation of 73 implementation
strategies.
Conclusions: This research advances the field by improving the conceptual clarity, relevance, and
comprehensiveness of implementation strategies that can be used in isolation or combination in implementation
research and practice. Future phases of ERIC will focus on developing conceptually distinct categories of strategies
as well as ratings for each strategy’s importance and feasibility. Next, the expert panel will recommend multifaceted
strategies for hypothetical yet real-world scenarios that vary by sites’ endorsement of evidence-based programs and
practices and the strength of contextual supports that surround the effort.
Keywords: Implementation research, Implementation strategies, Knowledge translation strategies, Mental health, US
Department of Veterans Affairs
* Correspondence: byronp@upenn.edu
1Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research, Department of
Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3535
Market Street, 3rd Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Implementation
Science
© 2015 Powell et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
DOI 10.1186/s13012-015-0209-1

Background
Research focusing on implementation strategies, defined
as “methods or techniques used to enhance the adop-
tion, implementation, and sustainability of a clinical pro-
gram or practice” [1], has been prioritized in order to
bridge the quality chasm in health and mental health
services [2-5].a However, efforts to identify, develop, and
test implementation strategies have been complicated by
a lack of conceptual clarity [1,6-9]. This lack of conceptual
clarity manifests in two primary ways. First, terms and def-
initions for implementation strategies are inconsistent
[7,10]. Idiosyncratic use of implementation strategy terms
involve homonymy (i.e., same term has multiple mean-
ings), synonymy (i.e., different terms have the same mean-
ings), and instability (i.e., terms shift unpredictably over
time) [11]. Implementation scientists have responded by
calling for efforts to clarify terminology and use it consist-
ently [1,5-7,12]. Second, published descriptions of imple-
mentation strategies too often do not include sufficient
detail to enable either scientific or real-world replication
[1,6], leading some to suggest guidelines for specifying
and reporting implementation strategies [1,6,13,14]. Taken
together, these two deficiencies complicate the acquisition
and interpretation of knowledge, preclude research syn-
theses such as systematic reviews and meta-analyses, limit
replication in both research and practice, and ultimately
stymie the translation and application of empirical studies
that could inform implementation processes [1,6,9].
A number of taxonomies of implementation strategies
have been developed, in part, to address these shortcom-
ings pertaining to the published literature, e.g., [10,15-18].
Powell et al. [10] reviewed 41 compilations and reviews of
implementation strategies and summarized them accord-
ing to their foci and disciplines/clinical specialties that
they represented (this can be found in Table One of that
publication). While they acknowledge that many of those
compilations represent seminal contributions to the field,
they also argue that most of the compilations were not
necessarily intended to be consolidated “menus” of poten-
tial implementation strategies for a broad range of stake-
holders in health and mental health. Powell et al. [10]
note that many compilations and reviews:
are purposely narrow in scope, focusing on strategies
with known evidence on effectiveness, e.g. [19-22];
specific medical conditions, fields of practice, or
disciplines, e.g. [23-25]; strategies that were used in a
specific setting or study, e.g. [26,27]; “exemplar”
programs or strategies, e.g. [28,29]; one level of target
such as consumers or practitioners, e.g. [30]; or one
type of strategy such as educational or organizational
strategies, e.g. [24,31]. The characteristics of some of
these reviews and compilations may lead health care
stakeholders to believe that there are relatively few
strategies from which to choose. Additionally, many of
these compilations do not provide definitions or
provide definitions that do not adequately describe the
specific actions that need to be taken by stakeholders.
In response to those limitations, Powell et al. [10] pro-
posed a consolidated compilation of 68 discrete (as opposed
to multifaceted) implementation strategies and definitions
based upon a review of the health and mental health litera-
tures. While the review was conducted by an interdisciplin-
ary team of health services researchers, the development of
the compilation was not informed by a wide-range of im-
plementation and clinical experts, and the authors did not
seek to generate consensus on the strategy terms and defi-
nitions beyond the study team [10]. This raises the question
of whether the strategy terms and definitions identified
would resonate with a broader array of researchers and im-
plementers in real-world settings. The Expert Recommen-
dations for Implementing Change (ERIC) study [9] builds
upon the Powell et al. [10] review by generating expert con-
sensus “on a common nomenclature for implementation
strategy terms, definitions, and categories that can be used
to guide implementation research and practice in mental
health service settings” [9]. We pursued this aim by
recruiting a panel of stakeholders with expertise in imple-
mentation science and clinical practice and engaging them
in a three-round modified-Delphi process to refine Powell
et al.’s [10] compilation of implementation strategies.
While many other efforts to generate consensus have re-
lied solely upon qualitative approaches, e.g., [8,10,32], this
study’s mixed methods approach provides more structure
for the expert recommendation process and derives con-
sensus quantitatively. We describe these processes below,
and more details about our methodological approach have
been published elsewhere [9].
Methods
Expert panel participants
We employed a purposive sampling procedure [33] that
began with an initial list of implementation science ex-
perts generated by members of the study team. The team
targeted a number of groups based upon their substantial
expertise in implementation research, including members
of the editorial board for the journal Implementation Sci-
ence, implementation research coordinators for the VA
Quality Enhancement Research Initiatives (QUERIs) [34],
and faculty and fellows from the National Institute of
Mental Health funded Implementation Research Institute
[35]. Nominees were encouraged to identify peers with ex-
pertise in implementation science and clinical management
related to implementing evidence-based programs and
practices. Efforts were made to ensure a diverse sample by
including VA and non-VA implementation experts and by
attempting to obtain a balance between implementation
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 2 of 14

and clinical expertise. Recruitment was limited to individ-
uals residing in the four primary time zones of North
America (i.e., Eastern through Pacific) in order to minimize
scheduling conflicts for the live Webinar (described below).
Ultimately, we recruited a panel of 71 experts (see
“Contributors” section for a full list of participants), each
of whom participated in at least one of the three Delphi
rounds (see Table 1). Ninety-seven percent of the experts
were affiliated with academic or health-care institutions in
the USA, and 3% were affiliated with Canadian univer-
sities. Ninety percent of participants had expertise in im-
plementation science and practice, and 45% were also
experts in clinical practice. Nearly two-thirds of partici-
pants had some affiliation with the VA, though most of
those individuals also had academic appointments in so-
cial science or health-related schools or departments.
Modified Delphi process
The modified Delphi process [36] had three rounds. The
first two rounds provided the opportunity for panel
members to offer feedback on a list of strategies and def-
initions via two Web-based surveys. After each of the
first two rounds, iterative refinements were made to the
compilation based upon participant feedback. The third
round involved a live, Web-based polling process to ob-
tain consensus on the final compilation of strategies.
Round 1
Fifty-seven experts completed the Round 1 Web-based
survey. Section one of the Round 1 survey listed terms
and definitions from Powell et al.’s [10] published tax-
onomy of 68 strategies. Each “item” included a strategy
term, its definition, a text box for participants to write in
possible synonyms, and a text box for further comments,
proposed definitions, or concerns regarding the strategy
term or definition. Section 2 of the Round 1 survey
asked panelists to propose strategy terms and definitions
not included in Powell et al.’s [10] compilation. The full
survey can be viewed in Additional file 1.
Round 2
Forty-three experts completed the Round 2 Web-based
survey, which included the implementation strategy
terms and definitions from Round 1 along with a summary
of the panelists’ comments and suggestions regarding add-
itional strategies. This included both a qualitative sum-
mary and, where possible, a quantitative characterization
of participants’ Round 1 responses (e.g., 72% of panelists
made no comment). The core definitions from the original
compilation [10] were separated from their accompanying
“ancillary material” (additional details that may be helpful
in understanding the nuances of the strategy). This
allowed us to summarize and group the feedback from
Round 1 according to whether the concerns panel
members expressed pertained to the core definition, al-
ternate definitions (proposed by participants in Round
1), or concerns or addendum to the ancillary material.
The full Round 2 survey can be viewed in Additional
file 2. Once again, participants could suggest additional
strategies and make additional comments in response
to the strategies, definitions, or feedback from Round
1. Panelists’ feedback from Round 2 was used to con-
struct a final list of strategies and definitions for the
consensus meeting in Round 3. Terms and definitions
were considered “acceptable” to the expert panel and
were not included in the Round 3 voting if no panelist
suggested alternatives or expressed concerns about the
core definition.
Round 3
Forty experts participated in Round 3 of the modified
Delphi, which involved a live polling and consensus
process conducted via a Web-based interactive discussion
platform. Prior to the meeting, panelists were e-mailed a
voting guide describing the voting process along with a
ballot, allowing them to prepare responses in advance (the
voting guide and ballot can be viewed in Additional files 3
and 4, respectively). During the consensus meeting, each
implementation strategy term and core definition for
which concerns were raised during Round 1 or 2 was pre-
sented along with the alternative definitions proposed
from the earlier rounds. Terms with only one alternative
definition were presented first, followed by those with
multiple alternatives. This strategy was used so panelists
could “warm up” by voting under the least complicated
circumstances, with voting continuing with increasingly
difficult scenarios and ending with voting on new terms
proposed by panelists. The first stage of voting involved
Table 1 Composition of expert panel (n = 71)
Round
Participants
VA (%)
Female (%)
Type of expertise
Implementation (%)
Clinical (%)
Both (%)
1
57
65
65
56
9
35
2
43
65
79
56
9
35
3
40
75
70
60
10
30
Total
71
66
65
55
10
35
Total represents the total number of unique experts participating in at least one round of the modified Delphi process.
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 3 of 14

“approval voting”, in which panelists were given the
option to vote for as many definitions (original and al-
ternative) they thought acceptable. Approval voting is
particularly useful for efficiently identifying the most
acceptable choice [37], as it has been deemed the most
“sincere and strategy proof” form of voting [38]. It pro-
motes collaborative versus adversarial forms of deci-
sion making. Furthermore, it allowed us to determine
whether the definitions from the original compilation
[10] were acceptable even when alternative definitions
may have been preferred. Approval ratings for existing
definitions, when low, pointed to the need for improv-
ing definitional clarity. While no research literature
could be found to support a supermajority cutoff, we
drew upon supermajority benchmarks from the US
Senate [39]. Three fifths (60%) is required to end de-
bate for most issues, while two thirds (66%) is required
for other actions. We opted for the convention used to
end debate (60%). This ended up being fortuitous for
timely completion of the Webinar, as there would have
been six additional debates and runoff votes had we
opted for a higher supermajority rate. We acknowledge
that we may have received different results if we had
used 66%. In the first stage of voting, a definition that
received a supermajority of votes (≥60%) and also
received more votes than any other definition was
declared the “winner”, and the poll was advanced to
the next term. When there was no clear supermajority
winner, panelists discussed the definitions. Discussions
were highly structured to maximize productivity dur-
ing the 60-min Webinar. Panelists indicated if they
wanted to make a comment by clicking a virtual hand
raise button in the Webinar platform and had up to
1 min to make comments. Subsequent discussion was
then limited to 5 min per strategy.
Following open discussion, the second stage of voting
involved “runoff voting”, in which participants selected
only their top choice. If only two alternatives were pre-
sented, the definition receiving the most votes was
declared the winner. If three or more alternatives were
presented and a majority (i.e., more than 50%) was not
obtained in the first runoff vote, then the top two alter-
natives from the first runoff round would advance to a
final runoff round to determine the winner. If a tie be-
tween the original and alternative definition occurred
in the runoff round, the definition already published in
the literature was retained. These same voting proce-
dures were applied to the additional strategies proposed
by the expert panel in Rounds 1 and 2 of the Delphi
process; however, the approval poll also included an
option for the proposed strategy to be rejected if a
supermajority (≥60%) of panelists deemed the strategy
unworthy of inclusion. Figure 1 provides an overview of
the voting process [9].
Four of the forty panelists were unable to successfully
utilize the Webinar program but did participate in poll-
ing by e-mail while following the Webinar proceedings
using their voting guide (Additional file 3) and partici-
pating in the discussion using the teleconference line.
The multiple sources of votes (through Webinar polling
and e-mails) were aggregated in real time.
The Institutional Review Board at Central Arkansas
Veterans Healthcare System has approved all study
procedures.
Results
Rounds 1 and 2
Expert panelists suggested a number of changes to Powell
et al.’s [10] terms and definitions and proposed additional
strategies. For example, suggested changes to strategy
terms included changing “tailor strategies to overcome
barriers and honor preferences” to simply “tailor strat-
egies”, and “penalize” to “develop disincentives”. The
alternate definition for the term “develop an imple-
mentation glossary” is illustrative of the participants’
efforts to ensure strategy definitions were clear. The
original definition was “develop a glossary to promote
common understanding about implementation among
the different stakeholders”. A new definition was pro-
posed, “Develop and distribute a list of terms describing
the innovation, implementation, and the stakeholders in
the organizational change.” Finally, five new terms and
definitions were suggested in Round 1, including “pro-
mote adaptability”, “external facilitation”, “identify early
adopters”, “promote network weaving”, and “provide local
technical assistance”. Table 2 provides a summary of the
types of changes to original strategy terms and definitions
that were suggested in Rounds 1 and 2, as well as the new
strategy terms that were proposed. The majority of the ex-
pert feedback received in Rounds 1 and 2 did not focus on
strategy terms and core definitions, but rather involved
concerns, additions, or clarifications pertaining to the an-
cillary material. For example, for the strategy “provide on-
going consultation”, participants noted that consultation
can be conducted by individuals outside of the organization
and that it can focus on system and culture change in
addition to clinical concerns. Feedback on ancillary mate-
rials did not impact the core definition of the strategy and
was thus integrated into the ancillary material at the discre-
tion of the study team. A more comprehensive description
of the types of feedback received in Rounds 1 and 2 can be
viewed in Additional file 2.
Round 3
The majority of the terms and definitions (69%) from
the Powell et al. [10] compilation were considered “no
contest” and were not subjected to voting in Round 3 as
participants did not raise substantial concerns or suggest
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 4 of 14

alternative definitions for them. Twenty-one strategies
and five new strategies were subjected to voting in
Round 3. The complete results from the Round 3 voting
can be viewed in Additional file 5. For each vote, there
was a small number of abstainers; the percentage of par-
ticipants casting votes ranged from 83 to 94%. In the
majority of cases, the initial vote (i.e., the approval vot-
ing stage) yielded a clear winner; however, in two cases,
no strategy received over 60% of the vote in the approval
voting stage and in another case there was a tie between
two strategies, each receiving 66% of the votes. In these
situations, the participants discussed their thoughts and
concerns, after which the runoff vote successfully identi-
fied a winning definition.
For the 21 alternative definitions suggested, an alter-
native definition was selected 81% of the time and the
original definition was maintained 19% of the time. One
of the advantages of approval voting was determining
the acceptability of the original definitions even when
alternatives were thought to be superior. In each of the
17 times in which an alternative was ultimately selected,
the original definitions failed to reach the supermajority
approval level of 60% (average 30%, range 3 to 51%).
Each of the five new strategies that the panel proposed
was maintained in some form. Panelists had the opportun-
ity to reject the proposed additions, but on average, across
the five strategies, 84% of panelists voted to retain the new
strategy (range 100 to 71%). Each of the new strategies
had an initial proposed definition in Round 1. Panelists
had the opportunity to suggest alternative definitions in
Round 2. In two cases (“promote network weaving” and
“provide local technical assistance”), no alternative defini-
tions were proposed, and the new definition was retained
with approval votes of 71 and 73%, respectively. In one
case (“identify early adopters”) the alternative definition
won in the approval vote. Finally, in two cases (“facilita-
tion” and “promote adaptability”), the original new defin-
ition was selected over the alternatives in the runoff vote.
Figure 1 Overview of the voting process in the final round of the modified Delphi task. In the third and final round of the modified Delphi
task, expert panelists will vote on all strategies where concerns were raised regarding the core definition in the first two online survey rounds. For
each strategy, the original and proposed alternate definitions will be presented for an approval poll where participants can vote to approve all
definition alternatives they find acceptable. In the first round of voting, if one definition receives a supermajority of votes (≥60%) and receives
more votes than all others, that definition will be declared the winner and the poll will move to the next term. If there is no consensus, a 5-min
discussion period is opened. When the discussion concludes, a runoff poll is conducted to determine the most acceptable definition
alternative [13].
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 5 of 14

Table 2 Results from Rounds 1 and 2 of the modified Delphi process
Suggested changes to strategy terms and/or definitions
Round 1
Round 2
Develop a formal implementation blueprint
2 alt
3 alt
Tailor strategies [to overcome barriers and honor preferences]
1 alt
———
Identify and prepare champions
1 alt
———
Involve patients/consumers and family members
1 alt
———
Provide ongoing consultation
1 alt
———
Shadow other clinicians
2 alt
3 alt
Change physical structure and equipment
1 alt
3 alt
Facilitate relay of clinical data to providers
1 alt
2 alt
Use advisory boards and work groups
1 alt
4 alt
Purposefully reexamine the implementation
1 alt
3 alt
Promote adaptability
New
1 alt
External facilitation
New
2 alt
Identify early adopters
New
1 alt
Promote network weaving
New
———
Provide local technical assistance
New
———
Assess for readiness and identify barriers and facilitators
Concerns
1 alt
Stage implementation scale-up
Concerns
———
Model and simulate change
Concerns
2 alt
Mandate change
Concerns
1 alt
Develop effective educational materials
Concerns
———
Develop an implementation glossary [a glossary of implementation]
Concerns
1 alt
Conduct ongoing training
Concerns
———
Make training dynamic
Concerns
———
Conduct educational outreach visits
Concerns
———
Use mass media
Concerns
———
Prepare patients/consumers to be active participants
Concerns
———
Develop disincentives [penalize]
Concerns
1 alt
Create new clinical teams
Concerns
———
Start a dissemination [purveyor] organization
Concerns
1 alt
Develop tools for quality monitoring
Concerns
———
Audit and provide feedback
Concerns
———
Use data warehousing techniques
Concerns
———
Use an improvement/implementation advisor
Concerns
———
Change accreditation or membership requirements
Concerns
———
Use data experts
———
1 alt
Use capitated payments
———
1 alt
Organize clinician implementation team meetings
———
1 alt
Intervene with patients/consumers to enhance uptake and adherence
———
1 alt
Create a learning collaborative
———
1 alt
Brackets represent elements of the strategies that have been deleted based on feedback in Rounds 1 and 2. Italicized elements were consensus modifications for
the strategy.
Alt alternative definitions suggested.
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 6 of 14

Final compilation
The final compilation included 73 discrete strategies
(Table 3). Consistent with the Powell et al. [10] compil-
ation, active verbs were used to describe the implemen-
tation strategy terms. We attempted to strike a balance
between economy of expression and comprehensiveness.
Thus, in some cases, we used verbs like “develop” or
“create” instead of “develop and implement” or “create
and implement”, though the implementation or use of
the strategies developed or created should be thought of
as part of the same process. In many cases, this is clari-
fied in the definition. For example, the strategy “develop
a formal implementation blueprint” specifies in the def-
inition that the blueprint should be used and updated.
Each of the strategies, including those in which the verb
“use” is included in the strategy term, should be thought
of as discretionary for researchers and implementers.
Our intent was to highlight the range of discrete strat-
egies that could potentially be used to implement new
programs and practices, not to present a checklist of
strategies that must be used in all efforts. Additional file
6 contains the full compilation with ancillary material
that contains additional references and details that may
be useful to implementation stakeholders, such as advice
about how a particular strategy might be used.
Discussion
This study aimed to refine and achieve consensus on a
compilation of implementation strategy terms and defi-
nitions by systematically gathering input from a wide
range of stakeholders. A large, accomplished panel of
implementation and clinical experts was successfully
engaged in a rigorous consensus development process.
Participants identified substantial concerns with 31% of
the terms and/or definitions from the original Powell
et al. [10] compilation and suggested five additional
strategies. Seventy-five percent of the definitions from
the original compilation were retained after voting. The
expert panel achieved consensus on a final compilation
of 73 implementation strategies. This study has improved
the original published compilation by enhancing the
clarity, relevance, and comprehensiveness of included
strategies and ensuring that they resonate with a wide
range of stakeholders conducting implementation research
and practice.
There are several immediate uses of this compilation.
First, it provides a list of discrete strategies that can
serve as “building blocks” for constructing multifaceted,
multilevel implementation strategies for implementation
efforts or in comparative effectiveness research [4]. Sec-
ond, the core definitions and ancillary materials (see
Additional file 6) can be used in conjunction with avail-
able reporting guidelines [1,13,14,40,41] to improve the
specification and reporting of implementation strategies
in efficacy, effectiveness, and implementation research
[42]. Finally, the refined compilation can be used as a
tool to assess discrete strategies that have been used in
published implementation research. Mazza et al. [18] re-
cently demonstrated how taxonomies can be used for
that purpose.
The subsequent stages of the ERIC project [9] will fur-
ther enhance the utility of this compilation in a number
of ways. First, expert panelists will complete concept
mapping [43] and rating exercises to derive conceptually
distinct categories of strategies, interrelationships between
them, and a rating for each discrete strategy’s importance
and feasibility. This information will help users select
strategies for their planned implementation efforts by
highlighting the broad categories they might consider and
providing feasibility and importance ratings of both indi-
vidual discrete strategies and clusters of strategies. Second,
expert panels will be asked to choose the best imple-
mentation strategies to use in real-world scenarios that
describe implementations of specific evidence-based
practices (e.g., measurement-based care for depression)
in hypothetical VA mental health clinic settings that
vary on certain contextual characteristics [9]. This stage
of ERIC will yield recommendations about which multi-
faceted, multilevel strategy is best matched to specific
scenarios. This information will help provide guidance
for similar implementation efforts and insights into how
recommendations may change based on clearly de-
scribed differences in context.
As Powell et al. [10] cautioned, this compilation
should not be thought of as a checklist. No implemen-
tation effort could feasibly utilize every one of these
strategies. The ERIC compilation provides a list by
which to select discrete strategies that can be used to
build a tailored multicomponent strategy for implementa-
tion. Future research is needed to identify the contexts
and circumstances under which each discrete strategy is
effective to help guide users in their selection.
We note that while our attempt was to identify discrete
strategies involving one action or process, the included
strategies vary in their level of complexity. In fact, active
research agendas have focused on determining the essen-
tial components of many of these “discrete” implementa-
tion strategies, such as audit and feedback [44], learning
collaboratives [45], and supervision [46]. The evidence will
continue to accumulate, providing more detailed specifica-
tions of components for discrete strategies to help inform
future iterations of this and other compilations.
The ERIC compilation consolidated discrete imple-
mentation strategies that have been identified through
other taxonomies and reviews (see Powell et al. [10] for
a list of sources and methodological details). Thus, there
are many similarities between the ERIC compilation
and other taxonomies. However, the ERIC compilation
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 7 of 14

Table 3 ERIC discrete implementation strategy compilation (n = 73)
Strategy
Definitions
Access new funding
Access new or existing money to facilitate the implementation
Alter incentive/allowance structures
Work to incentivize the adoption and implementation of the clinical innovation
Alter patient/consumer fees
Create fee structures where patients/consumers pay less for preferred treatments
(the clinical innovation) and more for less-preferred treatments
Assess for readiness and identify barriers and facilitators
Assess various aspects of an organization to determine its degree of readiness to
implement, barriers that may impede implementation, and strengths that can be
used in the implementation effort
Audit and provide feedback
Collect and summarize clinical performance data over a specified time period and give it
to clinicians and administrators to monitor, evaluate, and modify provider behavior
Build a coalition
Recruit and cultivate relationships with partners in the implementation effort
Capture and share local knowledge
Capture local knowledge from implementation sites on how implementers and
clinicians made something work in their setting and then share it with other sites
Centralize technical assistance
Develop and use a centralized system to deliver technical assistance focused on
implementation issues
Change accreditation or membership requirements
Strive to alter accreditation standards so that they require or encourage use of the
clinical innovation. Work to alter membership organization requirements so that
those who want to affiliate with the organization are encouraged or required to
use the clinical innovation
Change liability laws
Participate in liability reform efforts that make clinicians more willing to deliver the
clinical innovation
Change physical structure and equipment
Evaluate current configurations and adapt, as needed, the physical structure and/or
equipment (e.g., changing the layout of a room, adding equipment) to best
accommodate the targeted innovation
Change record systems
Change records systems to allow better assessment of implementation or clinical
outcomes
Change service sites
Change the location of clinical service sites to increase access
Conduct cyclical small tests of change
Implement changes in a cyclical fashion using small tests of change before taking
changes system-wide. Tests of change benefit from systematic measurement, and
results of the tests of change are studied for insights on how to do better. This
process continues serially over time, and refinement is added with each cycle
Conduct educational meetings
Hold meetings targeted toward different stakeholder groups (e.g., providers,
administrators, other organizational stakeholders, and community, patient/consumer,
and family stakeholders) to teach them about the clinical innovation
Conduct educational outreach visits
Have a trained person meet with providers in their practice settings to educate
providers about the clinical innovation with the intent of changing the provider’s
practice
Conduct local consensus discussions
Include local providers and other stakeholders in discussions that address whether
the chosen problem is important and whether the clinical innovation to address it
is appropriate
Conduct local needs assessment
Collect and analyze data related to the need for the innovation
Conduct ongoing training
Plan for and conduct training in the clinical innovation in an ongoing way
Create a learning collaborative
Facilitate the formation of groups of providers or provider organizations and foster
a collaborative learning environment to improve implementation of the clinical
innovation
Create new clinical teams
Change who serves on the clinical team, adding different disciplines and different
skills to make it more likely that the clinical innovation is delivered (or is more
successfully delivered)
Create or change credentialing and/or licensure standards
Create an organization that certifies clinicians in the innovation or encourage an
existing organization to do so. Change governmental professional certification or
licensure requirements to include delivering the innovation. Work to alter continuing
education requirements to shape professional practice toward the innovation
Develop a formal implementation blueprint
Develop a formal implementation blueprint that includes all goals and strategies.
The blueprint should include the following: 1) aim/purpose of the implementation;
2) scope of the change (e.g., what organizational units are affected); 3) timeframe
and milestones; and 4) appropriate performance/progress measures. Use and
update this plan to guide the implementation effort over time
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 8 of 14

Table 3 ERIC discrete implementation strategy compilation (n = 73) (Continued)
Develop academic partnerships
Partner with a university or academic unit for the purposes of shared training and
bringing research skills to an implementation project
Develop an implementation glossary
Develop and distribute a list of terms describing the innovation, implementation,
and stakeholders in the organizational change
Develop and implement tools for quality monitoring
Develop, test, and introduce into quality-monitoring systems the right input—the
appropriate language, protocols, algorithms, standards, and measures (of processes,
patient/consumer outcomes, and implementation outcomes) that are often specific
to the innovation being implemented
Develop and organize quality monitoring systems
Develop and organize systems and procedures that monitor clinical processes
and/or outcomes for the purpose of quality assurance and improvement
Develop disincentives
Provide financial disincentives for failure to implement or use the clinical innovations
Develop educational materials
Develop and format manuals, toolkits, and other supporting materials in ways that
make it easier for stakeholders to learn about the innovation and for clinicians to
learn how to deliver the clinical innovation
Develop resource sharing agreements
Develop partnerships with organizations that have resources needed to implement
the innovation
Distribute educational materials
Distribute educational materials (including guidelines, manuals, and toolkits) in
person, by mail, and/or electronically
Facilitate relay of clinical data to providers
Provide as close to real-time data as possible about key measures of process/outcomes
using integrated modes/channels of communication in a way that promotes use of
the targeted innovation
Facilitation
A process of interactive problem solving and support that occurs in a context of a
recognized need for improvement and a supportive interpersonal relationship
Fund and contract for the clinical innovation
Governments and other payers of services issue requests for proposals to deliver
the innovation, use contracting processes to motivate providers to deliver the
clinical innovation, and develop new funding formulas that make it more likely
that providers will deliver the innovation
Identify and prepare champions
Identify and prepare individuals who dedicate themselves to supporting, marketing,
and driving through an implementation, overcoming indifference or resistance that
the intervention may provoke in an organization
Identify early adopters
Identify early adopters at the local site to learn from their experiences with the
practice innovation
Increase demand
Attempt to influence the market for the clinical innovation to increase competition
intensity and to increase the maturity of the market for the clinical innovation
Inform local opinion leaders
Inform providers identified by colleagues as opinion leaders or “educationally
influential” about the clinical innovation in the hopes that they will influence
colleagues to adopt it
Intervene with patients/consumers to enhance uptake and
adherence
Develop strategies with patients to encourage and problem solve around
adherence
Involve executive boards
Involve existing governing structures (e.g., boards of directors, medical staff boards
of governance) in the implementation effort, including the review of data on
implementation processes
Involve patients/consumers and family members
Engage or include patients/consumers and families in the implementation effort
Make billing easier
Make it easier to bill for the clinical innovation
Make training dynamic
Vary the information delivery methods to cater to different learning styles and
work contexts, and shape the training in the innovation to be interactive
Mandate change
Have leadership declare the priority of the innovation and their determination to
have it implemented
Model and simulate change
Model or simulate the change that will be implemented prior to implementation
Obtain and use patients/consumers and family feedback
Develop strategies to increase patient/consumer and family feedback on the
implementation effort
Obtain formal commitments
Obtain written commitments from key partners that state what they will do to
implement the innovation
Organize clinician implementation team meetings
Develop and support teams of clinicians who are implementing the innovation
and give them protected time to reflect on the implementation effort, share
lessons learned, and support one another’s learning
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 9 of 14

addresses several limitations of previously developed
taxonomies and improves upon them in three ways.
First, the ERIC compilation provides clear labels and
more detailed definitions for each implementation
strategy. Second, it is widely applicable to implementa-
tion stakeholders in health and mental health settings
Table 3 ERIC discrete implementation strategy compilation (n = 73) (Continued)
Place innovation on fee for service lists/formularies
Work to place the clinical innovation on lists of actions for which providers can
be reimbursed (e.g., a drug is placed on a formulary, a procedure is now
reimbursable)
Prepare patients/consumers to be active participants
Prepare patients/consumers to be active in their care, to ask questions, and specifically
to inquire about care guidelines, the evidence behind clinical decisions, or about
available evidence-supported treatments
Promote adaptability
Identify the ways a clinical innovation can be tailored to meet local needs and
clarify which elements of the innovation must be maintained to preserve fidelity
Promote network weaving
Identify and build on existing high-quality working relationships and networks
within and outside the organization, organizational units, teams, etc. to promote
information sharing, collaborative problem-solving, and a shared vision/goal
related to implementing the innovation
Provide clinical supervision
Provide clinicians with ongoing supervision focusing on the innovation. Provide
training for clinical supervisors who will supervise clinicians who provide the
innovation
Provide local technical assistance
Develop and use a system to deliver technical assistance focused on
implementation issues using local personnel
Provide ongoing consultation
Provide ongoing consultation with one or more experts in the strategies used to
support implementing the innovation
Purposely reexamine the implementation
Monitor progress and adjust clinical practices and implementation strategies to
continuously improve the quality of care
Recruit, designate, and train for leadership
Recruit, designate, and train leaders for the change effort
Remind clinicians
Develop reminder systems designed to help clinicians to recall information and/or
prompt them to use the clinical innovation
Revise professional roles
Shift and revise roles among professionals who provide care, and redesign job
characteristics
Shadow other experts
Provide ways for key individuals to directly observe experienced people engage
with or use the targeted practice change/innovation
Stage implementation scale up
Phase implementation efforts by starting with small pilots or demonstration
projects and gradually move to a system wide rollout
Start a dissemination organization
Identify or start a separate organization that is responsible for disseminating the
clinical innovation. It could be a for-profit or non-profit organization
Tailor strategies
Tailor the implementation strategies to address barriers and leverage facilitators
that were identified through earlier data collection
Use advisory boards and workgroups
Create and engage a formal group of multiple kinds of stakeholders to provide
input and advice on implementation efforts and to elicit recommendations for
improvements
Use an implementation advisor
Seek guidance from experts in implementation
Use capitated payments
Pay providers or care systems a set amount per patient/consumer for delivering
clinical care
Use data experts
Involve, hire, and/or consult experts to inform management on the use of data
generated by implementation efforts
Use data warehousing techniques
Integrate clinical records across facilities and organizations to facilitate
implementation across systems
Use mass media
Use media to reach large numbers of people to spread the word about the
clinical innovation
Use other payment schemes
Introduce payment approaches (in a catch-all category)
Use train-the-trainer strategies
Train designated clinicians or organizations to train others in the clinical
innovation
Visit other sites
Visit sites where a similar implementation effort has been considered successful
Work with educational institutions
Encourage educational institutions to train clinicians in the innovation
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 10 of 14

(and perhaps beyond). Third, a major strength of this
compilation is that it is based on consensus of a broad
range of implementation experts.
There are several limitations related to the process of
generating this compilation. First, had we used a differ-
ent taxonomy of implementation strategies as a starting
point, the modified Delphi process may have yielded dif-
ferent results. However, the original Powell et al. [10]
compilation incorporated strategies from several other
existing taxonomies, e.g., [15-17], increasing the chances
that key implementation strategies were included. The
fact that the expert panelists suggested few additional
strategies also increases our confidence that the compil-
ation was relatively comprehensive. Second, the compos-
ition of our expert panel was limited to participants in
North America and was mostly composed of implementa-
tion and clinical experts from the USA. This was appro-
priate given the ERIC project’s focus on implementing
evidence-based mental health programs and practices
within the VA and for pragmatic reasons (e.g., scheduling
the consensus meeting), but we acknowledge that broader
international participation would have been ideal. This
may have implications for the content of the compilation,
as we discuss below. Third, it is possible that in-person
meetings may have generated more nuanced discussions
of strategy terms and definitions; however, the asynchron-
ous, online process had the advantage of allowing a wide
range of implementation and clinical experts to participate
and also ensured anonymity of responses, which limited
the possibility of participants simply yielding to the major-
ity opinion in Rounds 1 and 2. Finally, as noted in the
“Results” section, a small number of participants abstained
from voting for portions of the Round 3 consensus meet-
ing. While we can speculate as to potential reasons (e.g.,
technical difficulties, other distractions, not finding any of
the strategy terms and definitions appropriate), we cannot
be certain as to why participants abstained or about
whether or not this could have impacted the final results
in cases in which voting results were extremely close.
There are also limitations related to the content of the
refined compilation. First, the evidence base for each
strategy was not considered because the purpose of this
work was to identify the range of potential options avail-
able. Second, the strategies were not explicitly tied to
relevant theories or conceptual models. The compila-
tion’s utility would be enhanced by linking each strategy
to the domains of prominent conceptual frameworks
(e.g., the Consolidated Framework for Implementation
Research [47], Theoretical Domains Framework [48,49],
Promoting Action on Research Implementation in Health
Services (PARIHS) framework [50]). Furthermore, users
might benefit from using a recently developed framework
by Colquhoun and colleagues [8] to better plan use of the
individual strategies by identifying: 1) active ingredients
(i.e., the defining characteristics of the implementation
strategies); 2) causal mechanisms (i.e., the processes or
mediators by which strategies exert change); 3) mode of
delivery or practical application (i.e., the way an active
ingredient is applied, such as face-to-face, Web-based,
mass media, etc.); and 4) intended target (i.e., the imple-
mentation strategy’s “intended effects and beneficiar-
ies”). Lastly, while we are not aware of evidence that
would suggest that the strategies in this compilation
would not be applicable to many different contexts, it is
possible that some of the strategies may be more applic-
able to US or North American settings given the focus
of the ERIC project and the composition of the expert
panel. Engaging a broader international panel may have
revealed additional strategies that are applicable to health-
care systems that are organized differently or to settings
(e.g., low- and middle-income countries) that are not simi-
larly resourced. The fact that the original compilation
drew from taxonomies developed in contexts other than
the US, e.g., [15,17] may help mitigate this potential
limitation.
Conclusions
This research advances the field by improving the con-
ceptual clarity, relevance, and comprehensiveness of
discrete implementation strategies that can be used in
isolation or combination in implementation research
and practice. The utility of this compilation will be ex-
tended in subsequent stages of the ERIC study. We con-
clude by echoing Powell et al.’s [10] caution that this
compilation, while substantially improved, should not be
viewed as the final word. We welcome further com-
ments and critiques that will further refine this compil-
ation and enhance its ability to inform implementation
research and practice.
Contributors
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of each
member of the expert panel: Greg Aarons, University of
California, San Diego; Mark Bauer, Harvard University
and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Rinad Beidas,
University of Pennsylvania; Sharon Benjamin, Alchemy;
Ian Bennett, University of Pennsylvania; Nancy Bernardy,
Dartmouth College and US Department of Veterans Affairs;
Amy Bohnert, University of Michigan and US Department
of Veterans Affairs; Melissa Brouwer, McMaster University;
Leo Cabassa, Columbia University; Martin Charns, Boston
University and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Amy
Cohen, US Department of Veterans Affairs; Laurel
Copeland, Scott and White Healthcare and US Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs; Torrey Creed, University of
Pennsylvania; Jill Crowley, US Department of Veterans
Affairs; Geoff Curran, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Laura
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 11 of 14

Damschroder, University of Michigan and US Department
of Veterans Affairs; Teresa Damush, Indiana University
and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Afsoon Eftekhari,
US Department of Veterans Affairs; Rani Elwy, Boston
University and US Department of Veterans Affairs;
Bradford Felker, University of Washington and US
Department of Veterans Affairs; Erin Finley, University
of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio and US
Department of Veterans Affairs; Hildi Hagedorn, Uni-
versity of Minnesota and US Department of Veterans
Affairs; Alison Hamilton, University of California, Los
Angeles and US Department of Veterans Affairs;
Susanne Hempel, RAND; Timothy Hogan, University
of Massachusetts and US Department of Veterans
Affairs; Bradley Karlin, Education Development Center
and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Ira Katz, US
Department of Veterans Affairs; Jacob Kean, Indiana
University and US Department of Veterans Affairs;
Shannon Kehle-Forbes, University of Minnesota and
US Department of Veterans Affairs; Amy Kilbourne,
University of Michigan and US Department of Veterans
Affairs; Kelly Koerner, Evidence-Based Practice Institute;
Sarah Krein, University of Michigan and US Department
of Veterans Affairs; Julie Kreyenbuhl, University of
Maryland and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Kurt
Kroenke, Indiana University and US Department of
Veterans Affairs; Marina Kukla, Indiana University-
Purdue University Indianapolis and US Department of
Veterans Affairs; Sara Landes, University of Washington
and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Martin Lee,
University of California, Los Angeles and Prolacta Bio-
science; Cara Lewis, Indiana University-Bloomington;
Julie Lowery, University of Michigan and US Department
of Veterans Affairs; Brian Lund, US Department of
Veterans Affairs; Aaron Lyon, University of Washington;
Natalie Maples, University of Texas Health Science Center
San Antonio; Stephen Marder, University of California,
Los Angeles and US Department of Veterans Affairs;
Monica Matthieu, Saint Louis University and US
Department of Veterans Affairs; Geraldine McGlynn,
US Department of Veterans Affairs; Alan McGuire,
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis and US
Department of Veterans Affairs; Allison Metz, University
of North Carolina; Amanda Midboe, US Department of
Veterans Affairs; Edward Miech, Indiana University and
US Department of Veterans Affairs; Brian Mittman, US
Department of Veterans Affairs; Laura Murray, Johns
Hopkins University; Princess Osei-Bonsu, US Department
of Veterans Affairs; Richard Owen, University of Arkansas
for Medical Sciences and US Department of Veterans
Affairs; Louise Parker, University of Massachusetts Boston;
Mona Ritchie, US Department of Veterans Affairs; Craig
Rosen, Stanford University and US Department of
Veterans Affairs; Anju Sahay, US Department of Veterans
Affairs; Susanne Salem-Schatz, Health Care Quality Initia-
tives; Anne Sales, University of Michigan and US Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs; Mark Snowden, University of
Washington; Leif Solberg, Health Partners; Sharon Straus,
University of Toronto; Scott Stroup, Columbia University;
Jane Taylor, CHAMP; Carol VanDeusen Lukas, Boston
University and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Dawn
Velligan, University of Texas Health Science Center
San Antonio; Robyn Walser, University of California,
Berkeley and US Department of Veterans Affairs; Shannon
Wiltsey-Stirman, Boston University and US Department of
Veterans Affairs; Gordon Wood, US Department of
Veterans Affairs; Kara Zivin, University of Michigan
and US Department of Veterans Affairs; and Cynthia
Zubritsky, University of Pennsylvania.
Endnote
aAs Wensing et al. [51] note, the field of research fo-
cusing on “how to improve healthcare” has evolved
under several different names (e.g., implementation
science, knowledge translation research, improvement
science, research utilization, delivery science, quality
improvement, etc.). While each of these traditions “bring
their own nuances to the area…the reality is that there are
far more commonalities in the research conducted under
these different names than differences” [51]. Thus, while
multiple terms may be used to describe what we define as
implementation strategies (e.g., knowledge translation
strategies or interventions, quality improvement strat-
egies, implementation interventions, strategies to increase
research utilization, etc.), we believe that the compilation
described in this paper is likely to be applicable to the
research and practice occurring under these different
names. Indeed, the original Powell et al. [10] compilation
drew upon a taxonomy of “quality improvement strat-
egies” [52] and “knowledge translation interventions”, [53]
among others.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Expert Recommendations for Implementing
Change (ERIC) Round 1 survey for the modified Delphi. This
document contains the full survey that was administered in Round 1 of
the modified Delphi process.
Additional file 2: Round 2 of online modified Delphi. This document
contains the full survey that was administered in Round 2 of the modified
Delphi process.
Additional file 3: Expert Recommendations for Implementing
Change (ERIC) voting guide. This voting guide was mailed to
participants prior to modified Delphi Round 3.
Additional file 4: Expert Recommendations for Implementing
Change (ERIC)—ballot for Round 3 of the modified Delphi process.
This ballot specifies each of the strategies that were voted on in Round
3 of the modified Delphi.
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 12 of 14

Additional file 5: Expert Recommendations for Implementing
Change (ERIC)—results from modified Delphi Round 3 voting. This
document lists the voting results from modified Delphi Round 3.
Additional file 6: Expert Recommendations for Implementing
Change (ERIC)—discrete implementation strategy compilation with
ancillary material. This file contains the final ERIC discrete strategy
compilation and the associated ancillary material.
Abbreviations
ERIC: Expert Recommendations for Implementing Change; QUERI: Quality
Enhancement Research Initiative; VA: US Department of Veterans Affairs.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
All authors were involved in the conceptualization and design of this study.
TJW and JEK are co-principal investigators of the ERIC project. JLS, MMM,
MJC, and LJD are co-investigators. BJP and EKP are consultants. TJW led the
data collection. MJC led the Round 3 consensus process. BJP and TJW
conducted the data analysis and drafted this manuscript. All authors
reviewed, gave feedback, and approved the final version of this manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This project is funded through the US Department of Veterans Affairs
Veterans Health Administration Mental Health Quality Enhancement Research
Initiative (QLP 55–025). The authors thank Faye Smith for her technical
assistance in managing the online survey content and Webinar content and
operation for this study. The views expressed in this article are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the
Department of Veterans Affairs or the US government. Additionally, TJW
received support from the VA Office of Academic Affiliations Advanced
Fellowships Program in Health Services Research and Development at the
Center for Mental Healthcare & Outcomes Research; and BJP received
support from the National Institute of Mental Health (F31 MH098478), the
Doris Duke Charitable Foundation (Fellowship for the Promotion of Child
Well-Being), and the Fahs-Beck Fund for Research and Experimentation. MJC
received support from the VISN 4 Mental Illness Research, Education, and
Clinical Center.
Author details
1Center for Mental Health Policy and Services Research, Department of
Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3535
Market Street, 3rd Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 2Department of
Psychology, Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, MI, USA. 3VISN 4 MIRECC,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 4RAND Corporation, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. 5HSR&D Center
for Clinical Management Research, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. 6Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, HSR&D and
Mental Health Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI), Department
of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Little Rock, AR, USA. 7School of Social
Work, College for Public Health & Social Justice, Saint Louis University, St.
Louis, MO, USA. 8Brown School, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis,
MO, USA. 9Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA.
Received: 23 October 2014 Accepted: 22 January 2015
References
1.
Proctor EK, Powell BJ, McMillen JC. Implementation strategies:
recommendations for specifying and reporting. Implement Sci. 2013;8:1–11.
2.
Institute of Medicine. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for
the 21st century. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.
3.
Institute of Medicine. Improving the quality of health care for mental and
substance-use conditions. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2006.
4.
Institute of Medicine. Initial national priorities for comparative effectiveness
research. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2009.
5.
Eccles MP, Armstrong D, Baker R, Cleary K, Davies H, Davies S, et al. An
implementation research agenda. Implement Sci. 2009;4:1–7.
6.
Michie S, Fixsen DL, Grimshaw JM, Eccles MP. Specifying and reporting
complex behaviour change interventions: the need for a scientific method.
Implement Sci. 2009;4:1–6.
7.
McKibbon KA, Lokker C, Wilczynski NL, Ciliska D, Dobbins M, Davis DA, et al.
A cross-sectional study of the number and frequency of terms used to refer
to knowledge translation in a body of health literature in 2006: a tower of
Babel? Implement Sci. 2010;5:1–11.
8.
Colquhoun H, Leeman J, Michie S, Lokker C, Bragge P, Hempel S, et al.
Towards a common terminology: a simplified framework of interventions to
promote and integrate evidence into health practices, systems, and policies.
Implement Sci. 2014;9:1–6.
9.
Waltz TJ, Powell BJ, Chinman MJ, Smith JL, Matthieu MM, Proctor EK, et al.
Expert Recommendations for Implementing Change (ERIC): protocol for a
mixed methods study. Implement Sci. 2014;9:1–12.
10.
Powell BJ, McMillen JC, Proctor EK, Carpenter CR, Griffey RT, Bunger AC,
et al. A compilation of strategies for implementing clinical innovations in
health and mental health. Med Care Res Rev. 2012;69:123–57.
11.
Gerring J. Social science methodology: a criterial framework. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2001.
12.
Rabin BA, Brownson RC. Developing terminology for dissemination and
implementation research. In: Brownson RC, Colditz GA, Proctor EK, editors.
Dissemination and implementation research in health: translating science to
practice. New York: Oxford University Press; 2012. p. 23–51.
13.
Albrecht L, Archibald M, Arseneau D, Scott SD. Development of a
checklist to assess the quality of reporting of knowledge translation
interventions using the Workgroup for Intervention Development
and Evaluation Research (WIDER) recommendations. Implement Sci.
2013;8:1–5.
14.
Davidoff F, Batalden P, Stevens D, Ogrinc G, Mooney S. Publication
guidelines for quality improvement in health care: evolution of the SQUIRE
project. Qual Saf Health Care. 2008;17(Supplement 1):i3–9.
15.
Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care Group. Data collection
checklist. 2002. p. 1–30.
16.
Leeman J, Baernholdt M, Sandelowski M. Developing a theory-based
taxonomy of methods for implementing change in practice. J Adv Nurs.
2007;58:191–200.
17.
Walter I, Nutley S, Davies H. Developing a taxonomy of interventions used
to increase the impact of research. Andrews: University of St. Andrews of St.
Andrews; 2003.
18.
Mazza D, Bairstow P, Buchan H, Chakraborty SP, Van Hecke O, Grech C, et al.
Refining a taxonomy for guideline implementation: results of an exercise in
abstract classification. Implement Sci. 2013;8:1–10.
19.
Bero LA, Grilli R, Grimshaw JM, Harvey E, Oxman AD, Thomson MA. Getting
research findings into practice: closing the gap between research and
practice: an overview of systematic reviews of interventions to promote the
implementation of research findings. Br Med J. 1998;317:465–8.
20.
Grimshaw JM, Eccles M, Thomas R, MacLennan G, Ramsay C, Fraser C,
et al. Toward evidence-based quality improvement. Evidence (and its
limitations) of the effectiveness of guideline dissemination and
implementation strategies 1966–1998. J Gen Intern Med.
2006;21 Suppl 2:S14–20.
21.
Grol R, Grimshaw JM. From best evidence to best practice: effective
implementation of change in patients’ care. Lancet. 2003;362:1225–30.
22.
Shojania KG, Ranji SR, McDonald KM, Grimshaw JM, Sundaram V, Rushakoff
RJ, et al. Effects of quality improvement strategies for type 2 diabetes on
glycemic control: a meta-regression analysis. JAMA. 2006;296:427–40.
23.
Cabana MD, Rushton JL, Rush J. Implementing practice guidelines for
depression: applying a new framework to an old problem. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry. 2002;24:35–42.
24.
Gilbody S, Whitty P, Grimshaw JM, Thomas R. Educational and
organizational interventions to improve the management of depression in
primary care: a systematic review. JAMA. 2003;289:3145–51.
25.
Stone EG, Morton SC, Hulscher ME, Maglione MA, Roth EA, Grimshaw JM,
et al. Interventions that increase use of adult immunization and cancer
screening services: a meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:641–51.
26.
Hysong SJ, Best RG, Pugh JA. Clinical practice guideline implementation
strategy patterns in veterans affairs primary care clinics. Health Serv Res.
2007;42:84–103.
27.
Magnabosco JL. Innovations in mental health services implementation: a
report on state-level data from the U.S. evidence-based practices project.
Implement Sci. 2006;1:1–11.
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 13 of 14

28.
Katon WJ, Zatzick D, Bond G, Williams J. Dissemination of evidence-based
mental health interventions: importance to the trauma field. J Trauma Stress.
2006;19:611–23.
29.
McHugh RK, Barlow DH. The dissemination and implementation
of evidence-based psychological treatments. Am Psychol.
2010;65:73–84.
30.
Ryan R, Lowe D, Santesso N, Hill S. Development of a taxonomy of
interventions directed at consumers to promote evidence-based prescribing
and medicines use: a tool for evidence-based decision-making. Melbourne,
Australia: In National Medicines Symposium; 2010.
31.
Raghavan R, Bright CL, Shadoin AL. Toward a policy ecology of
implementation of evidence-based practices in public mental health
settings. Implement Sci. 2008;3:1–9.
32.
Mathew D, McKibbon KA, Lokker C, Colquhoun H. Engaging with a wiki
related to knowledge translation: a survey of WhatisKT Wiki user. J Med
Internet Res. 2014;16:e21.
33.
Palinkas LA, Horwitz SM, Green CA, Wisdom JP, Duan N, Hoagwood K.
Purposeful sampling for qualitative data collection and analysis in mixed
method implementation research. Adm Policy Ment Health. 2013.
doi:10.1007/s10488-013-0528-y.
34.
Stetler CB, Mittman BS, Francis J. Overview of the VA Quality Enhancement
Research Initiative (QUERI) and QUERI theme articles: QUERI series.
Implement Sci. 2008;3:1–9.
35.
Proctor EK, Landsverk J, Baumann AA, Mittman BS, Aarons GA, Brownson
RC, et al. The implementation research institute: training mental health
implementation researchers in the United States. Implement Sci.
2013;8:1–12.
36.
Hasson F, Keeney S. Enhancing rigor in the Delphi technique research.
Technol Forecast Soc Change. 2011;78:1695–704.
37.
Fishburn PC, Brams SJ. Expected utility and approval voting. Syst Res Behav
Sci. 1981;26:136–42.
38.
Brams SJ, Fishburn PC. Approval voting. Am Polit Sci Rev. 1978;72:831–47.
39.
Oleszek WJ. Super-majority votes in the Senate. Washington, D.C.:
Congressional Research Service; 2008. p. 1–3.
40.
WIDER recommendations to improve reporting of the content of behaviour
change interventions [http://www.implementationscience.com/content/
supplementary/1748-5908-7-70-s4.pdf]
41.
Davidoff F, Batalden P. Toward stronger evidence on quality improvement.
Draft publication guidelines: the beginning of a consensus project. Qual Saf
Health Care. 2005;14:319–25.
42.
Proctor EK, Rosen A. From knowledge production to implementation:
research challenges and imperatives. Res Soc Work Pract. 2008;18:285–91.
43.
Kane M, Trochim WMK. Concept mapping for planning and evaluation.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2007.
44.
Ivers NM, Sales A, Colquhoun H, Michie S, Foy R, Francis JJ, et al. No more
“business as usual” with audit and feedback interventions: towards an
agenda for a reinvigorated intervention. Implement Sci. 2014;9:1–8.
45.
Nadeem E, Olin S, Hoagwood KE, Horwitz SM. Understanding the
components of quality improvement collaboratives: a systematic literature
review. Milbank Q. 2013;91:354–94.
46.
Dorsey S, Pullman MD, Deblinger E, Berliner L, Kerns SE, Thompson K, et al.
Improving practice in community-based settings: a randomized trial of
supervision—study protocol. Implement Sci. 2013;8:1–11.
47.
Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC.
Fostering implementation of health services research findings into practice:
a consolidated framework for advancing implementation science.
Implement Sci. 2009;4:1–15.
48.
Michie S, Johnston M, Abraham C, Lawton R, Parker D, Walker A. Making
psychological theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: a
consensus approach. Qual Saf Health Care. 2005;14:26–33.
49.
Cane J, O’Connor D, Michie S. Validation of the theoretical domains
framework for use in behaviour change and implementation research.
Implement Sci. 2012;7:1–17.
50.
Rycroft-Malone J. The PARiHS framework: a framework for guiding the
implementation of evidence-based practice. J Nurs Care Qual.
2004;19:297–304.
51.
Wensing M, Grimshaw JM, Eccles MP. Does the world need a scientific
society for research on how to improve healthcare? Implement Sci.
2012;7:1–4.
52.
Shojania KG, McDonald KM, Wachter RM, Owens DK. Closing the quality
gap: a critical analysis of quality improvement strategies, volume 1—series
overview and methodology. Technical review 9. Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality: Rockville, MD; 2004.
53.
Wensing M, Bosch M, Grol R. Selecting, tailoring, and implementing
knowledge translation interventions. In: Straus S, Tetroe J, Graham
ID, editors. Knowledge translation in health care: moving from
evidence to practice. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009.
p. 94–113.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Powell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:21 
Page 14 of 14
