arXiv:cond-mat/0309488v2  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  27 Feb 2004
Deﬁning and identifying communities in networks
Filippo Radicchi,1 Claudio Castellano,2 Federico Cecconi,3 Vittorio Loreto,2, ∗and Domenico Parisi3
1Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma “Tor Vergata”,
Via della Ricerca Scientiﬁca 1, 00133 Roma, Italy
2Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma “La Sapienza” and INFM-SMC,
Unit`a di Roma 1, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, Italy
3Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies C.N.R., Viale Marx, 15, 00137, Roma, Italy
The investigation of community structures in networks is an important issue in many domains
and disciplines. This problem is relevant for social tasks (objective analysis of relationships on the
web), biological inquiries (functional studies in metabolic and protein networks) or technological
problems (optimization of large infrastructures).
Several types of algorithms exist for revealing
the community structure in networks, but a general and quantitative deﬁnition of community is
not implemented in the algorithms, leading to an intrinsic diﬃculty in the interpretation of the
results without any additional non-topological information. In this paper we deal with this problem
by showing how quantitative deﬁnitions of community are implemented in practice in the existing
algorithms. In this way the algorithms for the identiﬁcation of the community structure become
fully self-contained. Furthermore, we propose a new local algorithm to detect communities which
outperforms the existing algorithms with respect to computational cost, keeping the same level of
reliability. The new algorithm is tested on artiﬁcial and real-world graphs. In particular we show
how the new algorithm applies to a network of scientiﬁc collaborations, which, for its size, can
not be attacked with the usual methods. This new type of local algorithm could open the way to
applications to large-scale technological and biological applications.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Evidence has rapidly grown in the past few years that very diverse systems in many diﬀerent ﬁelds can be described
as complex networks, i. e. assemblies of nodes and edges with nontrivial topological properties [1, 2]. Examples
range from technological systems (the Internet and the web [3, 4]) to biological (epidemiology [5, 6], metabolic
networks [7, 8, 9], ecological webs [10, 11, 12, 13]) and social systems [14, 15] (scientiﬁc collaborations, structure of
large organizations).
In this paper we deal with a topological property of networks, the community structure, that has attracted a great
deal of interest very recently. The concept of community is very common and it is linked to the classiﬁcation of
objects in categories for the sake of memorization or retrieval of information. From this point of view the notion of
community is very general and, depending on the context, can be synonymous of module, class, group, cluster, etc.
Among the many contexts where this notion is relevant it is worth mentioning the problem of modularity in metabolic
or cellular networks [9, 16] or the problem of the identiﬁcation of communities in the web [17]. This last issue is
relevant for the implementation of search engines of new generation, content ﬁltering, automatic classiﬁcation or the
automatic realization of ontologies.
Given the relevance of the problem it is crucial to construct eﬃcient procedures and algorithms for the identiﬁcation
of the community structure in a generic network. This, however, is a highly nontrivial task.
Qualitatively, a community is deﬁned as a subset of nodes within the graph such that connections between the nodes
are denser than connections with the rest of the network. The detection of the community structure in a network
is generally intended as a procedure for mapping the network into a tree (Fig. 1). In this tree (called dendrogram
in social sciences) the leaves are the nodes while the branches join nodes or (at higher level) groups of nodes, thus
identifying a hierarchical structure of communities nested within each other.
Several algorithms to perform this mapping are known in the literature. The traditional method is the so-called
hierarchical clustering [18]. For every pair i, j of nodes in the network one calculates a weight Wi,j, which measures how
closely connected the vertices are. Starting from the set of all nodes and no edges, links are iteratively added between
pairs of nodes in order of decreasing weight. In this way nodes are grouped into larger and larger communities and
the tree is built up to the root, which represents the whole network. Algorithms of this kind are called agglomerative.
∗Electronic address: loreto@roma1.infn.it

2
For the other class of algorithms, called divisive, the order of construction of the tree is reversed: one starts with
the whole graph and iteratively cuts the edges, thus dividing the network progressively into smaller and smaller
disconnected sub-networks identiﬁed as the communities. The crucial point in a divisive algorithm is the selection of
the edges to be cut, which have to be those connecting communities and not those within them. Very recently, Girvan
and Newman (GN) have introduced a divisive algorithm where the selection of the edges to be cut is based on the
value of their “edge betweenness” [19], a generalization of the centrality betweenness introduced by Anthonisse [20]
and Freeman [21]. Consider the shortest paths between all pairs of nodes in a network. The betweenness of an edge
is the number of these paths running through it. It is clear that when a graph is made of tightly bound clusters,
loosely interconnected, all shortest paths between nodes in diﬀerent clusters have to go through the few inter-clusters
connections, which therefore have a large betweenness value. The single step of the GN detection algorithm consists in
the computation of the edge betweenness for all edges in the graph and in the removal of those with the highest score.
The iteration of this procedure leads to the splitting of the network into disconnected subgraphs that in their turn
undergo the same procedure, until the whole graph is divided in a set of isolated nodes. In this way the dendrogram
is built, from the root to the leaves.
The GN algorithm represents a major step forward for the detection of communities in networks, since it avoids
many of the shortcomings of traditional methods [19, 22]. This explains why it has been quickly adopted in the past
year as a sort of standard for the analysis of community structure in networks [23, 24, 25, 26, 27].
This paper follows a diﬀerent track by proposing an alternative strategy for the identiﬁcation of the community
structure. This complementary approach follows from the need of addressing the two following issues.
1. In general algorithms deﬁne communities operationally as what the they ﬁnds. A dendrogram, i. e. a community
structure, is always produced by the algorithms down to the level of single nodes, independently from the type
of graph analyzed.
This is due to the lack of explicit prescriptions to discriminate between networks that
are actually endowed with a community structure and those that are not.
As a consequence, in practical
applications one needs additional, non topological, information on the nature of the network to understand
which of the branches of the tree have a real signiﬁcance. Without such information it is not clear at all whether
the identiﬁcation of a community is reliable or not. There have been two noticeable proposals to solve this
problem. In particular it is worth mentioning the approach proposed by Wilkinson and Huberman [24], which
is limited to the lowest level of the community structure and speciﬁc to algorithms based on betweenness. More
recently [22], Newman and Girvan have introduced an a posteriori measure of the strength of the community
structure, which they called modularity. More precisely, the modularity estimates the fraction of inward links in
a community minus the expectation value of the same quantity in a network with the same community divisions
but random connections between the nodes. This quantity deﬁnitely gives an indication of the strength of the
community structure, even though the lack of the implementation of a quantitative deﬁnition of community
does not allow to discriminate in an objective way meaningful communities.
2. The “edge betweenness algorithm” is computationally costly, as already remarked by Girvan and Newman [19,
22]. Evaluating the score for all edges requires a time of the order of MN, where M is the number of edges and
N the number of nodes. The iteration of the procedure for all M edges leads in the worst case to a total scaling
of the computational time as M 2N, which makes the analysis practically unfeasible already for moderately large
networks (of the order of N = 10000 [22]).
In this paper we propose solutions to both these problems. First we introduce a general criterion for deciding
which of the subgraphs singled out by the detection algorithms are actual communities. We discuss in detail the case
of two quantitative deﬁnitions of community. In this way we transform the GN algorithm in a self-contained tool.
Secondly we present an alternative algorithm, based on the computation of local quantities, which gives, in controlled
cases, results of accuracy comparable to the GN method, while largely outperforming it from the point of view of the
computational speed.1
The outline of the paper is as follows. In section II we introduce the deﬁnitions of community. In section III we
show how these deﬁnitions can be implemented in a generic divisive algorithm in order to make it self-contained and
we present tests on some computer-generated and real networks. In section IV we present a new and fast algorithm
for the detection of communities and we compare its performance with the GN algorithm. Section V is devoted to the
application of the new algorithm to a network of scientiﬁc collaborations which, because of its size, is hard to analyze
with the Girvan-Newman method. We ﬁnally draw some conclusions and discuss the perspectives of this work.
1 It is worth mentioning that after the completion of this work Newman has proposed a new agglomerative algorithm to address the issue
of the computational eﬃciency [28].

3
II.
QUANTITATIVE DEFINITIONS OF COMMUNITY
The idea to solve the ﬁrst of the problems discussed above is very simple: the algorithm that builds the tree just
selects subgraphs that are candidate to be considered communities. One has then to check whether they are actually
such by using a precise deﬁnition. If the subgraph does not meet the criterion, the subgraph isolated from the network
is not a community and the corresponding branch in the dendrogram should not be drawn.
As mentioned above, a community is generally thought as a part of a network where internal connections are denser
than external ones. To sharpen the use of detection algorithms a more precise deﬁnition is needed. Many possible
deﬁnitions of communities exist in the literature [18]. Here we consider explicitly the implementation in the algorithms
of two plausible deﬁnitions of community which translate into formulas the sentence above.
The basic quantity to consider is ki, the degree of a generic node i, which in terms of the adjacency matrix Ai,j of
the network G is ki = P
j Ai,j 2. If we consider a subgraph V ⊂G, to which node i belongs, we can split the total
degree in two contributions: ki(V ) = kin
i (V ) + kout
i
(V ). kin
i (V ) = P
j∈V Ai,j is the number of edges connecting node
i to other nodes belonging to V . kout
i
(V ) = P
j /∈V Ai,j is clearly the number of connections toward nodes in the rest
of the network.
Deﬁnition of community in a strong sense
The subgraph V is a community in a strong sense if
kin
i (V ) > kout
i
(V ), ∀i ∈V.
(1)
In a strong community each node has more connections within the community than with the rest of the graph.
This deﬁnition coincides with the one proposed in [17] in the framework of the identiﬁcation of web communities.
Deﬁnition of community in a weak sense
The subgraph V is a community in a weak sense if
X
i∈V
kin
i (V ) >
X
i∈V
kout
i
(V ).
(2)
In a weak community the sum of all degrees within V is larger than the sum of all degrees toward the rest of the
network.
Clearly a community in a strong sense is also a community in a weak sense, while the converse is not true.
It is worth mentioning that our deﬁnitions of community, though very natural, do not represent the only possible
choice. Several other possible deﬁnitions, possibly more appropriate in some cases, exist and are described in [18].
Among them for instance the deﬁnition of the so-called LS −set goes in the direction of our strong deﬁnition even
though extremely more stringent. An LS −set is a set of nodes such that each of its proper subsets has more ties
to its complement within the set than outside. On the other hand the deﬁnition of k-core is roughly, although not
exactly, equivalent to our weak deﬁnition. A k-core is deﬁned as a subgraph in which each node is adjacent to at least
a minimum number, k, of the other nodes in the subgraph.
III.
SELF-CONTAINED ALGORITHMS
From the deﬁnitions given above, it is apparent that, if a network is randomly split in two parts, one very large
and the other with only few nodes, the very large part almost always fulﬁlls the deﬁnition of community. In order
to deal with this problem, let us consider the Erd¨os-Renyi random graph [29]. If we cut at random the graph in two
parts containing αN and (1 −α)N nodes, respectively, it is easy to evaluate analytically the probability P(α) that
the subgraph containing αN nodes fulﬁlls the weak or the strong deﬁnition (details will be given in a forthcoming
publication). It turns out that, as soon as N is suﬃciently large, the probability is very close to a step function
around α = 0.5. Hence it is extremely likely that, in a random graph randomly cut in two parts, the largest one
2 The adjacency matrix fully speciﬁes the topology of the network. In the simplest case of an unweighted, undirected network, it is equal
to 1 if i and j are directly connected, zero otherwise.

4
is a community according to the previous deﬁnitions. However it is extremely unlikely that both subgraphs fulﬁll
simultaneously the deﬁnitions: therefore if we accept divisions only if both groups fulﬁll the deﬁnition of community,
we correctly ﬁnd that a random graph has no community structure. We extend this criterion to the general case: if
less than two subgraphs obtained from the cut satisfy the deﬁnitions, then the splitting is considered to be an artifact
and disregarded.
We can now summarize the improved self-contained version of the GN algorithm.
1. Choose a deﬁnition of community;
2. Compute the edge betweenness for all edges and remove those with the highest score;
3. If the removal does not split the (sub-)graph go to point 2;
4. If the removal splits the (sub-)graph, test if at least two of the resulting subgraphs fulﬁll the deﬁnition. If they
do, draw the corresponding part of the dendrogram;
5. Iterate the procedure (going back to point 2) for all the sub-graphs until no edges are left in the network.
It is important to remark that the quantities appearing in Eqs. (1) and (2) must always be evaluated with respect
to the full adjacency matrix. The application of this procedure to a network produces a tree, where every branch
splitting represents a meaningful (with respect to the deﬁnition) separation in communities.
It is now possible to blindly test the eﬀectiveness of the GN algorithm. We have considered the “artiﬁcial” graph
already discussed by Girvan and Newman. It is a simple network with N nodes divided into four groups: connections
between pairs within a group are present with probability pin, while pairs of nodes in diﬀerent groups are connected
with probability pout. As the probability pout grows from zero, the community structure in the network becomes less
well deﬁned.
For every realization of the artiﬁcial graph the application of the detection algorithm generates a tree. We consider
the algorithm to be successful if the four communities are detected, each node is classiﬁed in the right community
and the communities are not further subdivided.
Fig. 2 presents the comparison of the fraction of successes for the modiﬁed GN algorithm with the expected value
computed analytically. We see that the GN algorithm captures very well the existence of communities in a strong
sense, while it performs less well for the weak deﬁnition. However, one should not be misguided by the quantity
presented in Fig. 2. By looking at a softer measure of success, the fraction f of nodes not correctly classiﬁed, one
realizes that, when the algorithm with weak deﬁnition seems to fail, it correctly identiﬁes the four communities and
it misclassiﬁes only a few nodes up to much higher values of pout. The deviations from the theoretical behaviour
observed for small values of pout are due to the possibility that one or more of the four communities are further split
in smaller sub-communities. This event, not taken into account in the analytical calculation, becomes very unlikely
as the size of the system increases.
IV.
A NEW FAST ALGORITHM
The Girvan-Newman algorithm is computationally expensive because it requires the repeated evaluation, for each
edge in the system, of a global quantity, the betweenness, whose value depends on the properties of the whole system.
Despite smart methods to compute the edge betweenness simultaneously for all edges [30, 31], the evaluation of such
quantity is the time consuming part of the procedure. As a consequence the time to analyze completely a network
turns out to grow fast with its size, making the analysis unfeasible for networks of size larger than around 10000
nodes [22].
In order to overcome this problem we introduce a new kind of divisive algorithm which requires the consideration
of local quantities only, and is therefore much faster than the GN algorithm. The fundamental ingredient of a divisive
algorithm is a quantity which can single out edges connecting nodes belonging to diﬀerent communities. We consider
the edge clustering coeﬃcient, deﬁned, in analogy with the usual node clustering coeﬃcient, as the number of triangles
to which a given edge belongs, divided by the number of triangles that might potentially include it, given the degrees
of the adjacent nodes. More formally, for the edge connecting node i to node j, the edge clustering coeﬃcient is
C(3)
i,j =
z(3)
i,j
min[(ki −1), (kj −1)],
(3)
where z(3)
i,j is the number of triangles built on that edge and min[(ki −1), (kj −1)] is the maximal possible number of
them.

5
The idea behind the use of this quantity in a divisive algorithm is that edges connecting nodes in diﬀerent commu-
nities are included in few or no triangles, and tend to have small values of C(3)
i,j . On the other hand many triangles
exist within clusters. Hence the coeﬃcient C(3)
i,j is a measure of how inter-communitarian a link is. A problem arises
when the number of triangles is zero, because C(3)
i,j = 0, irrespective of ki and kj, (or even C(3)
i,j is indeterminate,
when min[(ki −1), (kj −1)] = 0). To remove this degeneracy we consider a slightly modiﬁed quantity by using, at the
numerator, the number of triangles plus one:
˜C(3)
i,j =
z(3)
i,j + 1
min[(ki −1), (kj −1)].
(4)
By considering higher order cycles we can deﬁne, in much the same way, coeﬃcients of order g as:
˜C(g)
i,j =
z(g)
i,j + 1
s(g)
i,j
,
(5)
where z(g)
i,j is the number of cyclic structures of order g the edge (i, j) belongs to, while s(g)
i,j is the number of possible
cyclic structures of order g that can be built given the degrees of the nodes.
We can now deﬁne, for every g, a detection algorithm that works exactly as the GN method with the diﬀerence
that, at every step, the removed edges are those with the smallest value of ˜C(g)
i,j . By considering increasing values
of g, one can smoothly interpolate between a local and a non local algorithm. Notice that the deﬁnition of ˜C(g)
i,j
guarantees that nodes with only one connection are not considered as isolated communities by the algorithm, since
for their unique edge ˜C(g)
i,j is inﬁnite.
We have checked the accuracy of this new algorithm by comparing its performance with the GN method. Fig. 2
reports the results for the artiﬁcial test graph with four communities. It turns out that, with respect to the strong
deﬁnition, the new algorithm is as accurate as the GN one, both in the case of cycles of order g = 3 (triangles) and
g = 4 (squares).
On the other hand, for the weak deﬁnition the best accuracy is achieved with the new algorithm with g = 4.
Another test is performed by considering the examples of social networks already studied by GN. Fig. 3 shows the
trees resulting from the application of the GN algorithm and of the g = 4 algorithm to the network of college football
teams. Again the results are very similar, indicating that the local algorithm captures well the presence of communities
in that network.
Additional insight into the relationship between the GN algorithm and this new algorithm based on edge clustering
is provided by Fig. 4, where the edge betweenness is plotted versus ˜C(4)
i,j for each edge of the graph of scientiﬁc
collaborations studied in Ref. [15]. It is clear that an anticorrelation exists between the two quantities: edges with low
values of ˜C(4)
i,j tend to have high values of betweenness. The anticorrelation is not perfect: the edge with minimum
˜C(4)
i,j is not the one with maximal betweenness. Therefore we expect the two algorithms to yield similar community
structures though not perfectly coinciding.
In this framework it is important to recall the parallel drawn by Ronald S. Burt [32] between betweenness centrality
and the so-called redundancy. The deﬁnition of redundancy is very close to that of node clustering and, much in the
spirit of our work, Burt ﬁrst pointed out that nodes that belong to few loops are central in the betweenness sense.
Let us now turn our attention to the question of the computational eﬃciency of our local algorithm. One can roughly
estimate the scaling of the computational time as follows. When an edge is removed one has to check whether the
whole system has been separated in disconnected components and update the value of ˜C(g)
i,j in a small neighborhood
of the removed edge. The ﬁrst operation requires a time of the order of M, the total number of edges present in
the network, while the time required by the second operation does not scale with M. Since this operation has to be
repeated for all edges we can estimate the scaling of the total time as aM + bM 2. We thus expect computational time
to be linearly dependent on M for small systems and to cross over to an M 2 regime for large sizes.
We have measured the velocity of the new algorithm by computing the time needed to generate the whole tree for
a random graph of increasing size N and ﬁxed average degree (M ∼N). Results, reported in Fig. 5, conﬁrm that
the algorithm based on the computation of the edge clustering coeﬃcient is much faster than the one based on edge
betweenness, both for g = 3 and g = 4. The crossover between the initial linear dependence on N to the N 2 growth
for the local algorithm is evident for g = 3.

6
V.
COMMUNITY STRUCTURE IN A NETWORK OF SCIENTIFIC COLLABORATIONS
In this section we consider an application of the fast algorithm discussed in the previous section to a
network of scientiﬁc collaborations.
In particular we have considered the network of scientists who signed
at least one paper submitted to the E-print Archive relative to Condensed Matter in the period 1995-1999
(http://xxx.lanl.gov/archive/cond-mat). Data have been kindly provided by Mark Newman.
The network includes 15616 nodes (scientists) but it has a giant connected component which includes only N =
12722 scientists. We have focused our attention on this giant component and we have applied to it our algorithm for
g = 3 and g = 4. The time needed for the generation of the dendrogram for g = 3 is about 3 minutes on a desktop
computer with 800 MHz CPU. The algorithm detects at the same time the communities satisfying the weak and the
strong criteria. At the end of the procedure one obtains, for every value of g, a list of communities identiﬁed in a
weak sense and another list of communities identiﬁed in a strong sense. By deﬁnition the second list is a subset of
the ﬁrst one. Figure 6 reports the size distributions (for g = 3 and g = 4) of all the communities identiﬁed in a weak
sense. These distributions feature a power-law behaviour P(S) ∼S−τ with τ ≃2, an indication of the self-similar
community structure of this network [33]. It is worth mentioning that the exponent we observe coincides with the one
obtained, using the GN algorithm, in the framework of a recently proposed model of social network formation [34].
For what concerns a more detailed analysis of the communities found, validation of the results is far from trivial,
since there is no quantitative criterion to assess their accuracy. One may directly inspect the dendrogram in order to
answer questions like: are the communities representative of real collaborations between the corresponding scientists?
Do they identify speciﬁc research areas?
Would a generic scientist agree about his or her belonging to a given
community? Obviously all these questions cannot be answered in a deﬁnitive and quantitative way. We have partially
followed this path and we have checked several subsets of the network at diﬀerent levels in the hierarchy. To the best
of our knowledge the results seem to us reasonable. Of course this does not represent a proof of the eﬃciency of the
algorithm. We refer the reader to the detailed results of our analysis that we make available as additional supporting
information 3.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
The detection of the community structure in large complex networks is a promising ﬁeld of research with many
open challenges. The concept of community is qualitatively intuitive. However, to analyze a network it is necessary to
specify quantitatively and unambiguously what a community is. Once a deﬁnition is given it is in principle possible to
determine all subgraphs of a given network that fulﬁll the deﬁnition. However this task is in practice computationally
out of reach even for small systems. Therefore the search for the community structure has generally a more limited
goal: selecting, among all possible communities, a subset of them organized hierarchically, a dendrogram. Divisive
and agglomerative algorithms carry out this task. A comparison of the performances of such algorithms is non trivial.
In some simple cases, as the artiﬁcial graph with four subsets considered above, it is possible to assess quantitatively
the validity of the results. In other cases, like the network of scientiﬁc collaborations, no quantitative measure exists
to decide, given a precise deﬁnition of community, how good a dendrogram is. Typically, one may check whether the
results appear sensible. However this is far from objective, being mediated by the observer’s own perception and by
his/her intuitive concept of community.
In this work we have proposed two improvements in the construction of the dendrogram. First, we have devised
a way to implement, in a generic divisive algorithm, a quantitative deﬁnition of community. In this way algorithms
become fully self-contained, i.e.
they do not need non-topological input to generate the dendrogram.
Then we
have introduced a new divisive algorithm, which is based on local quantities, and therefore extremely fast. Both
these improvements have been tested successfully in controlled cases. The analysis of the large network of scientiﬁc
collaborations gives results that appear reasonable. However, it is clear that, as discussed above, this statement
is subjective and cannot be made at present more precise. Deﬁnitely, a quantitative measure for the evaluation of
dendrograms would be a major step forward in this ﬁeld.
At this point a remark is in order. So far we have only discussed examples of the so-called social networks. It
has been shown [35] that social networks substantially diﬀer from other types of networks, namely technological or
biological networks.
Among other diﬀerences, they exhibit a positive correlation between the degree of adjacent
vertices (assortativity) while most non-social networks are disassortative. While these results are consistent with our
3 The list of all the communities found with our algorithm for the scientiﬁc collaboration network is available on request
(castella@pil.phys.uniroma1.it)

7
and other’s ﬁndings about community structures in social networks, they put into question the very existence of a
community structure in non-social networks and the possibility of detecting it with the existing algorithms. From
the perspective of our local algorithm, which relies on the existence of closed loops, disassortative networks could
be in principle problematic, due to the small number of short cycles. However, interesting insight comes from the
study of the loops of arbitrary order [36].
In particular for four diﬀerent types of networks (two of them social
and assortative and two non-social and disassortative) measured values for the so-called average grid coeﬃcient (the
extension of the concept of clustering coeﬃcient to cycles of order four) are two to four order of magnitude larger
than the corresponding coeﬃcients of a random graph with the same average degree and size N. This argues in favor
of the presence of some sort of hierarchical structure and well-deﬁned communities also in disassortative networks. It
also hints that our algorithm could be fruitfully applied also to non-social (disassortative) networks, although future
work will be needed in this direction.
We believe that the new elements presented in this paper can be of great help in the analysis of networks. On the
one hand, the implementation of a quantitative deﬁnition of community makes algorithms self-contained and allows
the analysis of the community structure based only on the network topology. On the other hand, the introduction of
a new class of local and fast algorithms could open the way for applications to large-scale systems.
Acknowledgments: The authors are very grateful to Mark Newman for providing data on the networks of college
football teams and of scientiﬁc collaborations.
They also wish to thank Alain Barrat for useful suggestions and
discussions.
[1] Albert, R. & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2002), Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47-97.
[2] Newman, M. E. J. (2003), SIAM Review 45, 167-256.
[3] Albert, R.,Jeong, H. & and Barab´asi, A.-L. (1999), Nature 401, 130-131.
[4] Broder, A., Kumar, R., Maghoul, F., Raghavan, P., Rajagopalan, S., Stata, R., Tomkins, A. & Wiener, J. (2000), Computer
Networks 33, 309-320.
[5] Moore, C. & Newman, M. E. J. (2000), Phys. Rev. E 61, 5678-5682.
[6] Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani, A. (2001), Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 3200-3203.
[7] Jeong, H., Tombor, B., Albert, R., Oltvai, Z.N. & Barab´asi, A.-L. (2000), Nature 407, 651-654.
[8] Wagner, A. & Fell, D. A. (2001), Proc. R. Soc. London B 268, 1803-1810.
[9] Ravasz, E., Somera, A., Mongru, D. A., Oltvai, Z. N. & Barab´asi A.-L., (2002), Science 297, 1551-1555.
[10] Montoya, J. M., & Sol´e, R. V. (2002), J. Theor. Biol. 214, 405-412.
[11] Dunne, J. A., Williams, R. J. & Martinez, N. D. (2002), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 12917-12922.
[12] Camacho, J., Guimer`a, R. & Amaral, L. A. N. (2002), Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 228102.
[13] Garlaschelli, D., Caldarelli, G. & Pietronero, L. (2003), Nature 423, 165-168.
[14] Redner, S. (1998), Eur. Phys. J. B 4, 131-134.
[15] Newman, M. E. J. (2001), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 404-409.
[16] Rives, A. & Galitski, T. (2003), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 1128-1133.
[17] Flake, G. W., Lawrence, S. R., Giles, C. L. & Coetzee, F. M. (2002), IEEE Computer 35(3), 66-71.
[18] Wasserman, S. & Faust, K. (1994), Social Network Analysis (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, U.K.).
[19] Girvan, M. & Newman, M. E .J. (2002), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 7821-7826.
[20] Anthonisse, J. M. (1971), Technical Report BN 9/71, Stichting Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam.
[21] Freeman, L. (1977), Sociometry 40, 35-41.
[22] Newman, M. E .J. & Girvan, M. (2003), cond-mat/0308217.
[23] Holme, P., Huss, M. & Jeong, H. (2003), Bioinformatics 19, 532-538.
[24] Wilkinson, D. & Huberman, B. A. (2002), cond-mat/0210147.
[25] Gleiser, P. & Danon, L. (2003), cond-mat/0307434.
[26] Guimer`a, R., Danon, L., D´iaz-Guilera, A., Giralt, F. & Arenas, A. (2002), cond-mat/0211498.
[27] Tyler, J. R., Wilkinson, D. M. & Huberman, B. A. (2003), cond-mat/0303264.
[28] Newman, M. E .J. (2003), cond-mat/0309508.
[29] Bollobas, B. (1985), Random Graphs (Academic Press, New York).
[30] Newman, M. E. J. (2001), Phys. Rev. 64, 016131.
[31] Brandes U. (2001), Journal of Mathematical Sociology 25, 163-177.
[32] Burt R.S. (1992), Structural Holes (Harward University Press, Cambridge, MA).
[33] Caldarelli G., Caretta Cartozo C., De Los Rios P. & Servedio V.D.P., cond-mat/0311486.
[34] Bogu˜na M., Pastor-Satorras R., D´iaz-Guilera A. & Arenas A. (2003), cond-mat/0309263.
[35] Newman, M.E.J. & Park, J. (2003) Phys. Rev. E 68, 036122.
[36] Caldarelli, G., Pastor-Satorras, R. & Vespignani A. (2002), cond-mat/0212026.

8
Figure legends
Fig.1 A simple network (left) and the corresponding dendrogram (right).
Fig.2 Test of the eﬃciency of the diﬀerent algorithms in the analysis of the artiﬁcial graph with four communities.
The construction of the graph is described in text. Here N = 128 and pin is changed with pout in order to
keep the average degree equal to 16. (Left) Strong deﬁnition: fraction of successes for the diﬀerent algorithms
compared with the analytical probability that four communities are actually deﬁned. (Right) Weak deﬁnition:
in addition to the same quantities plotted in the left graph, here we report, for every algorithm, the fraction f
of nodes not correctly classiﬁed.
Fig.3 Plot of the dendrograms for the network of college football teams, obtained using the Girvan-Newman algorithm
(left) and our new algorithm with g = 4 (right). Diﬀerent symbols denote teams belonging to diﬀerent confer-
ences. In both cases the observed communities perfectly correspond to the conferences, with the exception of
the 6 members of the Independent conference, which are misclassiﬁed.
Fig.4 Edge betweenness vs. the modiﬁed edge clustering coeﬃcient ˜C(4)
i,j , for the network of scientiﬁc collaborations
considered in section V. Each dot represents an edge in the network. See section V for details.
Fig.5 Plot of the average time (in seconds) needed to analyze a random graph of N nodes and ﬁxed average degree
⟨k⟩= 5. The time refers to the construction of the full tree down to single nodes (Fig. 1). No criterion to
validate the communities was imposed. The runs are performed on a desktop computer with a 800 MHz CPU.
Fig.6 Normalized size distribution of all the communities of scientists identiﬁed in a weak sense by the algorithm
described in section IV for g = 3 (circles) and g = 4 (squares). In both cases the behaviour is well reproduced
by a power law with exponent −2.

9
FIG. 1:

10
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
pout
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
R0
Analytical
g = 3
g = 4
GN
Strong definition
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
pout
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
R0, f
R0 Analytical
R0   g = 3
R0   g = 4
R0   GN
f   g = 3
f   g = 4
f   GN
Weak definition
FIG. 2:

11
FIG. 3:

12
0.01
0.1
1
Modified Edge clustering coefficient (g=4) 
10
0
10
2
10
4
10
6
Edge betwenness
FIG. 4:

13
10
100
1000
10000
N
0.01
1
100
Time (sec)
GN
Local, g=3
Local, g=4
FIG. 5:

14
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
S
10
-6
10
-4
10
-2
10
0
P(S)
Distribution of (weak) community sizes (g=3)
Distribution of (weak) community sizes (g=4)
Fit with a power law with exponent -2
FIG. 6:
