Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers
1999,3/ (I), /37-149
Calculation of signal detection theory measures
HAROLD STANISLAW
California State University, Stanislaus, Turlock, California
and
NATASHA TODOROV
Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
Signal detection theory (SDT)may be applied to any area of psychology in which two different types
of stimuli must be discriminated. Wedescribe several of these areas and the advantages that can be re-
alized through the application of SDT. Three of the most popular tasks used to study discriminability
are then discussed, together with the measures that SDTprescribes for quantifying performance in
these tasks. Mathematical formulae for the measures are presented, as are methods for calculating the
measures with lookup tables, computer software specifically developed for SDTapplications, and gen-
eral purpose computer software (including spreadsheets and statistical analysis software).
Signal detection theory (SOT) is widely accepted by
psychologists; the Social Sciences Citation Index cites
over 2,000 references to an influential book by Green and
Swets (1966) that describes SOT and its application to
psychology. Even so, fewerthan half ofthe studies to which
SOT isapplicable actuallymake use ofthe theory (Stanislaw
& Todorov, 1992). One possible reason for this apparent
underutilization of SOT is that relevant textbooks rarely
describe the methods needed to implement the theory. A
typical example is Goldstein's (1996) popular perception
textbook, which concludes a nine-page description of SOT
with the statement that measures prescribed by SOT "can
be calculated ... by means of a mathematical procedure
we will not discuss here" (p. 594).
The failure ofmany authors to describe SOT's methods
may have been acceptable when lengthy,specialized tables
were required to implement the theory. Today, however,
readily available computer software makes an SOT analy-
sis no more difficult than a t test. The present paper at-
tempts to demonstrate this and to render SOT available to
a larger audience than currently seems to be the case.
We begin with a brief overview of SOT, including a
description of its performance measures. We then present
the formulae needed to calculate these measures. Next, we
describe different methods for calculating SOT measures.
Finally, we provide sample calculations so that readers
can verify their understanding and implementation of the
techniques.
Weare indebted to James Thomas, Neil Macmillan, John Swets, Doug-
las Creelman, Scott Maxwell, Mark Frank, Helena Kadlec, and an
anonymous reviewer for providing insightful comments on earlier ver-
sions of this manuscript. We also thank Mack Goldsmith for testing
some of our spreadsheet commands. Correspondence concerning this
article should be addressed to H. Stanislaw, Department of Psychology,
California State University, Stanislaus, 801 West Monte Vista Avenue,
Turlock, CA 95382 (e-mail: hstanisl@toto.csustan.edu).
OVERVIEW OF SIGNAL
DETECTION THEORY
Proper application of SOT requires an understanding of
the theory and the measures it prescribes. We present an
overview of SOT here; for more extensive discussions, see
Green and Swets (1966) or Macmillan and Creelman
(1991). Readers who are already familiar with SDT may
wish to skip this section.
SOT can be applied whenever two possible stimulus
types must be discriminated. Psychologists first applied the
theory in studies of perception, where subjects discrimi-
nated between signals (stimuli) and noise (no stimuli). The
signal and noise labels remain, but SOT has since been ap-
plied in many other areas. Examples (and their corre-
sponding signal and noise stimuli) include recognition
memory (old and new items), lie detection (lies and truths),
personnel selection (desirable and undesirable applicants),
jury decision making (guilty and innocent defendants),
medical diagnosis (diseased and well patients), industrial
inspection (unacceptable and acceptable items), and in-
formation retrieval (relevant and irrelevant information;
see also Hutchinson, 1981; Swets, 1973; and the extensive
bibliographies compiled by Swets, 1988b, pp. 685-742).
Performance in each of these areas may be studied with a
variety oftasks. Wedeal here with three ofthe most popu-
lar: yes/no tasks, rating tasks, and forced-choice tasks.
YeslNo Tasks
A yes/no task involves signal trials, which present one
or more signals, and noise trials, which present one or
more noise stimuli. For example, yes/no tasks in auditory
perception may present a tone during signal trials and
nothing at all during noise trials, whereas yes/no tasks for
memory may present old (previously studied) words dur-
ing signal trials and new (distractor) words during noise
trials. After each trial, the subjects indicate whether a sig-
137
Copyright 1999 Psychonomic Society, Inc.

138
STANISLAW AND TODOROV
d'
"0oo
:£
~
Q)en·0
Z
4
3
2
o
Criterion
-1
-2
.O...fll=;...._-""III=~_~...,.................,;:i:IIIpo......~.....,.,
-3
.4
Noise
distribution
.3
>-
.~
:.0
m
.2
.0
0.....
0...
.1
Decision variable
Figure 1. Distribution ofthe decision variable across noise and signal trials, showing
d'; c, and the likelihoods on which f3 is based.
nal was presented (i.e., whether a tone was presented, or
whether the word was previously studied).
According to SDT, the subjects in a yes/no task base
their response on the value that a decision variableachieves
during each trial. If the decision variable is sufficiently
high during a given trial, the subject responds yes (a signal
was presented); otherwise, the subject responds no (no
signal was presented). The value that defines sufficiently
high is called the criterion.
For example, consider a psychologist attempting to de-
termine whether or not a child has attention deficit hyper-
activity disorder (ADHD). The psychologist might ad-
minister the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach
& Edelbrock, 1983) and diagnose the child as having
ADHD if the resulting score is 10 or higher (Rey, Morris-
Yates, & Stanislaw, 1992). In this case, the decision vari-
able is the CBCL score, and the criterion is set at 10.
In the ADHD example, the decision variable is readily
observed. However, most ofthe tasks studied by psycholo-
gists involve decision variables that are available only to
the subject performing the task. For example, the decision
variable may be the apparent loudness experienced during
each trial in an auditory perception study, the feeling of
familiarity associated with each stimulus item in a memory
study, or the apparent guilt ofeach defendant in a study of
jury decision making. In each of these cases, the subjects
compare the decision variable (which only they can ob-
serve) to the criterion they have adopted. A yes response
is made only if the auditory stimulus seems sufficiently
loud, the stimulus item seems sufficiently familiar, or the
defendant seems sufficiently guilty.
On signal trials, yes responses are correct and are termed
hits. On noise trials, yes responses are incorrect and are
termedfalse alarms. The hit rate (the probability ofre-
spondingyes on signal trials) and thefalse-alarm rate (the
probability ofresponding yes on noise trials) fully describe
performance on a yes/no task.
Ifthe subject is using an appropriate decision variable,
and ifthe subject is capable ofdistinguishing between sig-
nals and noise, the decision variable will be affected by the
stimuli that are presented. For example, previously studied
words in a memory study should, on average, seem more fa-
miliar than distractors. However, some previously studied
words will seem more familiar than others. Distractors
will also vary in their familiarity. Furthermore, factors
such as neural noise and fluctuations in attention may af-
fect the decision variable, even if the stimulus is held con-
stant. Thus, the decision variable will have a range of dif-
ferent values across signal trials and a range of different
values across noise trials. (For more examples of this, see
McNicol, 1972, pp. 11-14.)
The distribution ofvalues realized by the decision vari-
able across signal trials is the signal distribution, whereas
the corresponding distribution for noise trials is the noise
distribution. The hit rate equals the proportion ofthe signal
distribution that exceeds the criterion, whereas the false-
alarm rate equals the proportion of the noise distribution
that exceeds the criterion. This is illustrated in Figure I,
where the decision variable (measured in arbitrary units)
has a mean of0 and a standard deviation of 1 on noise tri-
als. On signal trials, the mean is higher (M = 2), but the
standard deviation is unchanged. Ayes response is made for
trials in which the decision variable exceeds 0.5; these tri-
als lie in the shaded region of the two distributions. The
shaded region ofthe noise distribution constitutes 30.85%
of the entire noise distribution, so the false-alarm rate is
.3085. By contrast, 93.32% of the signal distribution is
shaded, so the hit rate is .9332.
If the criterion is set to an even lower, or more liberal,
value (i.e., moved to the far left in Figure I), it will almost

CALCULATION OF SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY MEASURES
139
always be exceeded on signal trials. This will produce
mostly yes responses and a high hit rate. However, the cri-
terion will also be exceeded on most noise trials, resulting
in a high proportion ofyes responses on noise trials (i.e., a
high false-alarm rate). Thus, a liberal criterion biases the
subject toward responding yes, regardless ofthe stimulus.
By contrast, a high, or conservative, value for the crite-
rion biases the subject toward responding no, because the
criterion will rarely be exceeded on signal or noise trials.
This will result in a low false-alarm rate, but also a low hit
rate. The only way to increase the hit rate while reducing
the false-alarm rate is to reduce the overlap between the
signal and the noise distributions.
Clearly, the hit and false-alarm rates reflect two factors:
response bias (the general tendency to respond yes or no,
as determined by the location of the criterion) and the de-
gree of overlap between the signal and the noise distribu-
tions. The latter factor is usually called sensitivity, re-
flecting the perceptual origins of SDT: When an auditory
signal is presented, the decision variable will have a greater
value (the stimulus will sound louder) in listeners with
more sensitive hearing. The major contribution of SDT to
psychology is the separation of response bias and sensi-
tivity. This point is so critical that we illustrate it with five
examples from widely disparate areas of study.
Our first example is drawn from perception, where
higher thresholds have been reported for swear words than
for neutral stimuli (Naylor & Lawshe, 1958). A somewhat
Freudian interpretation of this finding is that it reflects
a change in sensitivity that provides perceptual "protec-
tion" against negative stimuli (Erdelyi, 1974). However, a
false alarm is more embarrassing for swear words than for
neutral stimuli. Furthermore, subjects do not expect to en-
counter swear words in a study and are, therefore, cautious
about reporting them. Thus, different apparent thresh-
olds for negative than for neutral stimuli may stem from
different response biases, as well as from different levels
of sensitivity. In order to determine which explanation is
correct, sensitivity and response bias must be measured
separately.
A second example involves memory studies. Hypnosis
sometimes improves recall, but it also increases the num-
ber of intrusions (false alarms). It is important, therefore,
to determine whether hypnosis actually improves mem-
ory, or whether demand characteristics cause hypnotized
subjects to report more memories about which they are un-
certain (Klatzky & Erdelyi, 1985). The former explanation
implies an increase in sensitivity, whereas the latter implies
that hypnosis affects response bias. Again, it is important
to measure sensitivity and response bias separately.
Our third example involves a problem that sometimes
arises when comparing the efficacy of two tests used to
diagnose the same mental disorder. One test may have a
higher hit rate than the other, but a higher false-alarm rate
as well. This problem typically arises because the tests use
different criteria for determining when the disorder is ac-
tually present. SDT can solve this problem by determin-
ing the sensitivity of each test in a metric that is indepen-
dent of the criterion (Rey et aI., 1992).
A fourth example concerns jury decision making. SDT
analyses (Thomas & Hogue, 1976) have shown that jury
instructions regarding the definition of reasonable doubt
affect response bias (the willingness to convict) rather
than sensitivity (the ability to distinguish guilty from in-
nocent defendants). Response bias also varies with the
severity of the case: Civil cases and criminal cases with
relatively lenient sentences require less evidence to draw
a conviction than criminal cases with severe penalties.
Our final example is drawn from industry, where
quality-control inspectors often detect fewer faulty items
as their work shift progresses. This declining hit rate usually
results from a change in response bias (Davies & Parasura-
man, 1982, pp. 60-99), which has led to remedies that
would fail if declining sensitivity were to blame (Craig,
1985). SDT also successfully predicts how repeated in-
spections improve performance (Stanislaw, 1995).
Medical diagnosis illustrates the problems that existed
before SDT was developed. In his presidential address to
the Radiological Society ofNorth America, Garland (1949)
noted that different radiologists sometimes classified the
same X ray differently. This problem was considered both
disturbing and mysterious until it was discovered that dif-
ferent response biases were partly to blame. Subsequently,
radiologists were instructed first to examine all images,
using a liberal criterion, and then to reexamine positive
images, using a conservative criterion.
Sensitivity and response bias are confounded by most
performance measures, including the hit rate, the false-
alarm rate, the hit rate "corrected" by subtracting the false-
alarm rate, and the proportion of correct responses in a
yes/no task. Thus, if (for example) the hit rate varies be-
tween two different conditions, it is not clear whether the
conditions differ in sensitivity, response bias, or both.
One solution to this problem involves noting that sensi-
tivity is related to the distance between the mean of the
signal distribution and the mean of the noise distribution
(i.e., the distance between the peaks of the two distribu-
tions in Figure I). As this distance increases, the overlap
between the two distributions decreases. Overlap also de-
creases ifthe means maintain a constant separation but the
standard deviations decrease. Thus, sensitivity can be
quantified by using the hit and false-alarm rates to deter-
mine the distance between the means, relative to their
standard deviations.
One measure that attempts to do this is d', which mea-
sures the distance between the signal and the noise means
in standard deviation units. The use of standard deviates
often makes it difficult to interpret particular values ofd',
However, a value of 0 indicates an inability to distinguish
signals from noise, whereas larger values indicate a cor-
respondingly greater ability to distinguish signals from
noise. The maximum possible value ofd' is +X, which sig-
nifies perfect performance. Negative values ofd' can arise
through sampling error or response confusion (responding

140
STANISLAW AND TODOROV
yes when intending to respond no, and vice versa); the
minimum possible value is -00. d' has a value of 2.00 in
Figure I, as the distance between the means is twice as
large as the standard deviations of the two distributions.
SDT states that d' is unaffected by response bias (i.e.,
is a pure measure of sensitivity) if two assumptions are
met regarding the decision variable: (1) The signal and
noise distributions are both normal, and (2) the signal and
noise distributions have the same standard deviation. We
call these the d' assumptions. The assumptions cannot ac-
tually be tested in yes/no tasks; rating tasks are required
for this purpose. However, for some yes/no tasks, the d'
assumptions may not be tenable; the assumption regarding
the equality ofthe signal and the noise standard deviations
is particularly suspect (Swets, 1986).
If either assumption is violated, d' will vary with re-
sponse bias, even ifthe amount of overlap between the sig-
nal and the noise distributions remains constant. Because
ofthis, some researchers prefer to use nonparametric mea-
sures of sensitivity. These measures may also be used
when d' cannot be calculated. (This problem is discussed
in more detail below.) Several nonparametric measures of
sensitivity have been proposed (e.g., Nelson, 1984, 1986;
W D. Smith, 1995), but the most popular is A'. This mea-
sure was devised by Pollack and Norman (1964); a com-
plete history is provided by Macmillan and Creelman
(1996) and W D. Smith. A' typically ranges from .5, which
indicates that signals cannot be distinguished from noise,
to 1, which corresponds to perfect performance. Values
less than .5 may arise from sampling error or response
confusion; the minimum possible value is O. In Figure 1,
A' has a value of .89.
Response bias in a yes/no task is often quantified with
{3. Use of this measure assumes that responses are based
on a likelihoodratio. Suppose the decision variable achieves
a value ofx on a given trial. The numerator for the ratio is
the likelihood of obtaining x on a signal trial (i.e., the
height ofthe signal distribution at x), whereas the denom-
inator for the ratio is the likelihood of obtaining x on a
noise trial (i.e., the height of the noise distribution at x).
Subjects respond yes ifz the likelihood ratio (or a variable
monotonically related to it) exceeds {3, and no otherwise.
When subjects favor neither the yes response nor the no
response, {3 = 1. Values less than I signify a bias toward
responding yes, whereas values of{3 greater than 1 signify
a bias toward the no response. In Figure 1, the signal like-
lihood is .1295 at the criterion, whereas the noise likeli-
hood is .3521 at the criterion. Thus, {3 equals .1295 -:-
.3521, or .37. This implies that the subjects will respond
yes on any trial in which the height of signal distribution
at x, divided by the height ofthe noise distribution at x, ex-
ceeds 0.37.
Because {3 is based on a ratio, the natural logarithm of
{3 is often analyzed in place of {3 itself (McNicol, 1972,
pp. 62-63). Negative values ofln({3) signify bias in favor
ofyes responses, whereas positive values ofln({3) signify
bias in favor of no responses. A value of 0 signifies that
no response bias exists. In Figure 1, the natural logarithm
of{3 equals -1.00.
Historically, {3has been the most popular measure ofre-
sponse bias. However, many authors now recommend
measuring response bias with c (Banks, 1970; Macmillan
& Creelman, 1990; Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). This
measure assumes that subjects respond yes when the de-
cision variable exceeds the criterion and no otherwise; re-
sponses are based directly on the decision variable, which
some researchers regard as more plausible than assuming
that responses are based on a likelihood ratio (Richardson,
1994). Another advantage of c is that it is unaffected by
changes in d', whereas {3 is not (Ingham, 1970; Macmil-
lan, 1993; McNicol, 1972, pp. 63--64).
c is defined as the distance between the criterion and
the neutral point, where neither response is favored. The
neutral point is located where the noise and signal distri-
butions cross over (i.e., where {3 = 1). Ifthe criterion is lo-
cated at this point, c has a value ofO. Deviations from the
neutral point are measured in standard deviation units.
Negative values ofc signify a bias toward responding yes
(the criterion lies to the left ofthe neutral point), whereas
positive values signify a bias toward the no response (the
criterion lies to the right ofthe neutral point). In Figure 1,
the neutral point is located 1 standard deviation above the
noise mean. The criterion is located 0.50 standard devia-
tions to the left of this point, so c has a value of -0.50.
A popular nonparametric measure of response bias is
B". This measure was devised by Grier (1971) from a sim-
ilar measure proposed by Hodos (1970). Unfortunately,
some researchers have confused the two measures, using
the formula for Grier's B" to compute what is claimed to
be Hodos's bias measure (e.g., Macmillan & Creelman,
1996). Both nonparametric bias measures can range from
- 1 (extreme bias in favor ofyes responses) to I (extreme
bias in favor ofno responses). A value of0 signifies no re-
sponse bias. In Figure 1, Grier's B" has a value of -0.55.
Rating Tasks
Rating tasks are like yes/no tasks, in that they present
only one stimulus type during each trial. However, rather
than requiring a dichotomous (yes or no) response, rating
tasks require graded responses. For example, subjects in a
study ofjury decision making may rate each defendant on
a scale of 1 (most certainly guilty) to 6 (most certainly in-
nocent). These ratings can be used to determine points on
a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, which
plots the hit rate as a function of the false-alarm rate for
all possible values of the criterion. A typical ROC curve
is illustrated in Figure 2.
A rating task with r ratings determines r -
I points on
the ROC curve, each corresponding to a different crite-
rion. Forexample, one criterion distinguishes ratings of" I"
from ratings of "2." Another criterion distinguishes rat-
ings of"2" from ratings of"3," and so on. The ROC curve
in Figure 2 was generated from a rating task with four pos-
sible ratings, resulting in three points (the open squares).

CALCULATION OF SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY MEASURES
141
1.0
.8
Q)
.6
+-'
ctl
....
+-'
.4
I
.2
.0
the standard deviation for signals equals that for noise. In
fact, rating tasks may be used to determine the validity of
the assumption regarding equal standard deviations .
The ROC area can be calculated from yes/no data, as
well as from rating data. One method involves using d' to
estimate the ROC area; the resulting measure is called Ad"
This measure is valid only when the d' assumptions are
met. A' also estimates the ROC area, and does so without
assuming that the decision variable has a particular (e.g.,
normal) distribution. However, A' is problematic in other
respects (Macmillan & Kaplan, 1985; W D. Smith, 1995).
In general, A z (when it can be calculated) is the preferred
measure ofthe ROC area and, thus, of sensitivity (Swets,
1988a; Swets & Pickett, 1982, pp. 31-32).
Figure 2. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for a
rating task with four ratings and At = .90. Three points on the
ROC curve are shown (open squares). The area under the curve,
as estimated by linear extrapolation, is indicated by shading; the
actual area includes the gray regions.
The remainder of the ROC curve is determined by extrap-
olation, as will be described below.
Rating tasks are primarily used to measure sensitivity.
According to SDT, the area under the ROC curve is a mea-
sure of sensitivity unaffected by response bias. The ROC
area typically ranges from .5 (signals cannot be distin-
guished from noise) to 1(perfect performance). Areas less
than .5 may arise from sampling error or response confu-
sion; the minimum possible value is O. The area under the
ROC curve in Figure 2 equals .90; this includes both the
large shaded region and the smaller gray regions.
The ROC area can be interpreted as the proportion of
times subjects would correctly identify the signal, if sig-
nal and noise stimuli were presented simultaneously (Green
& Moses, 1966; Green &: Swets, 1966, pp. 45-49). Thus,
Figure 2 implies that signals would be correctly identified
on 90% ofthe trials in which signal and noise stimuli were
presented together.
The ROC area can be estimated quite easily iflinear ex-
trapolation is used to connect the points on the ROC curve
(for details, see Centor, 1985,and Snodgrass, Levy-Berger,
& Haydon, 1985, pp. 449-454). However, this approach
generally underestimates sensitivity. For example, linear
extrapolation measures only the shaded region in Figure 2;
the gray regions are excluded. A common remedy is to as-
sume that the decision variable is normally distributed and
to use this information to fit a curvilinear function to the
ROC curve. The ROC area can then be estimated from pa-
rameters ofthe curvilinear function. When this procedure
is used, the ROC area is called A z , where the z (which
refers to z scores) indicates that the noise and signal dis-
tributions are assumed to be normal.
In calculating Az , no assumptions are made concerning
the decision variable's standard deviation. This differs
from yes/no tasks, where one ofthe d' assumptions is that
Forced-Choice Tasks
In a forced-choice task, each trial presents one signal
and one or more noise stimuli. The subjects indicate
which stimulus was the signal. Tasks are labeled accord-
ing to the total number of stimuli presented in each trial;
an m-alternative forced-choice (mAFC) task presents one
signal and m - 1noise stimuli. For example, a 3AFC task
for the study ofrecognition memory presents one old item
and two distractors in each trial. The subjects indicate
which ofthe three stimuli is the old item.
Each stimulus in an mAFC trial affects the decision
variable. Thus, each mAFC trial yields mdecision variable
scores. Subjects presumably compare these m scores (or
their corresponding likelihood ratios) with each other and
determine which is the largest and, thus, the most likely to
have been generated by a signal. Because this comparison
does not involve a criterion, mAFC tasks are only suitable
for measuring sensitivity.
SDT states that, ifsubjects donot favor any ofthe m al-
ternatives a priori, the proportion of correct responses on
an mAFC task is a measure ofsensitivity unaffected by re-
sponse bias (Green & Swets, 1966, pp. 45-49). This mea-
sure typically ranges from 11m (chance performance) to a
maximum of 1 (perfect performance). Valuesless than 11m
may result from sampling error or response confusion; the
minimum possible value is O.
FORMULAE FOR CALCULATING
SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY MEASURES
Few textbooks provide any information about SDT be-
yond that just presented. This section provides the mathe-
matical details that textbooks generally omit. Readers who
would rather not concern themselves with formulae may
skip this section entirely; familiarity with the underlying
mathematical concepts is not required to calculate SDT
measures. However, readers who dislike handwaving, or
who desire a deeper understanding ofSDT, are encouraged
to read on.
In the discussion below, H is used to indicate the hit
rate. This rate is found by dividing the number of hits by

142
STANISLAW AND TODOROV
Thus, d' is found by subtracting the z score that corre-
sponds to the false-alarm rate from the z score that corre-
sponds to the hit rate.
A' can be calculated as follows (Snodgrass & Corwin,
1988):
(6)
(5)
(7)
(8)
(9)
!rO'(FJ]';ro '(H>Ir
{3 =e
,
which is simpler and less prone to round-off error. The
natural logarithm of{3 is then
[<1>-1(F)r - [<I>-I(H)r
In({3)= -=------=-------=------
2
Thus, the natural logarithm of {3 is found by squaring the
z score that corresponds to the false-alarm rate, subtracting
the square of the z score that corresponds to the hit rate,
and dividing the result by 2.
The formula for c (Macmillan, 1993) is
<I>-l(H)+ <1>-](F)
c=-
2
Thus, c is found by averaging the z score that corresponds
to the hit rate and the z score that corresponds to the false-
alarm rate, then multiplying the result by negative one.
Some authors (e.g., Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988) omit the
minus sign, which simply means that negative values ofc
indicate a bias toward responding no, rather than yes.
Grier's B" can be found as follows (Snodgrass & Cor-
win, 1988):
{
H (1 - H )- F (I - F ) when H? F
"
H(1-H)+F(I-F)
B =
F(1-F)-H(1-H) when H < F
F(1-F)+H(1-H)
When Grier (1971) first proposed this measure, he pub-
lished only the formula to be used when H 2:: F. Ifthis for-
mula is applied when H < F, B" has the correct magnitude
but the wrong sign. B" may be found with a single formula,
as follows:
B"= i n(H_F)H(1-H)-F(1-F).
sg
H(I-H)+F(I-F)
Rating Tasks
To calculate Az' the r -
1 pairs of hit and false-alarm
rates must first be found. An iterative procedure is used to
accomplish this. In describing this procedure, it is as-
sumed that numerically higher ratings indicate greater con-
fidence that the stimulus was a signal.
First, ratings greater than 1 are considered to be yes re-
sponses, whereas ratings of 1 are considered to be no re-
sponses. The resulting hit and false-alarm rates are then
determined. Next, ratings greater than 2 are considered to
be yes responses, whereas ratings of 1 or 2 are considered
to be no responses. This yields a second pair of hit and
false-alarm rates. This procedure is repeated until all r -
1 pairs ofhit and false-alarm rates have been determined.
The <I> ~ 1 function is then used to find the z scores for
each pair ofhit and false-alarm rates. This is analogous to
(I)
(2)
(3)
(4)
r';
<j2p
e-.5[4>-1(H)] 2
e-.5[4>- 1(F)] 2
{3 =
c'
-r-
~2p
YeslNo Tasks
d' can be calculated as follows (Macmillan, 1993):
d'=<I>-l(H) - <I>-l(F).
the total number of signal trials. Similarly, the false-alarm
rate, F, is found by dividing the number offalse alarms by
the total number ofnoise trials.
Some SDT measures can only be calculated with the
aid of two mathematical functions. One of these, the <I>
("phi") function, converts z scores into probabilities. This
same conversion is used to perform a z test. However, the
<I> function determines the portion ofthe normal distribu-
tion that lies to the left ofthe z score; larger z scores yield
higher probabilities. The z test, by contrast, determines the
portion to the right of the z score; larger z scores yield
smaller probabilities. Furthermore, the <I> function is one-
tailed, whereas many z tests are two-tailed. For example,
<I> (-1.64) = .05, which means that a probability of .05 is
associated with a z score of -1.64, not 1.96 (the critical
value for a two-tailed z test).
The second mathematical function sometimes needed
to calculate SDT measures is the <I>-] ("inverse phi")
function. This complements the <I> function and converts
probabilities into z scores. For example, <I> -] (.05) =
-1.64, which means that a one-tailed probability of .05
requires a z score of -1.64.
{
.5+ (H -F)(l+H -F)whenH? F
,
4H(1-F)
A =
.5- (F - H) (1+ F - H) when H < F
4F(1-H)
Some publications list only the formula to be used when
H 2:: F (e.g., Grier, 1971; note also the typographical error
in Cradit, Tashchian, & Hofacker, 1994). The need for two
different formulae is awkward, but Equation 2 can be
rewritten into a single formula, as follows:
r
(H _F)2+ IH-F 11
A' = .5+ sign(H -F)
,
4max(H,F)-4HF
where sign(H - F) equals +1 ifH - F> 0 (i.e., ifH >
F), 0 ifH = F, and -1 otherwise, and max(H, F) equals
either H or F, whichever is greater.
{3 may be calculated in a variety ofways. Many authors
(e.g., Brophy, 1986) suggest using the formula
However, this can be rewritten as

CALCULATION OF SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY MEASURES
143
2.5
2.0
Q)
1.5
...
0o
(/)
1.0
K,
Q)
0.5
-
co...
."!::
0.0
I
-0.5
-1.0
-2.5
-1.5
-0.5
0.5
False-alarm rate z score
Figure 3. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve plot-
ted in z space, for a rating task with six ratings and A z = .82. The
three diagonal lines represent different "best" fits to the five
points on the ROC curve (open squares). The thin line predicts
hit rate z scores from false-alarm rate z scores; the broken line
predicts false-alarm rate zscores from hit rate zscores. The heavy
line is a compromise between the two other lines.
plotting the ROC curve in z space, where the axes are z
scores rather than probabilities (see Figure 3). Continuing
this analogy, the slope and intercept of the line that best
fits the z scores in z space are found. A z can then be found
as follows (Swets & Pickett, 1982, p. 33):
A
<I> [
Intercept
]
(10)
z =
~1+(Slope)2·
The slope of the best-fitting line in z space equals the
noise distribution standard deviation divided by the signal
distribution standard deviation. Thus, the d' assumption of
equal standard deviations for the signal and noise distrib-
utions can be tested by determining whether the slope
equals 1 (or whether the logarithm of the slope equals 0,
which is the better test from a statistical viewpoint).
Forced-Choice Tasks
Sensitivity in a forced-choice task is determined by sim-
ply dividing the number of correct responses by the total
number oftrials.
Comparing Performance
Across Different Types ofTasks
d' may be used to estimate the ROC area as follows
(Macmillan, 1993):
Ad' =<1>(Ji).
(II)
If the d' assumptions are satisfied, Ad' should equal the
proportion of correct responses that would have been ob-
tained had subjects performed a 2AFC task instead of a
yes/no task. In other words, Ad' and the proportion correct
on a 2AFC task quantify performance with the same met-
ric, thereby allowing comparisons to be made between
yes/no and 2AFC tasks (see, e.g., Stanislaw, 1995, 1996).
The proportion of correct responses on a 2AFC task
should equal the area under the ROC curve. Thus, if the
decision variable is normally distributed, Az from a rating
task should equal the proportion correct on a 2AFC task,
which in turn should equal Ad' from a yes/no task, if the
decision variable has the same standard deviation for both
types of stimuli (Macmillan, 1993).
Unfortunately, no such prediction can be made for A'.
In fact, A' may differ from Ad" even though both measures
estimate the area under the ROC curve. For example, in
Figure 1, Ad' = .92 and A' = .89.
Converting Between z Scores and Probabilities
Clearly, calculation of many SDT measures requires
methods for converting z scores into probabilities (the <I>
function) and probabilities into z scores (the <1>-1 function).
Neither conversion is straightforward, because closed-
form solutions to the underlying equations do not exist.
However, several alternatives have been developed.
The most accurate ofthese--at least in theory-involve
iterative calculations that converge on the exact solution.
For example, the <I> function can be represented by a power
series (Zelen & Severo, 1972, Equation 26.2.10). Adding
terms to the series increases accuracy, but, in practice, a
limit is imposed by round-offerrors.
Another approach involves the use of closed-form ap-
proximations with known accuracy bounds. For example,
one approximation to the <I> function (Zelen & Severo,
1972, Equation 26.2.17) yields probabilities that are ac-
curate to within ±7.5 X ]0-8.
Hit and False-Alarm Rates of Zero or One
Regardless of the approach used for the <I> and <1>-1
functions, problems may arise when the hit or false-alarm
rate equals 0, because the corresponding z score is -rx.
Similarly, a hit or false-alarm rate of 1 corresponds to a z
score of +00. These extreme values are particularly likely
to arise when signals differ markedly from noise, few tri-
als are presented (so that sampling error is large), or sub-
jects adopt extremely liberal or conservative criteria (as
might occur if, for example, the consequences of a false
alarm are severe).
Ifboth rates have extreme values, d' and Ad' can still be
calculated. When H = 1 and F = 0, d' = +00 and Ad' = I.
When H =°and F = 1, d' = -00 and Ad' = 0. When both
rates are °or both rates are I, most researchers assume
that d' =°and Ad' = .5. However,ifone rate has an extreme
value and the other does not, d' and Ad' are indeterminate.
Several solutions to this problem have been proposed.
One possibility is to quantify sensitivity with nonpara-
metric measures, such as A' (Craig, 1979). These measures
eliminate reliance on the <I> and <1>-1 functions but are con-
troversial. Macmillan and Creelman (1996) have argued
against the use ofA'; however, Donaldson (1993) suggests

144
STANISLAW AND TODOROV
that A' may estimate sensitivity better than d' when the sig-
nal and noise distributions are normal but have different
standard deviations.
Another alternative is to combine the data from several
subjects before calculating the hit and false-alarm rates
(Macmillan & Kaplan, 1985). However, this approach
complicates statistical testing and should only be applied
to subjects who have comparable response biases and lev-
els ofsensitivity.
A third approach, dubbed loglinear, involves adding 0.5
to both the number ofhits and the number offalse alarms
and adding 1 to both the number of signal trials and the
number ofnoise trials, before calculating the hit and false-
alarm rates. This seems to work reasonably well (Hautus,
1995). Advocates of the loglinear approach recommend
using it regardless ofwhether or not extreme rates are ob-
tained.
A fourth approach involves adjusting only the extreme
rates themselves. Rates of0 are replaced with 0.5 -;- n, and
rates of 1 are replaced with (n - 0.5) -;- n, where n is the
number of signal or noise trials (Macmillan & Kaplan,
1985). This approach yields biased measures of sensitiv-
ity (Miller, 1996) and may be less satisfactory than the
loglinear approach (Hautus, 1995). However,it is the most
common remedy for extreme values and is utilized in sev-
eral computer programs that calculate SDT measures (see,
e.g., Dorfman, 1982). Thus, it is the convention we adopt
in our computational example below.
METHODS FOR
CALCULATING SDT MEASURES
In this section, we describe three general approaches
that can be used to calculate the measures prescribed by
SDT: tabular methods, methods that use software specif-
ically developed for SDT, and methods that rely on general
purpose software.
Tabular Methods
Elliott (1964) published one ofthe first and most pop-
ular listings of d' values for particular pairs of hit and
false-alarm rates. Similar tables followed. The most exten-
sive of these is Freeman's (1973), which also lists values
of 13. (See Gardner, Dalsing, Reyes, & Brake, 1984, for a
briefer table of13 values.)
Tables for d' are not restricted just to yes/no tasks. El-
liott (1964) published an early d' table for forced-choice
tasks; more recent versions that correct some errors have
since appeared (Hacker & Ratcliff, 1979; Macmillan &
Creelman, 1991, pp. 319-322). Tables for other tasks have
been published by Craven (1992), Hershman and Small
(1968), Kaplan, Macmillan, and Creelman (1978), and
Macmillan and Creelman (1991, pp. 323-354).
Tabular methods have relatively poor accuracy. Some
tables contain incorrect entries, but even error-free tables
can be used only after the hit and false-alarm rates are
rounded off (usually to two significant digits). Rounding
introduces errors; changing the fourth significant digit of
the hit or the false-alarm rate can often affect the second
significant digit ofd'. Interpolation between tabled values
can minimize the impact ofrounding errors, but the proper
interpolation method is nonlinear. Furthermore, even lin-
ear interpolation requires calculations that the tabular
method is specifically designed to avoid.
When SDT was first developed, most researchers were
forced to rely on the tabular approach. However, this ap-
proach is difficult to justify today.Computers can quantify
SDT performance far more quickly and accurately than
can tables. Computers also provide the only reasonable
means of analyzing rating task data; tables can determine
neither the slope nor the intercept of the best-fitting line
in z space.
Some computer programs (e.g., Ahroon & Pastore,
1977) calculate SDT measures by incorporating look-up
tables, thus gaining a slight speed advantage over closed-
form approximations and iterative techniques. However,
speed is likely to be of concern only in Monte Carlo sim-
ulations involving thousands of replications. Even here,
tables are of questionable utility, because of their limited
accuracy. Thus, the tabular approach should be used only
as a last resort.
Signal Detection Theory Software
Ahroon and Pastore (1977) were the first authors to
publish programs (written in FORTRAN and BASIC) for
determining values ofd' and 13 for yes/no tasks. However,
these programs should be used with caution, as they rely
on look-up tables for the cI> -1 function. Furthermore, 13 is
calculated with Equation 4 rather than Equation 5. This
imposes speed and accuracypenalties, thus offsetting what-
ever advantage might be gained from the tabular ap-
proach.
Better choices for analyzing yes/no data are Brophy's
(1986) BASIC program and the Pascal program published
by Macmillan and Creelman (1991, pp. 358-359). Other
published programs are written in APL (McGowan &
Appel, 1977) and Applesoft (which is similar to BASIC;
Gardner & Boice, 1986). Programmers who wish to write
their own code can refer to algorithms for the cI>-1 function
(see Brophy, 1985, for a review) and then apply the appro-
priate equation. Algorithms for calculating d' for forced-
choice tasks can be found in 1.E. K. Smith (1982).
More extensive programs are required to analyze data
from rating tasks. Centor (1985) has published a spread-
sheet macro for this purpose, but his program uses linear
extrapolation and thus tends to underestimate A z . (See
Centor & Schwartz, 1985, for a discussion of this prob-
lem.) A better choice is RSCORE, written by Donald Dorf-
man. Sourcecode is availableinboth FORTRAN (Dorfman,
1982) and BASIC (Alf & Grossberg, 1987). The latest
version, RSCORE4, may be downloaded (from ftp:!/per-
ception.radiology.uiowa.edu/public/rscore). A compara-
ble program, Charles Metz's ROCFIT,may be downloaded
(from ftp://random.bsd.uchicago.edu/roc). Both programs
are available in source code (FORTRAN) and compiled
form (PC-compatible for RSCORE4; PC-compatible,

CALCULATION OF SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY MEASURES
145
Table 1
Commands Needed to Calculate d' in Various Computer Packages
Package
Command(s)
Excel
DPRIME = NORMSINV(H) - NORMSINV(F)
Mathematica
«Statistics'N ormalDistribution'
DPRIME = Quantile[NormalDistribution[O,I],H]
-Quantile[NormalDistribution[O, I],F]
Minitab
InvCDF 'H' c3;
InvCDF 'F' c4;
normal°I.
normal°I.
Name c5 = 'DPRIME'
Let 'DPRIME' = c3 - c4
Quattro Pro
DPRIME = @NORMINV(H,O,I) - @NORMINV(F,O,I)
SAS
DPRIME = PROBIT(H) - PROBIT(F)
SPSS
COMPUTE DPRIME = PROBIT(H) - PROBIT(F)
SYSTAT
LET DPRIME = ZIF(H) - ZIF(F)
Note-The hit and false-alarm rates are called Hand F, respectively, and d' is
returned in DPRIME,
Macintosh, and Unix for ROCFIT). Both ftp sites also
contain programs that can be used for other types of SDT
analyses.
ROCFIT and RSCORE4 are both based on Dorfman's
(1982) program. Thus, they usually provide similar results.
However, RSCORE4 may perform better when hit or
false-alarm rates equal 0 or 1, as it uses a sophisticated it-
erative method for dealing with these cases (Dorfman &
Berbaum, 1995).
General Purpose Software
A' and B" can be computed with virtually any spread-
sheet or statistics package. For example, A' can be calcu-
lated in SPSS with the following COMPUTE statement:
APRIME = 0.5 + (ABS(H - F) 1(H - F»
* ((H"", F)**2 + ABS(H - F»
1(4 * MAX(H,F) - 4 * H * F),
(12)
where H is the variable containing the hit rate and F is the
variable containing the false-alarm rate. SPSS lacks the
sign function, so the statement ABS(H - F)/(H - F) is
used instead.
Extensions of Equation 12 to other software packages
are straightforward but may require slight changes. For
example, some packages square a value with the 1\2 oper-
ator, rather than the **2 operator. Packages that lack a
function for determining the maximum must use the two
formulae found in Equation 2, rather than the single for-
mula used in Equation 3.
Spreadsheets (and some statistical packages, such as
Minitab) require cell identifiers, rather than variablenames.
This is illustrated by the following Excel statement, which
can be used to calculate B" from the hit rate (stored in cell
al) and the false-alarm rate (stored in cell a2):
= SIGN(al - a2) * (al - al * al - a2 + a2 * a2)
I(al - al * al + a2 - a2 * a2).
(13)
Table 2
Commands Needed to Calculate f3in Various Computer Packages
Package
Command(s)
Excel
BETA = EXP ( ( NORMSINV(F)"2
- NORMSINV(H)"2 ) / 2 )
Mathematica
«Statistics'Normallristribution'
BETA = Exp [ ( Quantile[NormalDistribution[O, I],F]"2
-Quantile[NormalDistribution[O,l],H]"2) / 2]
Minitab
InvCDF 'H' c3;
normal°I.
InvCDF 'F' c4;
normal°I.
Name c5 = 'BETA'
Let 'BETA' = EXP ( ( c4**2 - c3**2 ) /2)
Quattro Pro
BETA = @EXP ( ( @NORMINV(F,O,I)"2
-@NORMINV(H,O,I)"2)/2 )
SAS
BETA = EXP ( ( PROBIT(F)**2 - PROBIT(H)**2 ) / 2 )
SPSS
COMPUTE BETA = EXP ( ( PROBIT(F)**2
- PROBIT(H)**2 ) / 2 )
SYSTAT
LET BETA = EXP ( ( ZIF(F)"2 ~ ZIF(H)"2 ) / 2 )
Note-The hit and false-alarm rates are called Hand F,respectively, and f3 is returned
in BETA.

146
STANISLAW AND TODOROV
Table 3
Commands Needed to Calculate c in Various Computer Packages
Package
Excel
Mathematica
Minitab
Quattro Pro
SAS
SPSS
SYSTAT
Command(s)
C = -( NORMSINV(H) + NORMSINV(F) ) / 2
«Statistics'NormalDistribution
C = -( Quantile[NormalDistribution[O,I],H]
+Quantile[NormalDistribution[O, I],F] ) / 2
InvCDF 'H' c3;
normal 0 I.
InvCDF 'F' c4;
normal 0 I.
Name c5 = 'C'
Let 'C' = -( c3 +c4 )/2
C = -( @NORMINV(H,O,I) + @NORMINV(F,O,I)) / 2
C = -( PROBIT(H) + PROBIT(F) ) / 2
COMPUTE C = -( PROBIT(H) + PROBIT(F) ) / 2
LET C = -( ZIF(H) + ZIF(F) ) / 2
Note-The hit and false-alarm rates are called Hand F,respectively, and c is returned
in C.
Other sensitivity and response bias measures can only
be calculated with software that provides direct access to
the cD and cD-I functions. All the statistical packages uti-
lize these functions to perform significance tests, but only
some allow the functions to be used while creating new
variables. Even fewer spreadsheets provide such access;
notable exceptions are Excel and Quattro Pro (but not
Lotus 1-2-3). However, any spreadsheet that permits
macro programming can use the cD-I algorithms reviewed
by Brophy (1985).
The cD-I function is needed to calculate d', {3, and c.
This function is called NORMSINV or NORMINV in
Excel and Quattro Pro, ANORIN in IMSL, normQuant in
JMp, Quantile[NormalDistribution[O,1]] in Mathematica,
InvCDF in Minitab, PROBIT in SAS and SPSS, and ZIF
in SYSTAT. Users must sometimes specify M = 0 and
SD = 1 (e.g., when using NORMINY, but not when using
NORMSINV). Calculation of {3 requires exponentiation
(called EXP in most packages) and squaring (using the **2
or 1\2 operator).
The cD function is needed to calculate Ad" This func-
tion is called NORMSDIST or NORMDIST in Excel and
Quattro Pro, ANORDF in IMSL, normDist in JMP,
CDF[NormalDistribution[O, I]] in Mathematica, CDF in
Minitab, PROBNORM in SAS, CDFNORM in SPSS, and
ZCF in SYSTAT. Users must sometimes specify M = 0 and
SD = I (e.g., when using NORMDIST, but not when using
NORMSDIST). Calculation ofAd' also requires taking a
square root. Most packages accomplish this with the SQR
or SQRT function.
Sample commands for determining d', {3, c, and Ad' in
a variety ofpackages are listed in Tables l~. Commands
for other packages should be readily derived from these ex-
amples (referring to the appropriate equation, as needed).
Note that some packages (e.g., spreadsheets and Minitab)
use column or cell identifiers in place ofthe variable names
listed in Tables l~.
Researchers with rating task data may be tempted to use
standard regression techniques (ordinary least-squares, or
OLS) to fit a line to the z scores for the hit and false-alarm
rates (e.g., Richards & Thornton, 1970). Once the slope
and intercept of this line are known, Equation 10 can be
used to determine A z : However,this approach is problem-
atic. OLS assumes that only one variable is measured with
error; the best-fitting line minimizes the errors in predict-
ing this variable. In rating tasks, the empirically determined
hit and false-alarm rates both contain sampling error, so
OLS provides biased estimates ofthe slope and intercept.
This problem is best solved by relying on a program de-
signed specifically for the analysis of rating task data,
such as ROCFIT or RSCORE4. However, another possi-
bility is to perform two OLS regressions. In describing this
Table 4
Commands Needed to Calculate Ad' in Various Computer Packages
Package
Command(s)
Excel
AD = NORMSDIST ( DPRIME / SQRT(2) )
Mathematica
«Statistics'Normallristribution'
AD = CDF [ NorrnalDistribution[O,I],DPRIME / Sqrt[2] ]
Minitab
LET c2 = 'DPRIME' / SQRT(2)
Name c3 = 'AD'
CDFc2 'AD'
Quattro Pro
AD = @NORMDlST ( DPRIME / SQRT(2), 0, I, I )
SAS
AD = PROBNORM ( DPRIME / SQRT(2) )
SPSS
COMPUTE AD = CDFNORM ( DPRIME / SQRT(2) )
SYSTAT
LET AD = ZCF ( DPRIME / SQR(2) )
Note-d' is stored in a variable called DPRIME, and Ad' is returned in a variable called
AD.

CALCULATION OF SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY MEASURES
147
TableS
Hypothetical Number of Responses in Signal and Noise Trials for
a Study Using a 6-Point Rating Scale, and Hit and False-Alarm Rates
if Numerically Higher Responses Are Considered to Be YesResponses
Response
Signal Trials
Hit Rate
Noise Trials
False-Alarm Rate
I
0
.99*
8
.68
2
4
.92
6
.44
3
8
.76
I
.40
4
8
.60
3
.28
5
12
.36
7
.02t
6
18
0
*The actual hit rate is 1.00; the entry shown assumes a rate of 49.5 -7 50. "The actual
false-alarm rate is 0.00; the entry shown assumes a rate of 0.5 -725.
procedure, we call the Z score corresponding to a given hit
rate zH' so that <1>-] (hit rate) = ZH' Similarly, we call the Z
score corresponding to a given false-alarm rate ZF' The
double regression procedure assumes that the best-fitting
"unbiased" line (the solid black line in Figure 3) is mid-
way between the regression line that minimizes the errors
in predicting ZH from ZF (the thin black line in Figure 3)
and the regression line that minimizes the errors in pre-
dicting ZF from ZH (the broken line in Figure 3).
The procedure begins by using OLS to regress zH on ZF
(i.e., predict the hit rate Z scores from the false-alarm rate
Z scores). Call the slope of the resulting regression line
Slope]. Next, regress ZF on ZH (i.e., predict the false-alarm
rate Z scores from the hit rate Z scores). Call the slope of
this regression line Slope.. Average the two slopes to find
the slope of the "unbiased" line, as follows:
Slope*= 0.5 (SlOpe]+_1_),
(14)
Slope,
where Slope 2 is inverted, so that both slopes indicate how
a given change in zF affects zH' Next, find the mean ofall
r -
1 values ofZ F (call this ZF) and the mean of all r -
1
values of ZH (zH ). Then, find the intercept ofthe best fit-
ting "unbiased" line with the formula
Intercept- =ZH - (Slope- X zF)'
(15)
Equation 15 ensures that the best-fitting "unbiased" line
predicts a value of ZH for ZH when ZF = Z F' Finally, deter-
mine Az by using the "unbiased" slope and intercept in
Equation 10.
COMPUTATIONAL EXAMPLES
Readers may find it useful to work through a computa-
tional example that illustrates the application of the pro-
cedures described above. Our example presents data from
a study in which a subject observes 50 signal trials and 25
noise trials. After each trial, the subject uses a 6-point
scale to indicate whether or not a signal was presented. A
response of 1 indicates that the subject is very certain a
signal was not presented, whereas a response of 6 indicates
the subject is very certain that a signal was presented. In-
termediate values represent intermediate levels of cer-
tainty. Hypothetical data from a single subject are pre-
sented in Table 5.
The data must first be converted into hit and false-
alarm rates. To do this, first consider 1 responses to be
equivalent to no responses in a yes/no task, and consider
the remaining responses to be equivalent to yes responses.
This yields 17 false alarms, so (dividing by the total num-
ber of noise trials) the false-alarm rate is 17 -:- 25 = .68.
Similarly, there are 50 hits, so the hit rate is 50 -:- 50 =
1.00. This hit rate is replaced by 49.5 -i- 50 = .99 (see the
section entitled "Hit and False-Alarm Rates of Zero or
One"). Now consider responses of 1 or 2 to be no re-
sponses, and consider responses of 3, 4, 5, or 6 to be yes
responses. This yields 11 false alarms (for a false-alarm
rate of .44) and 46 hits (for a hit rate of .92). This proce-
dure is continued until only responses of 6 are considered
yes responses, which yields a false-alarm rate of a(which
is replaced by 0.5 -:- 25 = .02) and a hit rate of .36. The
five pairs of hit and false-alarm rates that result from this
procedure are listed in Table 5.
Table 6 lists Z scores and the values of d', Ad" A', [3, c,
and B" for each of the five pairs of hit and false-alarm
rates. To illustrate how these values are obtained, consider
the second row in Table 5, which has a hit rate of .92. Ap-
plication ofthe <I>-] function reveals that the correspond-
ing Z score is 104051. Similarly,the false-alarm rate of 044
corresponds to a Z score of -0.1510. Subtracting the
false-alarm rate Z score from the hit rate Z score yields d' =
1.56 (Equation 1). Dividing this by v2 and applying the
<I> function to the result reveals that Ad' = .86 (Equa-
Table 6
Signal Detection Parameters for the Data Shown in Table S
Yes Response
CP-I(H)
CP-I(F)
d'
Ad'
A'
{3
c
B
U
2-6
2.3263
0.4677
1.86
.91
.82
0.07
-1.40
-0.91
3-6
1.4051
-0.1510
1.56
.86
.84
0.38
-0.63
-0.54
4-6
0.7063
-0.2533
0.96
.75
.75
0.80
-0.23
-0.14
5-6
0.2533
-0.5828
0.84
.72
.72
1.15
0.16
0.09
6
-0.3585
-2.0537
1.70
.88
.88
7.73
1.21
0.84

148
STANISLAW AND TODOROV
tion 11). Application of Equation 3 yields A' = .84. Sub-
tracting the squared hit rate z score from the squared false-
alarm rate z score and dividing the result by 2 yields
-0.98, which is the natural logarithm of f3 (Equation 6).
Raising e to this power reveals that f3 = 0.38 (Equation 5).
The mean of the hit rate and the false-alarm rate z scores
is 0.6271, so c = -0.63 (Equation 7). Finally, application
of Equation 9 yields B" = -0.54.
ROCFIT estimates that the ROC curve in z space has a
slope of 1.28 and an intercept of 1.52. Application ofEqua-
tion 10 yields a value of .82 for Az . When OLS is used to
estimate the slope and intercept, Slope) = 0.99, Slope, =
0.81, and Slope» = 1.11. The mean false-alarm rate z score
is -0.51, whereas the mean hit rate z score is 0.87. Thus,
Intercept- = 1.44, yielding a value of .83 for Az .
This example illustrates the danger in using standard
OLS to analyze rating data. The correlation between the
hit rate and the false-alarm rate z scores is very high (r =
.90). Even so, the slope obtained by minimizing errors in
predicting zH (0.99) differs markedly from the slope ob-
tained by minimizing errors in predicting zF (1.23, after
inverting Slope-), Furthermore, OLS gives the misleading
impression that the signal and noise distributions have
equal standard deviations (Slope) "" 1); in fact, the noise
distribution varies far more than the signal distribution.
Thus, a program specifically designed to analyze rating
data (such as ROCFIT or RSCORE4) should be used
whenever possible.
The data in this example violate one of the d' assump-
tions, because the noise distribution has a far larger stan-
dard deviation than does the signal distribution.
This violation explains why the d' values in Table 6-
each of which results from a different criterion-vary so
widely. Clearly, researchers should not use d' without first
obtaining evidence (preferably from a rating task) that its
underlying assumptions are valid. Nonparametric mea-
sures are no panacea; theA' values are somewhat less vari-
able than the Ad' values but also lack stability. Thus, re-
searchers who are primarily interested in sensitivity may
wish to avoid yes/no tasks altogether and rely, instead, on
forced-choice or rating tasks.
CONCLUSION
The primary contribution of SDT to psychology is the
recognition that performance on discrimination tasks in-
volves two separate factors: response bias and sensitivity.
Several different measures have been developed to quantify
both ofthese factors. Many ofthese measures can be deter-
mined in a computation-free manner through the use ofta-
bles, but a better approach involves using specialized or gen-
eral purpose computer software. It is to be hoped that the
ready availability of this software will encourage more re-
searchers to apply SDT than currently seems to be the case.
REFERENCES
ACHENBACH, T. M., & EDELBROCK, C. S. (1983). Manualfor the child
behavior checklist and revised child behavior profile. Burlington:
University of Vermont, Department of Psychiatry.
AHROON, W. A., JR., & PASTORE, R. E. (1977). Procedures for comput-
ing d' and (3. Behavior Research Methods & Instrumentation, 9, 533-
537.
ALF,E. E, & GROSSBERG, 1. M. (1987). DORF2R.BAS: Analyzing signal-
detection theory rating data in the BASIC programming language. Be-
havior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 19,475-482.
BANKS, W. P. (1970). Signal detection theory and human memory. Psy-
chological Bulletin, 74, 81-99.
BROPHY, A. L. (1985). Approximation ofthe inverse normal distribution
function. Behavior Research Methods. Instruments, & Computers, 17,
415-417.
BROPHY, A. L. (1986). Alternatives to a table of criterion values in sig-
nal detection theory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 18, 285-286.
CENTOR, R. M. (1985). A Visica1c program for estimating the area under
a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. Medical Decision
Making.S, 139-148.
CENTOR, R. M., & SCHWARTZ, J. S. (1985). An evaluation of methods
for estimating the area under a receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve. Medical Decision Making.S, 149-156.
CRADIT, J. D., TASHCHIAN, A., & HOFACKER, C. E (1994). Signal de-
tection theory and single observation designs: Methods and indices
for advertising recognition testing. Journal ofMarketing Research,
31, 117-127.
CRAIG, A. (1979). Nonparametric measures of sensory efficiency for
sustained monitoring tasks. Human Factors, 21, 69-78.
CRAIG, A. (1985). Field studies ofhuman inspection: The application of
vigilance research. In S. Folkard & T.H. Monk (Eds.), Hours ofwork
(pp. 133-145). Chichester, U.K.: Wiley.
CRAVEN, B. J. (1992). A table of d' for M-alternative odd-man-out
forced-choice procedures. Perception & Psychophysics, 51, 379-385.
DAVIES, D. R., & PARASURAMAN, R. (1982). The psychology ofvigi-
lance. London: Academic Press.
DONALDSON, W. (1993). Accuracy ofd' and A' as estimates of sensitiv-
ity. Bulletin ofthe Psychonomic Society, 31, 271-274.
DORFMAN, D. D. (1982). RSCORE II. In 1. A. Swets & R. M. Pickett,
Evaluation ofdiagnostic systems: Methodsfrom signal detection the-
ory (pp. 212-232). New York: Academic Press.
DoRFMAN, D. D., & BERBAUM, K. S. (1995). Degeneracy and discrete re-
ceiver operating characteristic rating data. Academic Radiology, 2,
907-915.
ELLIOTT, P. B. (1964). Tables ofd', In 1.A. Swets (Ed.), Signal detection
and recognition by human observers (pp. 651-684). New York: Wiley.
ERDELYI, M. H. (1974). A new look at the New Look: Perceptual de-
fense and vigilance. Psychological Review, 81, 1-25.
FREEMAN, P. R. (1973). Tablesofd 'and {3. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
GARDNER, R. M., & BOICE, R. (1986). A computer program to generate
signal-detection theory values for sensitivity and response bias. Be-
havior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 18, 54-56.
GARDNER, R. M., DALSING, S., REYES, B., & BRAKE, S. (1984). Table of
criterion values ({3) used in signal detection theory. Behavior Re-
search Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 16,425-436.
GARLAND, H. L. (1949). On the scientific evaluation of diagnostic pro-
cedures. Radiology, 52, 309-328.
GOLDSTEIN, E. B. (1996). Sensation and perception (4th ed.). New York:
Brooks Cole.
GREEN, D. M., & MOSES, E L. (1966). On the equivalence oftwo recog-
nition measures of short-term memory. Psychological Bulletin, 66,
228-234.
GREEN, D. M., & SWETS, J. A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psy-
chophysics. New York: Wiley.
GRIER,J. B. (1971). Nonparametric indexes for sensitivity and bias:
Computing formulas. Psychological Bulletin, 75, 424-429.
HACKER, M. J., & RATCLIFF, R. (1979). A revised table of d' for m-
alternative forced choice. Perception & Psychophysics, 26, 168-170.
HAUTUS, M. (1995). Corrections for extreme proportions and their bi-
asing effects on estimated values ofd', Behavior Research Methods.
Instruments. & Computers, 27, 46-51.
HERSHMAN, R. L., & SMALL, D. (1968). Tables of d' for detection and
localization. Perception & Psychophysics, 3,321-323.
HODOS, W. (1970). Nonparametric index of response bias for use in de-

CALCULATION OF SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY MEASURES
149
tection and recognition experiments. Psychological Bulletin, 74, 351-
354.
HUTCHINSON, T. P. (1981). A review of some unusual applications of
signal detection theory. Quality & Quantity, 15, 71-98.
INGHAM, J. G. (1970). Individual differences in signal detection. Acta
Psychologica, 34, 39-50.
KAPLAN, H. L., MACMILLAN, N. A., & CREELMAN, C. D. (1978). Tables
of d' for variable-standard discrimination paradigms. Behavior Re-
search Methods & Instrumentation, 10,796-813.
KLATZKY, R. L., & ERDELYI, M. H. (1985). The response criterion prob-
lem in tests of hypnosis and memory. International Journal ofClini-
cal & Experimental Hypnosis, 33, 246-257.
MACMILLAN, N. A. (1993). Signal detection theory as data analysis
method and psychological decision model. In G. Keren & C. Lewis
(Eds.), A handbookfor data analysis in the behavioral sciences:
Methodological issues (pp. 21-57). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
MACMILLAN, N. A., & CREELMAN, C. D. (1990). Response bias: Char-
acteristics ofdetection theory, threshold theory, and "nonparametric"
indexes. Psychological Bulletin, 107,401-413.
MACMILLAN, N. A., & CREELMAN, C. D. (1991). Detection theory: A
user's guide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
MACMILLAN, N. A., & CREELMAN, C. D. (1996). Triangles in ROC
space: History and theory of"nonparametric" measures ofsensitivity
and bias. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3, 164-170.
MACMILLAN, N. A., & KAPLAN, H. L. (1985). Detection theory analysis
ofgroup data: Estimating sensitivity from average hit and false-alarm
rates. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 185-199.
MCGOWAN, W.T., III, & ApPEL,J. B. (1977). An APL program for cal-
culating signal detection indices. Behavior Research Methods & In-
strumentation, 9, 517-521.
McNICOL,D. (1972). A primer ofsignal detection theory. London: Allen
& Unwin.
MILLER, J. (1996). The sampling distribution of d', Perception & Psy-
chophysics, 58, 65-72.
NAYLOR, J. C; & LAWSHE, C. H. (1958). An analytical review ofthe ex-
perimental basis of subception. Journal of Psychology, 46, 75-96.
NELSON, T.O. (1984). A comparison ofcurrent measures ofthe accuracy
of feeling-of-knowing predictions. Psychological Bulletin, 95, 109-
133.
NELSON, T. O. (1986). ROC curves and measures of discrimination ac-
curacy: A reply to Swets. Psychological Bulletin, 100, 128-132.
POLLACK, 1., & NORMAN, D. A. (1964). A nonparametric analysis of
recognition experiments. Psychonomic Science, 1,125-126.
REY,J. M., MORRIS-YATES, A., & STANISLAW, H. (1992). Measuring the
accuracy of diagnostic tests using receiver operating characteristic
(ROC) analysis. International Journal ofMethods in Psychiatric Re-
search, 2, 39-50.
RICHARDS, B. L., & THORNTON, C. L. (1970). Quantitative methods of
calculating the d' of signal detection theory. Educational & Psycho-
logical Measurement, 30, 855-859.
RICHARDSON, J. T. E. (1994). Continuous recognition memory tests: Are
the assumptions of the theory of signal detection really met? Journal
ofClinical & Experimental Neuropsychology, 16,482-486.
SMITH, J. E. K. (1982). Simple algorithms for M-alternative forced-
choice calculations. Perception & Psychophysics, 31, 95-96.
SMITH,W. D. (1995). Clarification ofsensitivity measure A'. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 39, 82-89.
SNODGRASS, J. G., & CORWIN, J. (1988). Pragmatics of measuring
recognition memory: Applications to dementia and amnesia. Journal
ofExperimental Psychology: General, 117, 34-50.
SNODGRASS, 1. G., LEVY-BERGER, G., & HAYDON, M. (1985). Human
experimental psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
STANISLAW, H. (1995). Effect of type of task and number of inspectors
on performance ofan industrial inspection-type task. Human Factors,
37, 182-192.
STANISLAW, H. (1996). Relative versus absolute judgments, and the ef-
fect of batch composition on simulated industrial inspection. In R. 1.
Koubek & W. Karwowski (Eds.), Manufacturing agility and hybrid
automation: I (pp. 105-108). Louisville, KY: lEA Press.
STANISLAW, H., & TODOROV, N. (1992). Documenting the rise and fall
ofa psychological theory: Whatever happened to signal detection the-
ory? (Abstract). Australian Journal ofPsychology, 44, 128.
SWETS, J. A. (1973). The relative operating characteristic in psychology.
Science, 182,990-1000.
SWETS, J. A. (1986). Form ofempirical ROCs in discrimination and di-
agnostic tasks: Implications for theory and measurement of perfor-
mance. Psychological Bulletin, 99,181-198.
SWETS, J. A. (1988a). Measuring the accuracy of diagnostic systems.
Science, 240, 1285-1293.
SWETS, J. A. (ED.) (l988b). Signal detection and recognition by human
observers. New York: Wiley.
SWETS, J. A., & PICKETT, R. M. (1982). Evaluation ofdiagnostic systems:
Methods from signal detection theory. New York: Academic Press.
THOMAS, E. A. C., & HOGUE, A. (1976). Apparent weight of evidence,
decision criteria, and confidence ratings in juror decision making.
Psychological Review, 83,442-465.
ZELEN, M., & SEVERO, N. C. (1972). Probability functions. In
M. Abramowitz & 1. A. Stegun (Eds.), Handbook ofmathematical
functions with formulas, graphs, and mathematical tables (pp. 925-
973). Washington, DC: National Bureau of Standards.
(Manuscript received August 15, 1997;
revision accepted for publication February 9, 1998.)