 
 
 
 
 
Edinburgh Research Explorer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cellular Architecture and Key Technologies for 5G Wireless
Communication Networks
Citation for published version:
Wang, C-X, Haider, F, Gao, X, You, X-H, Yang, Y, Yuan, D, Aggoune, HM, Haas, H, Fletcher, S &
Hepsaydir, E 2014, 'Cellular Architecture and Key Technologies for 5G Wireless Communication Networks',
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 122-130.
Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
Published In:
IEEE Communications Magazine
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jan. 2026

IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
122
0163-6804/14/$25.00 © 2014 IEEE
INTRODUCTION
The innovative and effective use of information
and communication technologies (ICT) is
becoming increasingly important to improve the
economy of the world [1]. Wireless communica-
tion networks are perhaps the most critical ele-
ment in the global ICT strategy, underpinning
many other industries. It is one of the fastest
growing and most dynamic sectors in the world.
The European Mobile Observatory (EMO)
reported that the mobile communication sector
had total revenue of €174 billion in 2010, there-
by bypassing the aerospace and pharmaceutical
sectors [2]. The development of wireless tech-
nologies has greatly improved people’s ability to
communicate and live in both business opera-
tions and social functions. 
The phenomenal success of wireless mobile
communications is mirrored by a rapid pace of
technology innovation. From the second genera-
tion (2G) mobile communication system debuted
in 1991 to the 3G system first launched in 2001,
the wireless mobile network has transformed
from a pure telephony system to a network that
can transport rich multimedia contents. The 4G
wireless systems were designed to fulfill the
requirements of International Mobile Telecom-
munications-Advanced (IMT-A) using IP for all
services [3]. In 4G systems, an advanced radio
interface is used with orthogonal frequency-divi-
sion multiplexing (OFDM), multiple-input multi-
ple-output (MIMO), and link adaptation
technologies. 4G wireless networks can support
data rates of up to 1 Gb/s for low mobility, such
as nomadic/local wireless access, and up to 100
Mb/s for high mobility, such as mobile access.
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) and its extension,
LTE-Advanced systems, as practical 4G systems,
have recently been deployed or soon will be
deployed around the globe. 
However, there is still a dramatic increase in
the number of users who subscribe to mobile
broadband systems every year. More and more
ABSTRACT
The fourth generation wireless communica-
tion systems have been deployed or are soon to
be deployed in many countries. However, with
an explosion of wireless mobile devices and ser-
vices, there are still some challenges that cannot
be accommodated even by 4G, such as the spec-
trum crisis and high energy consumption. Wire-
less system designers have been facing the
continuously increasing demand for high data
rates and mobility required by new wireless
applications and therefore have started research
on fifth generation wireless systems that are
expected to be deployed beyond 2020. In this
article, we propose a potential cellular architec-
ture that separates indoor and outdoor scenar-
ios, and discuss various promising technologies
for 5G wireless communication systems, such as
massive MIMO, energy-efficient communica-
tions, cognitive radio networks, and visible light
communications. Future challenges facing these
potential technologies are also discussed.
5G WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS:
PROSPECTS AND CHALLENGES
Cheng-Xiang Wang, Heriot-Watt University and University of Tabuk
Fourat Haider, Heriot-Watt University
Xiqi Gao and Xiao-Hu You, Southeast University
Yang Yang, ShanghaiTech University
Dongfeng Yuan, Shandong University
Hadi M. Aggoune, University of Tabuk
Harald Haas, University of Edinburgh
Simon Fletcher, NEC Telecom MODUS Ltd.
Erol Hepsaydir, Hutchison 3G UK
Cellular Architecture and Key
Technologies for 5G Wireless
Communication Networks

IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
123
people crave faster Internet access on the move,
trendier mobiles, and, in general, instant com-
munication with others or access to information.
More powerful smartphones and laptops are
becoming more popular nowadays, demanding
advanced multimedia capabilities. This has
resulted in an explosion of wireless mobile
devices and services. The EMO pointed out that
there has been a 92 percent growth in mobile
broadband per year since 2006 [2]. It has been
predicted by the Wireless World Research
Forum (WWRF) that 7 trillion wireless devices
will serve 7 billion people by 2017; that is, the
number of network-connected wireless devices
will reach 1000 times the world’s population [4].
As more and more devices go wireless, many
research challenges need to be addressed. 
One of the most crucial challenges is the
physical scarcity of radio frequency (RF) spectra
allocated for cellular communications. Cellular
frequencies use ultra-high-frequency bands for
cellular phones, normally ranging from several
hundred megahertz to several gigahertz. These
frequency spectra have been used heavily, mak-
ing it difficult for operators to acquire more.
Another challenge is that the deployment of
advanced wireless technologies comes at the cost
of high energy consumption. The increase of
energy consumption in wireless communication
systems causes an increase of CO2 emission indi-
rectly, which currently is considered as a major
threat for the environment. Moreover, it has
been reported by cellular operators that the
energy consumption of base stations (BSs) con-
tributes to over 70 percent of their electricity bill
[5]. In fact, energy-efficient communication was
not one of the initial requirements in 4G wire-
less systems, but it came up as an issue at a later
stage. Other challenges are, for example, aver-
age spectral efficiency, high data rate and high
mobility, seamless coverage, diverse quality of
service (QoS) requirements, and fragmented
user experience (incompatibility of different
wireless devices/interfaces and heterogeneous
networks), to mention only a few.
All the above issues are putting more pres-
sure on cellular service providers, who are facing
continuously increasing demand for higher data
rates, larger network capacity, higher spectral
efficiency, higher energy efficiency, and higher
mobility required by new wireless applications.
On the other hand, 4G networks have just about
reached the theoretical limit on the data rate
with current technologies and therefore are not
sufficient to accommodate the above challenges.
In this sense, we need groundbreaking wireless
technologies to solve the above problems caused
by trillions of wireless devices, and researchers
have already started to investigate beyond 4G
(B4G) or 5G wireless techniques. The project
UK-China Science Bridges: (B)4G Wireless Mobile
Communications (http://www.ukchinab4g. ac.uk/) is
perhaps one of the first projects in the world to
start B4G research, where some potential B4G
technologies were identified. Europe and China
have also initiated some 5G projects, such as
METIS 2020 (https://www.metis2020. com/) sup-
ported by EU and National 863 Key Project in
5G supported by the Ministry of Science and
Technology (MOST) in China. Nokia Siemens
Networks described how the underlying radio
access technologies can be developed further to
support up to 1000 times higher traffic volumes
compared to 2010 travel levels over the next 10
years [6]. Samsung demonstrated a wireless sys-
tem using millimeter (mm) wave technologies
with data rates faster than 1 Gb/s over 2 km [7].
What will the 5G network, which is expected
to be standardized around 2020, look like? It is
now too early to define this with any certainty.
However, it is widely agreed that compared to
the 4G network, the 5G network should achieve
1000 times the system capacity, 10 times the
spectral efficiency, energy efficiency and data
rate (i.e., peak data rate of 10 Gb/s for low
mobility and peak data rate of 1 Gb/s for high
mobility), and 25 times the average cell through-
put. The aim is to connect the entire world, and
achieve seamless and ubiquitous communica-
tions between anybody (people to people), any-
thing (people to machine, machine to machine),
wherever they are (anywhere), whenever they
need (anytime), by whatever electronic
devices/services/networks they wish (anyhow).
This means that 5G networks should be able to
support communications for some special sce-
narios not supported by 4G networks (e.g., for
high-speed train users). High-speed trains can
easily reach 350 up to 500 km/h, while 4G net-
works can only support communication scenarios
up to 250 km/h. In this article, we propose a
potential 5G cellular architecture and discuss
some promising technologies that can be
deployed to deliver the 5G requirements. 
The remainder of this article is organized as
follows. We propose a potential 5G cellular
architecture. We describe some promising key
technologies that can be adopted in the 5G sys-
tem. Future challenges are highlighted. Finally,
conclusions are drawn.
A POTENTIAL 5G WIRELESS
CELLULAR ARCHITECTURE
To address the above challenges and meet the
5G system requirements, we need a dramatic
change in the design of cellular architecture. We
know that wireless users stay indoors for about
80 percent of time, while only stay ourdoors
about 20 percent of the time [8]. The current
conventional cellular architecture normally uses
an outdoor BS in the middle of a cell communi-
cating with mobile users, no matter whether they
stay indoors or outdoors. For indoor users com-
municating with the outdoor BS, the signals have
to go through building walls, and this causes very
high penetration loss, which significantly dam-
ages the data rate, spectral efficiency, and ener-
gy efficiency of wireless transmissions. 
One of the key ideas of designing the 5G cel-
lular architecture is to separate outdoor and
indoor scenarios so that penetration loss through
building walls can somehow be avoided. This will
be assisted by distributed antenna system (DAS)
and massive MIMO technology [9], where geo-
graphically distributed antenna arrays with tens
or hundreds of antenna elements are deployed.
While most current MIMO systems utilize two
to four antennas, the goal of massive MIMO sys-
One of the key ideas
of designing the 5G
cellular architecture is
to separate outdoor
and indoor scenarios
so that penetration
loss through building
walls can be some-
how avoided. This
will be assisted by
distributed antenna
system (DAS) and
massive MIMO 
technology.

tems is to exploit the potentially large capacity
gains that would arise in larger arrays of anten-
nas. Outdoor BSs will be equipped with large
antenna arrays with some antenna elements (also
large antenna arrays) distributed around the cell
and connected to the BS via optical fibers, bene-
fiting from both DAS and massive MIMO tech-
nologies. Outdoor mobile users are normally
equipped with limited numbers of antenna ele-
ments, but they can collaborate with each other
to form a virtual large antenna array, which
together with BS antenna arrays will construct
virtual massive MIMO links. Large antenna
arrays will also be installed outside of every
building to communicate with outdoor BSs or
distributed antenna elements of BSs, possibly
with line of sight (LoS) components. Large anten-
na arrays have cables connected to the wireless
access points inside the building communicating
with indoor users. This will certainly increase the
infrastructure cost in the short term while signifi-
cantly improving the cell average throughput,
spectral efficiency, energy efficiency, and data
rate of the cellular system in the long run.
Using such a cellular architecture, as indoor
users only need to communicate with indoor
wireless access points (not outdoor BSs) with
large antenna arrays installed outside build-
ings, many technologies can be utilized that are
suitable for short-range communications with
high data rates. Some examples include WiFi,
femtocell, ultra wideband (UWB), mm-wave
communications (3–300 GHz) [7], and visible
light communications (VLC) (400–490 THz)
[10]. It is worth mentioning that mm-wave and
VLC technologies use higher frequencies not
traditionally used for cellular communications.
These high-frequency waves do not penetrate
solid materials very well and can readily be
absorbed or scattered by gases, rain, and
foliage. Therefore, it is hard to use these waves
for outdoor and long distance applications.
However, with large bandwidths available, mm-
wave and VLC technologies can greatly
increase the transmission data rate for indoor
scenarios. To solve the spectrum scarcity prob-
lem, besides finding new spectrum not tradi-
tionally used for wireless services (e.g.,
mm-wave communications and VLC), we can
also try to improve the spectrum utilization of
existing radio spectra, for example, via cogni-
tive radio (CR) networks [11].
The 5G cellular architecture should also be a
heterogeneous one, with macrocells, microcells,
small cells, and relays. To accommodate high-
mobility users such as users in vehicles and high-
speed trains, we have proposed the mobile
femtocell (MFemtocell) concept [12], which
combines the concepts of mobile relay and fem-
tocell. MFemtocells are located inside vehicles
to communicate with users within the vehicle,
while large antenna arrays are located outside
the vehicle to communicate with outdoor BSs.
An MFemtocell and its associated users are all
viewed as a single unit to the BS. From the user
point of view, an MFemtocell is seen as a regu-
lar BS. This is very similar to the above idea of
separating indoor (inside the vehicle) and out-
door scenarios. It has been shown in [12] that
users using MFemtocells can enjoy high-data-
rate services with reduced signaling overhead.
The above proposed 5G heterogeneous cellular
architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. 
PROMISING KEY
5G WIRELESS TECHNOLOGIES
In this section, based on the above proposed
heterogeneous cellular architecture, we discuss
some promising key wireless technologies that
can enable 5G wireless networks to fulfill perfor-
mance requirements. The purpose of developing
these technologies is to enable a dramatic capac-
ity increase in the 5G network with efficient uti-
lization of all possible resources. Based on the
well-known Shannon theory, the total system
capacity Csum can be approximately expressed by
(1)
where Bi is the bandwidth of the ith channel, Pi
is the signal power of the ith channel, and Np
denotes the noise power. From Eq. 1, it is clear
that the total system capacity Csum is equivalent
to the sum capacity of all subchannels and het-
erogeneous networks. To increase Csum, we can
increase the network coverage (via heteroge-
neous networks with macrocells, microcells,
small cells, relays, MFemtocell [12], etc.), num-
ber of subchannels (via massive MIMO [9], spa-
tial modulation [SM] [13], cooperative MIMO,
DAS, interference management, etc.), bandwidth
(via CR networks [11], mm-wave communica-
tions, VLC [10], multi-standard systems, etc.),
and power (energy-efficient or green communi-
cations). In the following, we focus on some of
the key technologies.
MASSIVE MIMO
MIMO systems consist of multiple antennas at
both the transmitter and receiver. By adding
multiple antennas, a greater degree of freedom
(in addition to time and frequency dimensions)
in wireless channels can be offered to accom-
modate more information data. Hence, a signif-
icant performance improvement can be
obtained in terms of reliability, spectral effi-
ciency, and energy efficiency. In massive MIMO
systems, the transmitter and/or receiver are
equipped with a large number of antenna ele-
ments (typically tens or even hundreds). Note
that the transmit antennas can be co-located or
distributed (i.e., a DAS system) in different
applications. Also, the enormous number of
receive antennas can be possessed by one device
or distributed to many devices. Besides inherit-
ing the benefits of conventional MIMO sys-
tems, a massive MIMO system can also
significantly enhance both spectral efficiency
and energy efficiency [9]. Furthermore, in mas-
sive MIMO systems, the effects of noise and
fast fading vanish, and intracell interference
can be mitigated using simple linear precoding
and detection methods. By properly using multi-
user MIMO (MU-MIMO) in massive MIMO
systems, the medium access control (MAC)
layer design can be simplified by avoiding com-
∑
∑
≈
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
C
B
P
N
log
1
i
i
p
sum
2
Channels
HetNets
IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
124
The 5G cellular archi-
tecture should also
be a heterogeneous
one, with macrocells,
microcells, small cells,
and relays. To
accommodate high-
mobility users such
as users in vehicles
and high-speed
trains, we have pro-
posed the mobile
femtocell concept,
which combines the
concepts of mobile
relay and femtocell.

IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
125
plicated scheduling algorithms [14]. With MU-
MIMO, the BS can send separate signals to
individual users using the same time-frequency
resource, as first pro. Consequently, these main
advantages enable the massive MIMO system
to be a promising candidate for 5G wireless
communication networks.
SPATIAL MODULATION
Spatial modulation, as first proposed by Haas et
al., is a novel MIMO technique that has been
proposed for low-complexity implementation of
MIMO systems without degrading system per-
formance [13]. Instead of simultaneously trans-
mitting multiple data streams from the available
antennas, SM encodes part of the data to be
transmitted onto the spatial position of each
transmit antenna in the antenna array. Thus,
the antenna array plays the role of a second (in
addition to the usual signal constellation dia-
gram) constellation diagram (the so-called spa-
tial constellation diagram), which can be used
to increase the data rate (spatial multiplexing)
with respect to single-antenna wireless systems.
Only one transmit antenna is active at any time,
while other antennas are idle. A block of infor-
mation bits is split into two sub-blocks of
log2(NB) and log2(M) bits, where NB and M are
the number of transmit antennas and the size
of the complex signal constellation diagram,
respectively. The first sub-block identifies the
active antenna from a set of transmit antennas,
while the second sub-block selects the symbol
from the signal constellation diagram that will
be sent from that active antenna. Therefore,
SM is a combination of space shift keying (SSK)
and amplitude/phase modulation. Figure 2
shows the SM constellation diagram with 4
transmit antennas (NB = 4) and quadrature
phase shift keying (QPSK) modulation (M = 4)
as an example. The receiver can then employ
optimal maximum likelihood (ML) detection to
decode the received signal. 
Spatial modulation can mitigate three major
problems in conventional MIMO systems: inter-
channel interference, inter-antenna synchroniza-
tion, and multiple RF chains [13]. Moreover,
low-complexity receivers in SM systems can be
designed and configured for any number of
transmit and receive antennas, even for unbal-
anced MIMO systems. We have to point out that
the multiplexing gain in SM increases logarith-
mically with the increase in the number of trans-
mit antennas, while it increases linearly in
conventional MIMO systems. Therefore, the low
implementation complexity comes at the expense
of sacrificing some degrees of freedom. Most
research on SM focuses on the case of a single
receiver (i.e., single-user SM). Multi-user SM
can be considered as a new research direction to
be considered in 5G wireless communication sys-
tems. 
COGNITIVE RADIO NETWORKS
The CR network is an innovative software
defined radio technique considered to be one of
the promising technologies to improve the uti-
lization of the congested RF spectrum [9].
Adopting CR is motivated by the fact that a
large portion of the radio spectrum is underuti-
lized most of the time. In CR networks, a sec-
ondary system can share spectrum bands with
the licensed primary system, either on an inter-
ference-free basis or on an interference-tolerant
basis [9]. The CR network should be aware of
the surrounding radio environment and regulate
its transmission accordingly. In interference-free
CR networks, CR users are allowed to borrow
spectrum resources only when licensed users do
not use them. A key to enabling interference-
Figure 1. A proposed 5G heterogeneous wireless cellular architecture.
CR network
Large MIMO
network
Mobile femtocell
network
LOS
channel
........
Internet
Internet
Internet
.
.........
........
..........
.
..........
VLC
60 GHz
Gigabit Ethernet
WiFi
Femtocell
Core network
The 5G CR network
is an innovative soft-
ware defined radio
technique which has
been considered as
one of the promising
technologies to
improve the utiliza-
tion of the congest-
ed RF spectrum.
Adopting CR is moti-
vated by the fact
that a large portion
of the radio spec-
trum is underutilized
most of the time.

free CR networks is figuring out how to detect
the spectrum holes (white space) that spread out
in wideband frequency spectrums. CR receivers
should first monitor and allocate the unused
spectrums via spectrum sensing (or combining
with geolocation databases) and feed this infor-
mation back to the CR transmitter. A coordinat-
ing mechanism is required in multiple CR
networks that try to access the same spectrum to
prevent users colliding when accessing the
matching spectrum holes. In interference-toler-
ant CR networks, CR users can share the spec-
trum resource with a licensed system while
keeping the interference below a threshold. In
comparison with interference-free CR networks,
interference-tolerant CR networks can achieve
enhanced spectrum utilization by opportunisti-
cally sharing the radio spectrum resources with
licensed users, as well as better spectral and
energy efficiency. However, it has been shown
that the performance of CR systems can be very
sensitive to any slight change in user densities,
interference threshold, and transmission behav-
iors of the licensed system. This fact is illustrated
in Fig. 3, where we notice that the spectral effi-
ciency decreases quickly with the increase in the
number of primary receivers. However, the spec-
tral efficiency can be improved by either relaxing
the interference threshold of the primary system
or considering only the CR users who have short
distances to the secondary BS. In [15], hybrid
CR networks have been proposed for adoption
in cellular networks to explore additional bands
and expand the capacity.
MOBILE FEMTOCELL
The MFemtocell is a new concept that has been
proposed recently to be a potential candidate
technology in next generation intelligent trans-
portation systems [12]. It combines the mobile
relay concept (moving network) with femtocell
technology. An MFemtocell is a small cell that
can move around and dynamically change its
connection to an operator’s core network. It
can be deployed on public transport buses,
trains, and even private cars to enhance service
quality to users within vehicles. Deployment of
MFemtocells can potentially benefit cellular
networks. First, MFemtocells can improve the
spectral efficiency of the entire network. To
demonstrate this fact, Fig. 4 compares the aver-
age spectral efficiency of the direct transmis-
sion scheme and an MFemtocell-enhanced
scheme with two resource partitioning schemes
(i.e., orthogonal and non-orthogonal resource
partitioning schemes) as a function of the per-
centage of users associated with MFemtocells.
Also, the comparison is done between maxi-
mum signal-to-noise ratio (MAX-SNR) and
proportional fairness (PF) scheduling algo-
rithms. We can see that increasing the percent-
age of users that communicate with the BS
through MFemtocells leads to an increase in
spectral efficiency, which is much better com-
pared to the case where users communicate
directly with the BS (i.e., the direct transmis-
sion scheme). Second, MFemtocells can con-
tribute to signaling overhead reduction of the
network. For instance, an MFemtocell can per-
form a handover on behalf of all its associated
users, which can reduce the handover activities
for users within the MFemtocell. This makes
the deployment of MFemtocells suitable for
high-mobility environments. In addition, the
energy consumption of users inside an MFem-
tocell can be reduced due to relatively shorter
communication range and low signaling over-
head. 
VISIBLE LIGHT COMMUNICATION
Visible light communication uses off-the-shelf
white light emitting diodes (LEDs) used for
solid-state lighting (SSL) as signal transmitters
and off-the-shelf p-intrinsic-n (PIN) photodi-
odes (PDs) or avalanche photo-diodes (APDs)
as signal receivers [10]. This means that VLC
enables systems that illuminate and at the same
time provide broadband wireless data connectiv-
ity. If illumination is not desired in the uplink,
infrared (IR) LEDs or indeed RF would be
viable solutions. In VLC, the information is car-
ried by the intensity (power) of the light. As a
result, the information-carrying signal has to be
real valued and strictly positive. Traditional dig-
ital modulation schemes for RF communication
use complex valued and bipolar signals. Modifi-
cations are therefore necessary, and there is a
rich body of knowledge on modified multi-carri-
er modulation techniques such as OFDM for
intensity modulation (IM) and direct detection
(DD). Data rates of 3.5 Gb/s have been report-
ed from a single LED. It has to be noted that
VLC is not subject to fast fading effects as the
wavelength is significantly smaller than the
IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
126
Figure 2. SM constellation diagram using four transmit antennas (NB = 4)
and QPSK modulation.
01(11)
00(11)
11(11)
10(11)
Signal constellation for the
first transmit antenna
.....
Signal constellation for the
second transmit antenna
Spatial constellation
Re
Im
Re
11
Im
10
01
00
01(00)
00(00)
11(00)
10(00)

IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
127
detector area. While the link-level demonstra-
tions are important steps to prove that VLC is a
viable technique to help mitigate spectrum bot-
tlenecks in RF communications, it is essential to
show that full-fledged optical wireless networks
can be developed by using existing lighting
infrastructures. This includes MU access tech-
niques, interference coordination, and others.
To this end, let us assume multiple light fixtures
in a room. Each of these light fixtures is envis-
aged to function as a very small optical BS
resulting in a network of very small cells called
optical attocells. This is in analogy to femtocells
in RF communications and in recognition of the
fact that a single room can be served by many of
these very small cells. An optical attocell covers
an area of 1–10 m2 and distances of about 3 m.
It is well known in cellular RF communications
that small cells have significantly contributed to
recent improvements in network spectral effi-
ciency. However, the main limiting factor is
interference. Optical attocells are less subject to
interference since lightwaves do not propagate
through walls. The ratio of the area spectral
efficiency (ASE) in bits per second per Hertz
per square meter attained for the attocell net-
work and the ASE for the femtocell network is
illustrated in Fig. 5 against a varying number of
femtocells per floor. The number of optical
access points per room varies from one to four.
The gains diminish as the number of femtocells
per floor is increased as expected, but the gain
is still above 100 for 20 femtocells per floor and
4 optical attocells per room. The maximum gain
in ASE is close to 1000. As an example, let us
assume a typical ASE of 1.2 b/s/Hz/m2 for the
optical attocell network and a bandwidth of 10
MHz for LED and RF. This would mean that
users can on average share a total of 300 Mb/s
in a 5 m × 5 m × 3 m room in the case of the
optical attocell network. In the case of the RF
femtocell network and the best case of 20 fem-
tocells per floor, the attainable capacity for the
same room is only about 3 Mb/s.
GREEN COMMUNICATIONS
The design of 5G wireless systems should take
into account minimizing the energy consump-
tion in order to achieve greener wireless com-
munication systems [5]. Wireless system
operators around the world should aim to
achieve such energy consumption reductions,
which consequently contribute to the reduction
of CO2 emissions. The indoor communication
technologies are promising deployment strate-
gies to get better energy efficiency. This is
because of the favorable channel conditions
they can offer between the transmitters and
receivers. Moreover, by separating indoor traffic
from outdoor traffic, the marcocell BS will have
less pressure in allocating radio resources and
can transmit with low power, resulting in a sig-
nificant reduction in energy consumption. VLC
and mm-wave technologies can also be consid-
ered as energy efficient wireless communication
solutions to be deployed in 5G wireless systems.
For example, in VLC systems the consumed
energy in one bulb is much less than that in its
RF-based equivalents for transmitting the same
high-density data. 
FUTURE CHALLENGES IN
5G WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
NETWORKS
Although there have been some developments in
the above potential key 5G wireless technolo-
gies, there are still many challenges ahead. Due
to the limited space, in this section we only dis-
cuss some of these challenges.
OPTIMIZING PERFORMANCE METRICS
The evaluation of wireless communication net-
works has been commonly characterized by con-
sidering only one or two performance metrics
while neglecting other metrics due to high com-
Figure 3. The average system spectral efﬁciency of a CR network as a function
of the number of primary receivers with different values of interference thresh-
olds Q (number of secondary receivers = 20).
Number of primary receivers
Spectral efficiency (b/s/Hz)
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Q = 20 dB
Q = 10 dB
Q = –10 dB
200
0
300
400
500
Simulation results
Analytical results
Figure 4. Average spectral efﬁciency of system-level MFemtocells with multi-
user scheduling and resource partitioning schemes.
Percentage of users within MFemtocells
Average spectral efficiency (b/s/Hz)
20%
40%
0%
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
60%
80%
100%
Direct transmission, MAX SINR
Single transmission, PF
Non-orthogonal, MAX SINR
Non-orthogonal, PF
Orthogonal, MAX SINR
Orthogonal, PF

IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
128
plexity. For a complete and fair assessment of
5G wireless systems, more performance metrics
should be considered. These include spectral
efficiency, energy efficiency, delay, reliability,
fairness of users, QoS, implementation complexi-
ty, and so on. Thus, a general framework should
be developed to evaluate the performance of 5G
wireless systems, taking into account as many
performance metrics as possible from different
perspectives. There should be a trade-off among
all performance metrics. This requires high-com-
plexity joint optimization algorithms and long
simulation times. 
REALISTIC CHANNEL MODELS FOR
5G WIRELESS SYSTEMS
Realistic channel models with proper accura-
cy-complexity trade-off are indispensable for
some typical 5G scenarios, such as massive
MIMO channels and high-mobility channels
(e.g., high-speed train channels and vehicle-to-
vehicle channels). Conventional MIMO chan-
nel models cannot be directly applied to
massive MIMO channels in which different
antennas may observe different sets of clus-
ters. Massive MIMO channel models should
take into account specific characteristics that
make them different from those in convention-
al MIMO channels, such as the spherical wave-
front 
assumption 
and 
non-stationary
properties. Also, 3D massive MIMO models,
which jointly consider azimuth and elevation
angles, are more practical but more complicat-
ed. Some existing massive MIMO channel
models are briefly summarized and classified
in Table 1 [14].
Compared to conventional low-mobility wire-
less channels, high-mobility channels have
greater dynamics and possibly more severe fad-
ing, and are essentially non-stationary. How to
characterize non-stationary high-mobility chan-
nels is also very challenging.
REDUCING SIGNAL PROCESSING COMPLEXITY
FOR MASSIVE MIMO
One technical challenge in developing massive
MIMO systems is the signal processing complex-
ity. As transmit and receive signals are quite
lengthy, the search algorithms must be per-
formed over many possible permutations of sym-
bols. In the current literature, massive MIMO
research is often treated as a detection problem
based on a search motivated by the well-known
ML criterion. The existing detection algorithms
assume that the channel has been perfectly esti-
mated, which appears to be an unreasonable
assumption given the size of the channel matrix
and thus amount of channels to be tracked. A
possible solution to this problem is to apply the
SM concept to massive MIMO systems. In this
case, the spatial signature of each antenna needs
to be different from the point of view of the
receiver because data is encoded into the choice
of transmit antenna active in the transmit array.
It is therefore possible that channel estimation
does not need to be exact but rather be merely
sufficient to distinguish each transmit antenna.
This may be a reasonable prospect, especially if
the receive array is large, in which case each
transmit antenna would have a quite detailed
and thus distinct spatial signature.
INTERFERENCE MANAGEMENT FOR
CR NETWORKS
A major issue in interference-tolerant CR net-
works in 5G is how to reliably and practically
manage the mutual interference of CR and pri-
mary systems. Regulating the transmit power is
essential for the CR system to coexist with other
licensed systems. An interference temperature
model is introduced for this purpose to charac-
terize the interference from the CR to the
licensed networks. Interference cancellation
techniques should also be applied to mitigate the
interference at CR receivers. Another issue in
interference-tolerant CR networks is that a feed-
back mechanism is important to periodically
inform the CR network about the current inter-
ference status at the licensed system. A practical
solution is that the interference state informa-
tion can be sent from licensed systems and col-
lected by a central unit (or a third party system).
Any CR network should first register to the cen-
tral unit in order to be updated regarding the
allowed spectrum and interference. Alternative-
ly, the CR transmitters can listen to beacon sig-
nals transmitted from the primary receivers and
rely on the channel reciprocity to estimate the
channel coefficient. In this case, the CR trans-
mitters can cooperate among themselves to reg-
ulate the transmit power and prevent the
interference at the primary receivers being above
the threshold.
CONCLUSIONS
In this article, the performance requirements of
5G wireless communication systems have been
defined in terms of capacity, spectral efficiency,
energy efficiency, data rate, and cell average
throughput. A new heterogeneous 5G cellular
Figure 5. The ratio of ASE attained for the optical attocell network to ASE for
the femtocell network against varying numbers of femtocells per ﬂoor.
Number of femtocells per floor
6
4
100
0
ASE VLC/ASE RF
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
1 AP
1 AP, FL = 17 dB
2 AP
2 AP, FL = 17 dB
4 AP
4 AP, FL = 17 dB

IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
129
architecture has been proposed with separated
indoor and outdoor applications using DAS and
massive MIMO technology. Some short-range
communication technologies, such as WiFi, fem-
tocell, VLC, and mm-wave communication tech-
nologies, can be seen as promising candidates to
provide high-quality and high-data-rate services
to indoor users while at the same time reducing
the pressure on outdoor BSs. We have also dis-
cussed some potential key technologies that can
be deployed in 5G wireless systems to satisfy the
expected performance requirements, such as CR
networks, SM, MFemtocells, VLC, and green
communications, along with some technical chal-
lenges. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support
of this work from SNCS Research Center, the
University of Tabuk, the Ministry of Higher
Education in Saudi Arabia, the Opening Project
of the Key Laboratory of Cognitive Radio and
Information Processing (Guilin University of
Electronic Technology), Ministry of Education
(No. 2013KF01), Hutchison 3G UK, Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China (No. 61231009), the
STCSM (No. 11JC1412300), the International
Science & Technology Cooperation Program.
REFERENCES
[1] Commission of the European Communities, Staff Work-
ing Document, “Exploiting the Employment Potential of
ICTs,” Apr. 2012.
[2] Euro. Mobile Industry Observatory, GSMA, Nov. 2011.
[3] A. Hashimoto, H. Yorshino, and H. Atarashi, “Roadmap
of IMT-Advanced Development,” IEEE Microwave Mag.,
vol. 9, no. 4, Aug. 2008, pp. 80–88.
[4] WWRF, L. Sorensen and K. E. Skouby, User Scenarios
2020, report, July 2009; http://www.wireless-world-
research.org. 
[5] C. Han et al., “Green Radio: Radio Techniques to Enable
Energy Efficient Wireless Networks,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 49, no. 6, June 2011, pp. 46–54.
[6] Nokia Siemens Networks, “2020: Beyond 4G: Radio Evo-
lution for the Gigabit Experience,” white paper, 2011.
[7] A. Bleicher, “Millimeter Waves May Be the Future of 5G
Phones,” IEEE Spectrum, Aug. 2013.
[8] V. Chandrasekhar, J. G. Andrews, and A. Gatherer,
“Femtocell Networks: A Survey,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
vol. 46, no. 9, Sept. 2008, pp. 59–67.
[9] F. Rusek et al., “Scaling Up MIMO: Opportunities and
Challenges with Very Large Arrays,” IEEE Sig. Proc.
Mag., vol. 30, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 40–60.
[10] H. Haas, “Wireless Data from Every Light Bulb,” TED
website, Aug. 2011; http://bit.ly/tedvlc
[11] X. Hong et al., “Secondary Spectrum Access Networks:
Recent Developments on the Spatial Models,” IEEE
Vehic. Tech. Mag., vol. 4, no. 2, June 2009, pp. 36–43.
[12] F. Haider et al., “Spectral Efficiency Analysis of Mobile
Femtocell Based Cellular Systems,” Proc. IEEE ICCT ’11,
Jinan, China, Sept. 2011, pp. 347–51.
[13] M. D. Renzo et al., “Spatial Modulation for Generalized
MIMO: Challenges, Opportunities, and Implementation,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 102, no. 1, Jan. 2014, pp. 56–103.
[14] C.-X. Wang and S. Wu, “Massive MIMO Channel Mea-
surements and Modeling: Advances and Challenges”
IEEE Wireless Commun.., submitted for publication.
[15] X. Hong et al., “Capacity Analysis of Hybrid Cognitive
Radio Networks with Distributed VAAs,” IEEE Trans.
Vehic. Tech., vol. 59, no. 7, Sept. 2010, pp. 3510–23.
BIOGRAPHIES
CHENG-XIANG
WANG
[S’01, M’05, SM’08] (cheng-
xiang.wang@hw.ac.uk) received his Ph.D. degree from Aal-
borg University, Denmark, in 2004. He joined Heriot-Watt
University, United Kingdom, as a lecturer in 2005 and
became a professor in August 2011. His research interests
include wireless channel modeling and 5G wireless commu-
nication networks. He has served or is serving as an Editor
or Guest Editor for 11 international journals, including IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology (2011–), IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications (2007–2009), and IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications. He has edit-
ed one book, and published one book chapter and about
190 papers in journals and conferences.
FOURAT HAIDER (fsh12@hw.ac.uk) received his Bachelor’s
degree in electrical and electronic engineering/communica-
tion engineering from the University of Technology, Iraq, in
2004, and his M.Sc. degree with Distinction at Brunel Uni-
versity, United Kingdom, in 2009. Since December 2010, he
has been a Ph.D. student at Heriot-Watt University and the
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom. His main research
interests include spectral-energy efficiency trade-off, wire-
less channel capacity analysis, femtocell and mobile femto-
cell, and MIMO systems. He received the Best Paper Award
from IEEE ICCT 2011.
XIQI GAO [SM’07] (xqgao@seu.edu.cn) received his Ph.D.
degree in electrical engineering from Southeast University,
Nanjing, China, in 1997. He joined the Department of
Radio Engineering, Southeast University, in April 1992.
Since May 2001, he has been a professor of information
systems and communications. From September 1999 to
August 2000, he was a visiting scholar at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Boston University. From August
2007 to July 2008, he visited the Darmstadt University of
Technology as a Humboldt scholar. His current research
interests include broadband multicarrier communications,
MIMO wireless communications, and signal processing for
wireless communications.
XIAOHU YOU [SM’11, F’12] (xhyu@seu.edu.cn) received his
Master’s and Ph.D. degrees from Southeast University,
Nanjing, China, in electrical engineering in 1985 and 1988,
respectively. Since 1990, he has been working with Nation-
al Mobile Communications Research Laboratory at South-
east University, where he held the rank of professor. His
research interests include mobile communication systems,
and signal processing and its applications. Now he is a
member of the China 863 Expert Committee responsible
for telecommunications.
YANG YANG [S’99, M’02, SM’10] (yang.yang@wico.sh)
received his Ph.D. degree in information engineering from
the Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2002. He is cur-
rently the director of the Shanghai Research Center for
Wireless Communications (WiCO) and a professor with the
School of Information Science and Technology, Shang-
haiTech University. His general research interests include
wireless ad hoc and sensor networks, wireless mesh net-
works, next generation mobile cellular systems, intelligent
transport systems, and wireless testbed development and
practical experiments.
DONGFENG YUAN [SM’01] (dfyuan@sdu.edu.cn) received his
M.Sc. degree from the Department of Electrical Engineer-
ing, Shandong University, China, in 1988, and his Ph.D.
degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering,
Tsinghua University, China, in January 2000. Currently he is
a full professor in the School of Information Science and
Table 1. Recent advances in massive MIMO channel models.
Channel model
Complexity
Description
Ready for
massive
MIMO?
Narrowband i.i.d.
Rayleigh
Low
Uncorrelated model
No
Narrowband CBSM
(Weichselberger)
Medium
Jointly correlated model
No
Narrowband CBSM
(Kronecker)
Medium
Classic correlated model
No
Wideband elliptical
GBSM [14]
High
Massive MIMO 
properties considered
Yes

IEEE Communications Magazine • February 2014
130
Engineering, Shandong University, China. His current
research interests include cognitive radio systems, coopera-
tive (relay) communications, and 5G wireless communica-
tions.
HADI M. AGGOUNE [M’00, SM’09] (haggoune.sncs@
ut.edu.sa) received his Ph.D. degree in electrical engi-
neering from the University of Washington (UW). He is a
Professional Engineer registered in the State of Wash-
ington, winner of the IEEE Professor of the Year Award,
UW Branch, and listed as an inventor in a patent
assigned to Boeing. Currently he is a professor and
director of the Sensor Networks and Cellular Systems
Research Center, University of Tabuk, Saudi Arabia. His
research interests include modeling and simulation of
large-scale networks, sensors, visualization, and control
and energy.
HARALD HAAS [S’98, AM’00, M’03] (h.haas@ed.ac.uk) holds
the Chair of Mobile Communications in the Institute for
Digital Communications at the University of Edinburgh. His
main research interests are in the areas of wireless system
design and analysis as well as digital signal processing,
with a particular focus on interference coordination in
wireless networks, spatial modulation, and optical wireless
communication. He holds more than 15 patents. He has
published more than 50 journal papers, including a Science
article, and more than 140 peer-reviewed conference
papers.
SIMON FLETCHER (simon.fletcher@emea.nec.com) has respon-
sibility for Products Strategy and Innovation for the emerg-
ing communications infrastructure platforms of NEC’s
Global Market product portfolio. He has core interests in
sustainability, 3GPP radio access technologies, and the
management of innovation processes. As a director of
mobile VCE, a UK based research consortium, he acts as
CEO and Chair of the Advisory Board. He also represents
the community as a director in the ICT-KTN.
EROL HEPSAYDIR (erol.hepsaydir@three.co.uk) has been work-
ing in the cellular mobile industry for 22 years. He has
launched several mobile networks in Australia, Singapore,
Korea, and the United Kingdom. Since 2001, he has been
responsible for network technology. He is now head of
Network Technology for Hutchison 3G UK. He is currently
working on LTE and small cell deployment planning in the
United Kingdom.
