©1948 Nature Publishing Group
No. 4094 April I 7, 1948 
NATURE 
583 
Microdiffusion Analysis and Volumetric Error 
By Prof. Edward J. Conway. Revised edition. Pp. 
xix+357. 
(London: Crosby Lockwood and Son, 
Ltd., 1947.) 2ls. net. 
M
ICRO-DIFFUSION analysis represents a real 
advance in modern analytical technique. It 
seems strange, in fact, that the underlying principle 
of allowing the gaseous product of a reaction to 
diffuse, in a closed chamber, into a suitable absorbent 
or reactant should not have been used more exten-
sively in analytical procedures at a much earlier date. 
Absorption of gases into appropriate reactants by 
distillation and aeration methods is, of course, the 
basis of many well-known, and important, chemical 
and biochemical methods of analysis, but the 
methods are usually tedious and extravagant in 
apparatus and material. 
Conway's technique in-
volves the use of a simple and inexpensive glass 
apparatus (termed the 'Unit') consisting of an inner 
and outer chamber. The gaseous product of a reaction 
(for example, ammonia, volatile amines, carbon 
dioxide, acetaldehyde) passes from one chamber, 
where the gas exerts a certain tension, into an 
absorbent in the second chamber, where the tension 
approaches zero. Analyses are made of the contents 
of the second chamber, and the accuracy is limited 
only by the accuracy of delivering and titrating 
fluid volumes of the order of 1 mi. Conway claims 
that the method appears to be the "simplest possible 
consistent with the maximum attainable accuracy in 
the handling of micro-volumes". The technique has 
been adopted for analyses of ammonia, amides and 
amines, adenosine and adenosine derivatives, halo-
gens, alcohol, acetone, lactic acid and glucose, carbon 
monoxide and carbon dioxide. It may be used also 
in the estimations of enzyme activities. 
Conway's book describes his 'Unit', the various 
physico-chemical factors involved in diffusion tech-
niques, the micro-pipettes and burettes required and 
the errors involved in their use. It gives details of 
the analytical methods involving the micro-diffusion 
technique which have now been adopted in many 
laboratories, and it has a most valuable section on 
the errors encountered in volumetric titrations. It 
has a good bibliography, and is well illustrated and 
produced. It is a book which should be in the hands 
of most biochemists and clinicians. 
Arch reology and Society 
By Grahame Clark. 
Second edition, revised. 
Pp. 
xv+222+24 plates. 
(London: Methuen and Co., 
Ltd., 1947.) lOs. 6d. net. 
T
HIS is a welcome new edition of a book which in 
October 1939 found a rapid sale, and should 
certainly do so now. It is one of the best and most 
readable short introductions to archreology in general, 
and though much in it has needed no revision, Dr. 
Clark has related his themes to their present-day 
setting with sound 
Archreology studies 
how men lived in the past : in partnership with 
documentary history if available, but in any event 
with confidence that it can do much that its partner 
cannot, in particular, of course, in the study of pre-
historic times. This does not make it in itself alto-
gether a science; yet it owes its modern precision 
largely to its growing capacity to collaborate with 
natural sciences, in the application of their techniques 
to the study of man's past doings. In that matter 
Dr. Clark at Cambridge has himself long been a 
leader, and this gives especial value here to his 
chapters on archreological discovery, preservation, 
excavation and chronology. 
Finally, too, he gives 
us some excellent plain speaking on the all-important 
'social relations' of his subject: reRearch must be 
kept free of perversion by nationalism, and devoted 
to the honest pursuit of historical truth. 
C. F. C. liA. WKES 
Faraday's Encyclopedia of Hydrocarbon Compounds 
(Covering the Literature up to January 1st, 1947). 
Compiled by Dr. Joseph Escott Faraday. Vol. 4: C9 
Pp. lxxxviii + 448. (Manchester : Chemindex, Ltd.,. 
1947.) 
£5 lOs. 
D
R. FARADAY, in accord with his promise, now 
presents us with volume 4 of his encyclopredia 
of hydrocarbons ; the author and his publishers are 
to be heartily commended on being able to keep such 
a promise in these difficult times. 
The present 
volume deals with the C1 compounds up to January I, 
1947, and follows closely the lines of the previous 
parts, now so well known to organic chemists. 
It is stated in the foreword that future volumes 
will contain the Dyson cipher of the compounds 
described : this will greatly increase the value of the 
work if and when the Dyson cipher becomes widely 
used. 
It came as a slight surprise to the reviewer to find 
indane called 1 : 2-trimethylane-benzene, and indene, 
1 : 2-trimethylene-(7)-benzene; 
on reflexion, this 
possibly appears logical, but it will surely be some 
time before 1 : 3-tribromopropane is called tri-
methylane dibromide, and surely the group > CH1 is 
methylene, although perhaps this term should be 
reserved for =CH2 •• Hydrindane, which might be 
expected to be 1 : 2-trimethylane-cyclohexane, is 
bicyclo-hexane-(1,2)-pentane. 
The reviewer is, of course, well aware of the diffi-
culties of systematic nomenclature, and the above 
remarks cannot be taken as adverse criticism. 
The Yearbook of the Universities of the Empire, 
1947 
Published for the Universities Bureau of the British 
Empire. 
Pp. xxxi+I098. 
(London: G. Bell and 
Sons, Ltd., 1947.) 21s. net. 
T
HE usefulness of this valuable reference book is 
attested by the sorry condition to which the last 
issue, that dated 1940, must have been reduced in 
any institution or department in touch with university 
affairs. 
The war-time Supplement issued in 1941 
carried on the information for but a short space, and 
it has been necessary to wait six years before the 
complete data relating to the staffs of the universities 
of the British Empire could be made available once 
more. Even now, due to the rapid expansion taking 
place in the universities themselves, and also to the 
longer time now required for printing such a book, it 
is not claimed that the information is up to date in 
the sense it used to be. The new volume contains 
about a hundred pages more than that for 1940-an 
indication of the growth of the universities that 
has taken place. 
As before, the information under each university 
includes a directory of the officers and staff, general 
information and reports of events of outstanding 
interest during the previous year. There are append-
ixes on the qualifications for admission to a first 
degree, statistics of foreign students in British univ-
ersities, general conditions in American universities, 
and Anglo-American professorships.