957
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1351/PAC-REP-12-07-15
© 2013 IUPAC, Publication date (Web): 26 February 2013
Methods of measurement and evaluation of
natural antioxidant capacity/activity
(IUPAC Technical Report)* 
Reşat Apak1,‡, Shela Gorinstein2, Volker Böhm3, Karen M. Schaich4,
Mustafa Özyürek1, and Kubilay Güçlü1
1Department of Chemistry, İstanbul University, Faculty of Engineering, Avcılar,
34320 İstanbul, Turkey; 2The Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical School,
School of Pharmacy, The Institute for Drug Research, Jerusalem, Israel; 3Institute
of Nutrition, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Dornburger Str. 25-29, 07743 Jena,
Germany; 4Department of Food Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick,
NJ 08901-8520, USA
Abstract: The chemical diversity of natural antioxidants (AOXs) makes it difficult to sepa-
rate, detect, and quantify individual antioxidants from a complex food/biological matrix.
Moreover, the total antioxidant power is often more meaningful to evaluate health beneficial
effects because of the cooperative action of individual antioxidant species. Currently, there is
no single antioxidant assay for food labeling because of the lack of standard quantification
methods. Antioxidant assays may be broadly classified as the electron transfer (ET)- and
hydrogen atom transfer (HAT)-based assays. The results obtained are hardly comparable
because of the different mechanisms, redox potentials, pH and solvent dependencies, etc. of
various assays. This project will aid the identification and quantification of properties and
mutual effects of antioxidants, bring a more rational basis to the classification of antioxidant
assays with their constraints and challenges, and make the results more comparable and
understandable. In this regard, the task group members convey their own experiences in var-
ious methods of antioxidants measurement.
Keywords: 2,2'-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)(ABTS)/Trolox-equivalent
antioxidant capacity (TEAC); antioxidant capacity/activity; cereals; cupric reducing anti -
oxidant capacity (CUPRAC); 2,2-di(4-tert-octylphenyl)-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH); ferric
reducing antioxidant power (FRAP); fruits; hydrophilic/lipophilic antioxidants; IUPAC
Analytical Chemistry Division; oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC); original and
modified reducing antioxidant capacity CUPRAC methods; total antioxidant capacity (TAC)
assays; total peroxyl radical-trapping antioxidant parameter (TRAP); vegetables.
CONTENTS
1.
BACKGROUND
1.1
HAT-based assays
1.2
ET-based assays
2.
DETERMINATION OF HYDROPHILIC AND LIPOPHILIC ANTIOXIDANT CAPACITY:
COMMENTS AND RESULTS
*Sponsoring body: IUPAC Analytical Chemistry Division: see more details on p. 991.
‡Corresponding author: Tel.: +90 212 473 7028; E-mail: rapak@istanbul.edu.tr

3.
CRITICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN ORAC, TRAP, TEAC/ABTS, AND DPPH ASSAYS OF
ANTIRADICAL ACTION
3.1
Current status
3.2
ORAC assays 
3.2.1
Experimental approach
3.2.2
Basis for calculating and expressing results
3.2.3
Recommendations for standardisation and use of ORAC assays
3.3
TRAP assays
3.4
TEAC assays
3.4.1
Experimental approach
3.4.2
Constraints and challenges
3.4.3
Evaluation and recommendations for TEAC/ABTS•+ assay
3.5
DPPH assays
3.5.1
Experimental approach
3.5.2
Reaction timing and monitoring 
3.5.3
Recommendations for standardisation and use of DPPH assays
4.
CUPRAC ASSAY AS A NOVEL ET-BASED ANTIOXIDANT CAPACITY ASSAY, AND ITS
VARIOUS MODIFICATIONS FOR CAPACITY/ACTIVITY MEASUREMENT IN DIVERSE
MATRICES (INCLUDING BIOLOGICAL FLUIDS)
4.1
Some modifications of the CUPRAC method
4.1.1
TAC assay of human serum 
4.1.2
Determination of ascorbic acid (AA) in the presence of flavonoids
4.1.3
CUPRAC assay for simultaneous measurement of lipophilic and hydrophilic
antioxidants 
4.1.4
CUPRAC assay modified for measuring hydroxyl radical scavenging activity of
food antioxidants
4.1.5
Hydroxyl radical scavenging antioxidant activity of polyphenolic compounds 
4.1.6
Measurement of xanthine oxidase inhibition activity of polyphenolic compounds 
4.1.7
Hydrogen peroxide scavenging activity of polyphenolic compounds [with Cu(II)
catalysis]
4.1.8
CUPRAC antioxidant sensor
4.1.9
On-line HPLC-CUPRAC method
4.1.10 Antioxidant capacities of thiol-containing proteins
4.1.11 Superoxide radical scavenging activity assay of biological samples 
4.2
The advantages of the CUPRAC method
5.
ANTIOXIDANT CAPACITY/ACTIVITY ASSAYS APPLIED TO FRUITS, VEGETABLES,
AND CEREALS
5.1
Vegetables
5.2
Olive oils 
5.3
Seed oils
5.4
Fruits
5.4.1
Common fruits (peaches, pears, and apples)
5.4.2
Citrus fruits (grapefruits, oranges, lemons, sweeties) 
5.4.3
Subtropical, tropical, and exotic fruits 
5.4.3.1
Persimmons
5.4.3.2
Kiwi fruit
5.4.3.3
Exotic fruits
5.5
Cereals
6.
CONCLUSIONS
7.
NOTES ADDED IN PROOF
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
958

8. 
MEMBERSHIP OF SPONSORING BODIES
9.
REFERENCES
10.
ABBREVIATIONS
1. BACKGROUND
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as superoxide anion (O2
•–), hydroxyl (•OH), peroxyl (ROO•), and
alkoxyl radicals (RO•), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and singlet oxygen (O2
1Δg) may attack biological
macromolecules, giving rise to protein, lipid, and DNA damage, cell aging, oxidative stress-originated
diseases (e.g., cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases), and cancer. Antioxidants scavenge or
quench ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) products of respiration, including free radicals [1]. 
The terms “antioxidant activity” and “antioxidant capacity” have different meanings: antioxidant
activity deals with the kinetics of a reaction between an antioxidant and the prooxidant or radical it
reduces or scavenges, whereas antioxidant capacity measures the thermodynamic conversion efficiency
of an oxidant probe upon reaction with an antioxidant. Measuring the antioxidant activity/capacity lev-
els of food and biological fluids (e.g., human serum) is carried out for the meaningful comparison of
the antioxidant content of foodstuffs and for the diagnosis and treatment of oxidative stress-associated
diseases in clinical biochemistry [e.g., a consistent difference has been reported in the level of anti -
oxidants between the tumoral sample and its corresponding peritumoral tissue, independently of the
tumor type; plasma TRAP (total peroxyl radical-trapping antioxidant parameter) values were found in
good agreement with the stage of coronary heart disease]. ROS can lead to oxidation of amino acid side
chains, formation of protein–protein cross-linkages, and oxidation of the peptide backbones of proteins,
where age-dependent oxidative alterations in humans, such as increase in protein carbonyls and in pro-
tein advanced oxidation products and decrease in plasma total thiols, significantly correlate with the
total antioxidant capacity (TAC) of plasma [2]. The cooperation among different antioxidants provides
greater protection against ROS/RNS attack than any compound alone (thereby rendering TAC meas-
urement even more important). 
An antioxidant may be defined as “any substance that when present at relatively low concentra-
tions, compared with those of the oxidisable substrate, significantly delays or inhibits oxidation of that
substrate” [3]. For convenience, antioxidants have been traditionally divided into two classes; primary
or chain-breaking antioxidants, and secondary or preventative antioxidants.
Chain-breaking mechanisms:
L• + AH →LH + A•
LO• + AH →LOH + A•
LOO• + AH →LOOH + A•
Thus, radical initiation (by reacting with a lipid radical) or propagation (by reacting with peroxyl
or alkoxyl radicals) steps are inhibited. On the other hand, secondary (preventative) antioxidants retard
the rate of oxidation, e.g., transition-metal ion chelators may inhibit Fenton-type reactions that produce
hydroxyl radicals:
Fe2+ + H2O2 →Fe3+ + •OH + OH–
The chemical diversity of antioxidants (relative abundance of their glycosides and isomers) makes
it difficult to separate and quantify antioxidants from food/biological matrices where their combined
action may be more relevant. Therefore, it is desirable to measure the TAC/activity level directly from
plant extracts and biological fluids. A basic classification of antioxidant assays is the type of reaction: 
(i)
hydrogen atom transfer (HAT)-based assays 
(ii)
electron transfer (ET)-based assays
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
959

Although the exact mechanism of chemiluminescent TAC assays is still debatable [4], lumines-
cence methods in the analysis of edible oils (such as oxidative stability, antioxidant activity, and lipid
hydroperoxide content, as well as classification or adulteration of vegetable oils) have been effectively
used without pretreatment [5]. In light of the fact that the beneficial influence of many foodstuffs and
beverages, including fruits, vegetables, tea, coffee, and cacao, on human health has been recently rec-
ognized to originate from their antioxidant activity, the most common methods used for in vitro deter-
mination of antioxidant capacity of food constituents with some important advantages and shortcom-
ings of each method were recently reviewed [6].
1.1 HAT-based assays
HAT-based assays measure the capability of an antioxidant to quench free radicals (generally, peroxyl
radicals considered to be biologically more relevant) by H-atom donation. The HAT mechanisms of
antioxidant action in which the hydrogen atom (H) of a phenol (Ar–OH) is transfered to a ROO• radi-
cal can be summarized by the reaction 
ROO• + AH/ArOH →ROOH + A•/ArO•
where the aryloxy radical (ArO•) formed from the reaction of antioxidant phenol with peroxyl radical
is stabilized by resonance. The AH and ArOH species denote the protected biomolecules and phenolic
antioxidants, respectively. Effective phenolic antioxidants need to react faster than biomolecules with
free radicals to protect the latter from oxidation. Since in HAT-based antioxidant assays, both the fluo-
rescent probe and antioxidants react with ROO•, the antioxidant activity can be determined from com-
petition kinetics by measuring the fluorescence decay curve of the probe in the absence and presence
of antioxidants, integrating the area under these curves, and finding the difference between them [7,8]. 
HAT-based assays include oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) assay, TRAP assay using
R-phycoerythrin as the fluorescent probe, crocin bleaching assay using 2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane)
hydrochloride (AAPH) as the radical generator, and β-carotene bleaching assay, although the latter
bleaches not only by peroxyl radical attack but by multiple pathways [7,8].
1.2 ET-based assays
In most ET-based assays, the antioxidant action is simulated with a suitable redox-potential probe,
namely, the antioxidants react with a fluorescent or coloured probe (oxidising agent) instead of peroxyl
radicals. Spectrophotometric ET-based assays measure the capacity of an antioxidant in the reduction
of an oxidant, which changes colour when reduced. The degree of colour change (either an increase or
decrease of absorbance of the probe at a given wavelength) is correlated to the concentration of anti -
oxidants in the sample. 2,2'-Azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS)/Trolox-equiva-
lent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) and 2,2-di(4-tert-octylphenyl)-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) [9–11] are
 decolourisation assays, whereas in Folin total phenols assay [12,13], ferric reducing antioxidant power
(FRAP) [14,15] and cupric reducing antioxidant capacity (CUPRAC) [16], there is an increase in
absorbance at a prespecified wavelength as the antioxidant reacts with the chromogenic reagent [i.e., in
the latter two methods, the lower valencies of iron and copper, namely, Fe(II) and Cu(I), form charge-
transfer complexes with the corresponding ligands, respectively]. There is no visible chromophore in
the Ce4+-reducing antioxidant capacity assay developed recently by Ozyurt et al. [17], as the remaining
Ce(IV) in dilute sulfuric acid solution after polyphenol oxidation under carefully controlled conditions
was measured at 320 nm (i.e., in the UV region of the electromagnetic spectrum). 
A ferric-ferrozine method of antioxidant capacity measurement has been developed for the sim-
ple, low-cost, and versatile assay of food antioxidants [18]. In the presence of ferrozine (FZ) ligand, fer-
ric ion easily oxidizes antioxidants and is itself reduced to Fe(II)-FZ, yielding a very high molar absorp-
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
960

tivity [for Fe(II) at the order of 2.8 × 104 Lmol–1cm–1] and thus enhanced sensitivity for most anti -
oxidants. 
The ferricyanide/Prussian blue assay of reducing capacity measurement was modified so as to
obtain a more reproducible, linear, and additive response from antioxidants with respect to concentra-
tion [19]. The simultaneous use of ferricyanide and ferric ions as chromogenic oxidants supplied more
favourable redox conditions for a greater variety of antioxidants. Prussian blue precipitation was hin-
dered with the addition of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and the optimal pH was adjusted to 1.7 to
maintain the redox activity of ferric ion while preventing its hydrolysis. Incubation of the reaction mix-
ture at room temperature for 30 min enabled more complete oxidations than observed in the conven-
tional ferricyanide method while elevated temperature incubation resulted in overoxidation of mixture
constituents causing significant deviations from linearity of absorbance–concentration curves. 
ET-based assays generally set a fixed time for the concerned redox reaction and measure thermo -
dynamic conversion (oxidation) during that period. ET-based assays include ABTS/TEAC, DPPH
(though the first two assays are considered as mixed HAT/ET-based assays by some researchers),
Folin–Ciocalteu reagent (FCR), FRAP, ferricyanide, and CUPRAC using different chromogenic redox
reagents with different standard potentials. Although the reducing capacity of a sample is not directly
related to its radical scavenging capability, it is a very important parameter of antioxidants. The reac-
tion equations of various ET-based assays can be summarized as follows:
Folin: Mo(VI) (yellow) + e– (from AH) →Mo(V) (blue)
(1) 
where the oxidising reagent is a molybdophosphotungstic heteropolyacid comprised of
3H2O–P2O5–13WO3–5 MoO3–10 H2O (heteropoly anion: P2Mo5W13O62
6–), in which the hypothe-
sized active center is Mo(VI) with λmax = 765 nm.
FRAP: Fe(TPTZ)2
3+ + ArOH →Fe(TPTZ)2
2+ + ArO• + H+
(2) 
where TPTZ: 2,4,6-tripyridyl-s-triazine ligand with λmax = 595 nm. 
Ferricyanide/Prussian blue: Fe(CN)6
3– + ArOH →Fe(CN)6
4– + ArO• + H+
(3)
Fe(CN)6
4– + Fe 3+ + K+ →KFe[Fe(CN)6]
(4)
where KFe[Fe(CN)6]: Prussian Blue with λmax = 700 nm.
ABTS/TEAC: ABTS + K2S2O8 →ABTS•+
(5)
ABTS•+ + ArOH →ABTS + ArO• + H+
(6)
where ABTS is 2,2'-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) with λmax = 734 nm and TEAC
is Trolox-equivalent antioxidant capacity (also the name of the assay). Although other wavelengths such
as 415 and 645 nm have been used in the ABTS assay [8], the 734-nm peak wavelength has been pre-
dominantly preferred due to less interference from plant pigments.
DPPH: DPPH• + ArOH →DPPH + ArO• + H+
(7) 
where DPPH• is the [2,2-di(4-tert-octylphenyl)-1-picrylhydrazyl] stable radical with λmax = 515 nm. 
CUPRAC: nCu(Nc)2
2+ + Ar(OH)n →nCu(Nc)2
+ + Ar(=O)n + nH+
(8) 
where the polyphenol with suitably situated Ar–OH groups is oxidized to the corresponding quinone,
and the reduction product, i.e., bis(neocuproine)Cu(I) [Cu(I)-Nc] chelate, shows absorption maximum
at 450 nm. It should be noted that not all phenolic –OH are reduced to the corresponding quinones, and
the efficiency of this reduction depends on the number and position of the phenolic –OH groups as well
as on the overall conjugation level of the polyphenolic molecule. 
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
961

2. DETERMINATION OF HYDROPHILIC AND LIPOPHILIC ANTIOXIDANT CAPACITY:
COMMENTS AND RESULTS
Antioxidants have always been of interest to food chemists for prevention of rancidity. Later, they have
become of interest to biologists and clinicians due to their ability to protect the human body against
damage by ROS/RNS. Antioxidants are more than chain-breaking inhibitors of lipid peroxidation. TAC
is a parameter frequently used for characterisation of food products and of the antioxidant status of the
body. TAC is a sum parameter, combining the additive/synergistic effects of a variety of different sin-
gle antioxidants. However, this parameter does not include antioxidant enzymes (e.g., catalase, super-
oxide dismutase). Thus, Bartosz [4] suggested the term “non-enzymatic antioxidant capacity” (NEAC). 
During the last decade, many analytical methods were developed to determine the antioxidant
activity/capacity in vitro, measuring the ability to reduce oxidant species/probes or to scavenge free rad-
icals. Eight common methods to determine the hydrophilic antioxidant activity were compared looking
at four standard antioxidants. The results were not comparable. Analysing 12 food additives and 6 sec-
ondary plant products on their antioxidant activity by using 3 different test systems resulted in differ-
ences depending on the assay. All the food additives showed antioxidant activities comparable to the
calibration substance Trolox (6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid). In contrast,
the secondary plant products had an up to 16 times higher antioxidant potential. To look for the influ-
ence of the sample concentration on the measured hydrophilic antioxidant capacity, 4 pure substances
and 3 food extracts were analysed using 7 common antioxidant capacity assays. For all applied pure
substances and in most of the assays, effects of the sample concentration on the measured antioxidant
capacity were observed. Investigating the lipophilic antioxidant activity, often solutions of analytes in
methanol (MeOH) or ethanol (EtOH) are used. To dissolve also hydrocarbons as, e.g., the carotenes
β-carotene and lycopene, common test systems to determine the hydrophilic antioxidant activity were
modified. Analysing several carotenoids in 4 test systems showed lipophilic antioxidant activities being
dependent on the number of conjugated double bonds, presence of β-ionone ring, number of hydroxyl
groups, and number of keto groups. Thus, determination of hydrophilic and lipophilic antioxidant activ-
ity/capacity was observed to be affected by various parameters. Until now, results can only be used to
rank different compounds or food extracts in one laboratory within one assay. 
Numerous protocols have been proposed to determine the antioxidant activity/capacity. Six assay
methods investigated use radicals [DMPD (N,N-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine), DPPH, ORAC, PCL
(photochemoluminescence) assay, TEAC, and TRAP], and two use metal ions (FRAP and LDL oxida-
tion) as oxidising agents. Table 1 shows the assays with the radicals or oxidants used.
Table 1 Assays and their radicals/oxidants as well as the measurement principles.
Assay
Radical or 
Measurement principle
Measurement media/
oxidant
instrument
DMPD
DMPD•+
absorbance (505 nm)
cuvettes/spectrophotometer
DPPH
DPPH•
absorbance (515 nm)
cuvettes/spectrophotometer
FRAP
Chelated Fe3+
absorbance (595 nm)
microplates/microplate reader
LDL oxidation
Cu2+
absorbance (234 nm)
cuvettes/spectrophotometer
ORAC
AAPH•
fluorescence
microplates/microplate reader
PCL
O2
•–
chemiluminescence
reaction tubes/Photochem® (luminometer)
TEAC
ABTS•+
absorbance (734 nm)
cuvettes/spectrophotometer
TRAP
AAPH•
fluorescence
cuvettes/fluorimeter
Five of the assays (LDL oxidation, ORAC, PCL, TEAC, and TRAP) determine the delay in oxi-
dation and use the lag phase or the area under the curve (AUC) as the parameter quantitating anti oxidant
activity. In contrast, four methods determine the ability of antioxidants to reduce radical cations
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
962

(DMPD, DPPH, and TEAC) or chelated metal ions (FRAP). Comparison of the lag phases of the four
standards in the TEAC assay resulted in similar curves for Trolox and ascorbic acid (AA), while uric
acid showed a much lower slope and gallic acid a much higher one (Fig. 1). A comparable behaviour
of the four compounds was seen in the FRAP assay (Fig. 2).
These results of TEAC and FRAP assays showed gallic acid as the most active antioxidant of the
compounds investigated. In contrast, uric acid was a very weak antioxidant in both assays. Uric acid is
the major contributor to the TAC of human blood plasma, with contributions between 33 and 53 % as
was summarised by Bartosz [4] from various test systems. Another observation from the comparison of
methods [20] was to see lag phases for uric acid of a few minutes in the TEAC and PCL assays, while
the LDL oxidation assay and the TRAP assay resulted in lag phases of hours, being a hint for different
reaction kinetics. In conclusion, the results from different assays were not comparable. They can, how-
ever, give an idea of the protective potential of phytochemicals and plant food. For an adequate assess-
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
963
Fig. 1 Lag phases [min] of the four standard antioxidants; AA, gallic acid, Trolox, and uric acid, using different
concentrations in the TEAC assay [10].
Fig. 2 Antioxidant activity (expressed as mmolL–1 Fe2+ equivalents) of the four standard antioxidants AA, gallic
acid, Trolox, and uric acid using different concentrations in the FRAP assay [20].

ment of antioxidant power in biological systems, the use of more than one method is highly recom-
mended. In clinical laboratories, they can be a first orientation for diagnosis of oxidative stress. However,
they do not include antioxidative and oxidant-regenerating enzymes in blood, cells, and tissues [4].
Another investigation [21] compared 12 food additives and 6 secondary plant products by using
the 3 test systems FRAP, TEAC, and PCL. Nine of the 18 compounds were analysed on their
hydrophilic antioxidant activity (Fig. 3) using the FRAP assay, the TEAC assay (lag phase), and the
hydrophilic version of the PCL (ACW: water-soluble substances) assay. In addition, 12 compounds
were analysed on their lipophilic antioxidant activity (Fig. 4) using a lipophilic version of the TEAC
assay (reduction of preformed ABTS•+) and the lipophilic version of the PCL (ACL: lipid-soluble sub-
stances) assay.
Within the hydrophilic assays TEAC and PCL, the regularly used antioxidants AA, isoascorbic
acid, and sodium ascorbate showed Trolox equivalents (TEs) in the same order of magnitude. Results
of both assays were well correlated (r = 0.82). Calcium ascorbate resulted in higher TE values, depend-
ing on the different molecular structure. FRAP values were higher for all food additives compared to
the already mentioned two test systems. The secondary plant products gallic acid, caffeic acid, and ros-
marinic acid resulted in high antioxidant activities in all assays used. Especially rosmarinic acid was a
very good antioxidant. The results for the regularly used lipophilic tocopherols and octyl gallate as well
as propyl gallate (PG) were in a comparable order of magnitude for the lipophilic assays TEAC and
PCL, results of both assays being well correlated (r = 0.94). The two gallates showed higher activities
in both assays than all other food additives investigated. As already shown in the hydrophilic test sys-
tems, the secondary plant products also were better antioxidants in the lipophilic methods. Eugenol,
quercetin, and rosmarinic acid, exemplarily used as lipophilic antioxidants, resulted in large differences
between the two assays. Rosmarinic acid was the most active compound in the PCL assay while
quercetin was the antioxidant with the highest activity in the TEAC assay. The secondary plant prod-
ucts had an up to 16 times higher antioxidant potential. This might present a good reason for the food
industry to use natural antioxidants instead of synthetic ones to get storage stability for processed food
items, which, according to recent surveys, is in the interest of consumers.
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
964
Fig. 3 Hydrophilic antioxidant activity of food additives and secondary plant products in the FRAP, TEAC, and
PCL (ACW) assays. Bars for the same assay with different superscript letters are significantly different, p < 0.05
[21].

To look for the influence of the sample concentration on the measured hydrophilic antioxidant
capacity, pure substances (AA, gallic acid, Trolox, and uric acid) and food extracts (strawberry nectar,
tomato extract, and white tea) were analysed using the following seven common antioxidant capacity
assays: three versions of the TEAC assay (1: lag phase, 2: MnO2-preformed ABTS•+, 3: K2S2O8-pre-
formed ABTS•+); FRAP assay; PCL assay; ORAC assay; and total phenolics (TP) assay:
Folin–Ciocalteu. These investigations were made to evaluate the reproducibility of antioxidant activ-
ity/capacity results. Table 2 gives an overview of all results.
Table 2 Influence of increasing sample concentration of standard substances and food
extracts on antioxidant capacity (different assays) and content of TP [22].
Antioxidant
FRAP
ORAC
PCL
TEAC 1
TEAC 2
TEAC 3
TP
Ascorbic acid
↔
↑
↔
↔
↔
↔
↑
Gallic acid
↔

↑
↔
↓
↓
cal
Uric acid
↑

↑
↔
↓
↓
↔
Trolox®
↔
cal
cal
cal
cal
cal
↓
Strawberry nectar
↔
↓
↑
↔
↔
↓
↓
Tomato extract
↔
↑
↑
↔
↔
↓

White tea
↔
↓
↑
↔
↔
↓
↓
↔constant,↑ increase, ↓decrease,  fluctuant, cal = calibration (respective pure substance serving
as the standard for calibration), *slight increase/decrease (coefficient of variation over the full sample
concentration range was less than 10 %). 
For all applied pure substances and in most of the assays, the effects of the sample concentration
on the measured antioxidant capacity were observed. The effects of the dilution of sample extract were
also shown for the food extracts using ORAC, PCL, TEAC 3, and Folin–Ciocalteu (TP) assays. Since
it still remains speculative how sample concentration affects the measured antioxidant activity/capacity
exactly, it is strongly recommended to use at least three sample concentrations for analysis to detect and
to discuss concentration-dependent effects. Thus, results given in the literature and determined by using
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
965
Fig. 4 Lipophilic antioxidant activity of food additives and secondary plant products in the TEAC and PCL (ACL)
assays. Bars for the same assay with different superscript letters are significantly different, p < 0.05 [21].

only one dilution have to be discussed critically. Published data cannot be realistically evaluated with-
out knowing the dilution ratio. 
For a long time, reproducible results were achievable only for hydrophilic antioxidants. Some of
these hydrophilic assays were also published as lipophilic methods, but the authors mostly used alco-
hols (MeOH, EtOH) as solvent for the sample. Thus, investigations were possible with more or less
lipophilic phenolic compounds as well as with tocopherols and other medium nonpolar molecules. In
contrast, for example, carotenoids as hydrocarbons could not be investigated for their antioxidant activ-
ity at that time with the exception of lipophilic TEAC assay using hexane as solvent. The measurement
in the TEAC assay for lipophilic compounds was made by reaction in a two-phase system (hexane and
aqueous buffer) and measuring the absorbance of the aqueous phase exactly after 2 min [23].
To improve the situation for lipophilic antioxidants that are effective in different compartments of
the human body compared to hydrophilic antioxidants, many experiments were also done to optimize
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
966
Fig. 5 Antioxidant activity of tocopherols, tocotrienols, and α-tocopherol acetate measured by FRAP assay [A],
αTEAC assay [B], DPPH assay [C], CL assay [D], and ORAC assay [E]. Bars with different superscript letters
differ significantly (p < 0.05) [24].

existing test systems for really nonpolar compounds (e.g., carotenoids). Firstly, common test systems to
determine the hydrophilic antioxidant activity were modified and tested with tocopherols and
tocotrienols [24]. Figure 5 shows the results of investigations using FRAP, TEAC, DPPH, chemilumi-
nescence (CL), and ORAC assays. 
α-Tocopherol and α-tocotrienol were the most effective antioxidants in the FRAP assay as well
as in the DPPH assay. In contrast, the α-vitamers showed the lowest activity compared to the other vita-
mers in the CL and ORAC assays. Using the TEAC assay did not lead to significant differences in
α-tocopherol equivalent (α-TE). α-Tocopheryl acetate showed either none or only a low activity in all
test systems investigated due to the blocked OH group in C-6 of the chromanol ring by esterification.
The next step was to analyse different carotenoids on their antioxidant activity by using the mod-
ified methods. All assays, successfully used for vitamin E compounds, were tested using 14 carotenoids
and for comparison of the 2 antioxidative food additives butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) and butylated
hydroxyanisole (BHA). It was observed that the ORAC assay, a more or less polar test system using
randomly methylated β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) as a “vehicle” for the lipophilic compounds, did not work
with carotenoids. The DPPH assay, determining the decrease in absorbance at the wavelength of
540 nm, resulted in an overlap with the spectral absorbance of carotenoids as shown in Fig. 6 for the
xanthophyll astaxanthin [25]. Thus, this assay is not suitable for carotenoids.
Use of the TEAC assay (Fig. 7) resulted in increasing antioxidant activity with an improved sys-
tem of conjugated double bonds. Acyclic structures also improve the activity in this assay. In contrast,
the presence of the β-ionone ring led to lower values. Hydroxyl groups as well as keto groups of the
xanthophylls also reduce the antioxidant activity.
The number of conjugated double bonds also showed a favourable effect in the FRAP assay
(Fig. 8). As was seen in the TEAC assay, the presence of the β-ionone ring significantly decreased the
antioxidant activity. In contrast to αTEAC results, the number and position of hydroxyl and keto groups
at the β-ionone ring improved the antioxidant activity in the FRAP assay.
The number of conjugated double bonds was also important when using a peroxyl radical-scav-
enging CL assay, showing that these structural components are closely related to the antioxidant behav-
iour of carotenoids. In contrast to the other two test systems shown, in the CL assay, the acyclic struc-
ture (e.g., of lycopene) led to lower activity (Fig. 9).
Concluding the investigations of carotenoids in the three lipophilic test systems (αTEAC, FRAP,
and CL assays), these assays can be used for hydrocarbons, with the lipophilic antioxidant activities
being dependent on the number of conjugated double bonds, presence of β-ionone ring, number of
hydroxyl groups, and number of keto groups.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
967
Fig. 6 Scavenging activity astaxanthin measured by DPPH assay [25].  DPPH and astaxanthin;  astaxanthin;
 differential curve of DPPH after subtracting absorbance of astaxanthin.

R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
968
Fig. 8 Antioxidant activity of carotenoids as well as of BHT and BHA measured by FRAP assay. Bars with
different letters differ significantly (p < 0.05) [25].
Fig. 9 Antioxidant activity of carotenoids as well as of BHT and BHA measured by CL assay. Bars with different
letters differ significantly (p < 0.05) [25].
Fig. 7 Antioxidant activity of carotenoids as well as of BHT and BHA measured by αTEAC assay. Bars with
different letters differ significantly (p < 0.05) [25].

3. CRITICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN ORAC, TRAP, TEAC/ABTS, AND DPPH ASSAYS OF
ANTIRADICAL ACTION
DPPH• quenching reactions have been used to elucidate structural effects on chemical mechanisms and
reactivity of simple phenols since the late 1950s [26–29]. Antioxidant activity assays for complex
polyphenols were initiated in a 1985 pivotal study in which Wayner et al. used the water-soluble azide
azobis (2-amidinopropane hydrochloride) to generate radicals in plasma, then followed inhibition of
oxygen consumption to investigate compounds contributing to antioxidant capacity [30]. This first
TRAP assay responded to new data documenting the role of radicals in oxidative pathologies and
ignited a veritable explosion of antioxidant assays seeking to identify compounds with radical-scav-
enging abilities, measure their activity, and compare effectiveness of different compounds and materi-
als. As we now try to deal with an ever-increasing number of assays, information that nearly every nat-
ural material has active antioxidant compounds, and accumulating evidence that most polyphenol
antioxidant in foods are poorly absorbed and rapidly conjugated and eliminated, it is instructive to
revisit this original and compare it with current approaches. Two key differences include: 
(a)
focus on endogenous antioxidants
(b)
primary endpoint—oxygen consumption—rather than secondary target
Over the past 25 years, antioxidant assays have shifted considerably from this initial assay
focused on elucidating endogenous activity to massive efforts to screen large numbers of biological
materials for free radical scavenging activity that presumably will signal potential for in vivo preventa-
tive or therapeutic effects, namely, to identify superfoods and super-nutraceuticals that should be con-
sumed for improved health. The zeal for finding the new “fountain of youth” has led scientists to set up
assays for fast and easy results while ignoring critical aspects of the basic chemistry in the assays and
the biochemistry of the antioxidants. Widespread use of antioxidant assays as rapid screening tools
rather than as chemical reactions to measure kinetics and determine mechanisms is largely responsible
for the inconsistencies, inaccuracies, and controversies in the scientific antioxidant literature, in medi-
cine, and in the popular press. 
Concerns about the design and use of in vitro antioxidant assays were raised in 2000 by interna-
tionally recognized lipid scientists, Frankel and Meyer [31]. In 2004, the First International Congress
on Antioxidant Methods, cosponsored by the American Chemical Society, the American Oil Chemists’
Society, the American Association of Official Analytical Chemists, and the Institute of Food
Technologists, formally recognized problems in the broad variations in assay mechanisms and chem-
istry, differentiated issues with in vitro and in vivo assays, and developed two white papers with initial
recommendations for use and standardisation of in vitro assays [32,33]. Since then, the debate has con-
tinued in numerous sessions in professional meetings, but no consensus has yet been developed.
3.1 Current status
Developed for ease of use and rapid screening of large numbers of materials, most current antioxidant
assays have both conceptual and technical limitations. Conceptual issues raise questions about the
rationale and design of the antioxidant assays, including:
•
All assays in current use were designed on the assumption that antioxidant action in vivo proceeds
by the same free radical scavenging shown in solution, yet in vivo radical scavenging associated
with absorbed antioxidants (as opposed to in vitro cell culture) has not been demonstrated.
•
Very low bioavailability, absorption, distribution, and unknown metabolism of antioxidants
impose severe limitations on what reactions these compounds can mediate competitively in vivo;
indeed, low absorption may render the chemistry measured in the assays irrelevant outside of the
gastrointestinal tract.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
969

•
Polyphenols are chemically reactive and undergo reactions other than radical scavenging, one of
which is binding to proteins; these are active in vivo and must be considered when designing test
diets and applications. 
•
Most current in vitro assays measure inaccurate chemistry in concentration ranges (both absolute
and relative) many orders of magnitude higher than ever seen in vivo.
•
Some radical assays use molecular targets (e.g., sterically hindered >N•) that do not represent
chemistry of in vivo targets. 
•
Reaction times in assays run from 4 minutes to many hours, while the lifetimes of oxygen radi-
cals normally being combated in vivo and in foods are very short [34]:
Radical (10–3 M, 37 °C)
Lifetime
HO•
10–9 s
L• (lipid alkyl)
10–8 s
RO•
10–6 s
AnOO• (arachidonic acid)
10–5 s
ROO•
10 s
Consequently, the relevance of following reactions over long times to detect slow reactors, “full
reactivity”, or activity of secondary products is highly questionable at best. In truth, most long-time
assays measure molecular migration and reorientation rather than radical quenching.
3.2 ORAC assays 
3.2.1 Experimental approach 
The ORAC assay is based on the work of Glazer [35], Ghiselli et al. [36], and Cao et al. [37]. The basic
assay uses a bis azide initiator such as AAPH [2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) dihydrochloride] to gen-
erate peroxyl radicals when heated in the presence of sufficient oxygen. The peroxyl radicals then react
with a fluorescent probe to quench its fluorescence. The reduction in fluorescence is followed optically,
and antioxidant activity is determined by slowing of the fluorescence loss in presence of antioxidant.
Assays may be performed manually with single samples in cuvettes, or they may be automated in
microplates.
The original ORAC assay was developed using the fluorescent protein β-phycoerythrin (B-PE) as
the radical target [35–38]. The assay was automated with a Cobas Fara II centrifugal analyser [39] and
applied to measure antioxidant capacity of tea and fruits [40], oat extracts [41], and vegetables [42].
Later, due to problems with reagent inconsistency, light sensitivity, and binding of polyphenols, B-PE
was replaced with fluorescein (FL: 3',6'-dihydroxyspiro[isobenzofuran-1[3H],9'[9H]-xanthen]-3-one)
[43].
Radical-quenching effects are reflected in increased lag times before active decay of the probe,
decreased rates of decay, or both. As an analytical tool, lag times are problematic since they are not
always present, they are difficult to determine accurately, and many different methods for determining
the point of initial reaction make comparing data difficult. To overcome these limitations and to fully
account for effects that extend beyond early stages of oxidation (e.g., redox cycling, potential effects of
secondary antioxidant products, slow antioxidant reactions), the ORAC assay replaces lag times with
comparisons of net integrated areas under fluorescence decay curves. AUCs of test samples are con-
verted to Trolox (a water-soluble congener of tocopherol) equivalents by comparison to a standard
curve prepared from the AUCs determined over a range of Trolox concentrations. Alternatively, TEs of
the sample can be calculated from AUCs using the following relationships [43]:
ORAC (U/mL) = [(AUCsample −AUCblank)/(AUCTrolox −AUCblank)]  MTrolox/Msample 
(9)
where M is the molar concentration (molarity) in molL–1. 
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
970

ORAC (U/mL) = 50 (dilution) (AUCsample −AUCblank)/(AUCTrolox −AUCblank) 
(10)
when molarity is unknown.
In addition to the original version that detects ROO• reactions, ORAC assays have been modified
for detection of •OH [44] and other radicals by modifying the initiators, and for detection of lipophilic
antioxidants [45] by encapsulating (and thus solubilising) these compounds in randomly methylated
β-CD. High-throughput assays using plate readers [46] have been applied to a broad range of plasma,
biological materials, and foods, for example [47–49], to provide the basis for a database of activities
compiled by the U.S. Department of Agriculture [50]. All versions of the ORAC assays have been com-
mercialized by Brunswick Labs, Wareham, MA, USA. 
3.2.2 Basis for calculating and expressing results 
Multiple methods for expressing results are some of the most troublesome aspects of all the antioxidant
assays, but particularly for ORAC. The equation defining ORAC units 
ORAC U = [(AUCsample −AUCblank)/(AUCTrolox −AUCblank)]  MTrolox/Msample = mM TE (11)
is straightforward when normalising pure known compounds, but when relating TE to extracts with
unknown composition and concentration it becomes the source of one of the most serious limitations of
the ORAC assay. ORAC units = mmol TE per what? Which of these units should be used—mL, L, g
or kg fresh weight (FW), g or kg dry weight (DW), 100 g serving, average size serving, mol phenol?
A reference base is clearly required for all ORAC values, but it must also be appropriate for the
product. Because so much attention has been given to absolute ORAC values in the popular press, it has
become common practice to express ORAC values on whatever basis will provide the largest numbers.
However, if the base does not match how a food is consumed (e.g., citing liters of juice or 100 g of
spices), ORAC values have no meaning or relevance; they are confusing at best and deliberately mis-
leading or fraudulent at worst. Similarly, when ORAC values are based on weight, dry foods always
have higher ORAC values than high-moisture or fresh foods, yet this distinction is usually ignored in
presenting and interpreting data. For example, dry cinnamon has the highest ORAC value (267000) in
Table 3, dried beans are more than an order of magnitude lower (about 12000), and (high-moisture)
fresh fruits sit at the bottom with 3000–6000. Taken at a glance, the table leaves the impression that
fresh fruits known to have high antioxidant activity are poor actors in relation to dried beans and to more
cinnamon than usually goes into a full recipe. Expressing these foods all on a common DW basis (e.g.,
per gram DW) would present a more accurate comparison. 
Even more troublesome is the practice of citing ORAC values without units or base, for example,
the ORAC values in Table 4 were taken from an Internet website. The list was entitled “high ORAC
foods” with no reference base or sample size cited and no information about analyses provided. This
kind of flagrant misuse of ORAC values is all too common and must be stopped.
Normalising to a useful weight or volume gives numbers for comparison, but it is still unclear
what these numbers connect to. This raises two important issues with interpreting or using ORAC val-
ues—what do they mean chemically, and what do they mean nutritionally? Neither question can cur-
rently be answered. 
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
971

Table 3 Selected listings from USDA data on ORAC values of common
foods*.
Food
Serving size
ORAC per serving
(μmol TE100 g–1)
Cinnamon, ground
100 g
267536
Aronia black chokeberry
100 g
16062
Small red bean
½ c. dried beans
13727
Wild blueberry
1 c.
13427
Red kidney bean
½ c. dried beans
13259
Pinto bean
½ c.
11864
Blueberry
1 c. berries
9019
Cranberry
1 c. berries
8983
Artichoke hearts
1 c., cooked
7904
Blackberry
1 c. berries
7701
Prune
½ c.
7291
Raspberry
1 c.
6058
Strawberry
1 c.
5938
Red Delicious apple
1 apple
5900
Granny Smith apple
1 apple
5381
Pecan
1 oz.
5095
Sweet cherry
1 c.
4873
Black plum
1 plum
4844
Russet potato
1 cooked
4649
Black bean
½ c. dried beans
4181
Plum
1 plum
4118
Gala apple
1 apple
3903
*http://www.ars.usda.gov/SP2UserFiles/Place/12354500/Articles/AICR07_ORAC.pdf
Table 4 ORAC values for high antioxidant foods.
High antioxidant food item
ORAC value
Spices, cloves, ground
314446
Sumac, bran, raw
312400
Spices, cinnamon, ground
267536
Sorghum, bran, hi-tannin
240000
Spices, oregano, dried
200129
Acai berry, freeze-dried
161400
Spices, turmeric, ground
159277
Sorghum, bran, black
100800
Sumac, grain, raw
86800
Cocoa, dry powder, unsweetened
80933
Spices, cumin seed
76800
Maqui berry, concentrated powder
75000
Spices, parsley, dried
74349
Sorghum, bran, red
71000
Spices, basil, dried
67553
Chemically, are high ORAC foods also high in polyphenols and are these responsible for the reac-
tivity, or are other molecules also involved? Twenty-five years of screening has shown that most fruits,
vegetables, herbs, spices, and leaves contain active antioxidants that react to give ORAC values. Now,
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
972

it is time to shift emphasis to elucidating the compounds responsible and the mechanisms involved in
the reactions that yield ORAC curves. 
What ORAC values mean nutritionally is a more difficult question to answer. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture recommends consumption of 3000–5000 ORAC units/day in foods. 5000
ORAC units can be provided by one Granny Smith apple or 1 oz pecans, which seem to be very little
considering the hype about antioxidant roles in slowing aging and preventing disease. Looking at 5000
ORAC units from a different perspective, assuming that μmoles Trolox are equivalent to μmoles toco-
pherol:
5000 ORAC units ≅5 mmol vitamin E = 2153 mg vitamin E
1 IU vitamin E = 0.67 mg α-tocopherol
2153 mg tocopherol = 3230 IU TE 
In contrast to the apple example, this analysis make 5000 ORAC units seem excessive since 30 IU
tocopherol is needed daily to prevent deficiency and 400 IU tocopherol is the maximum recommended
supplement level. Another way to interpret the data is that one apple has antioxidant action equivalent
to 8 standard 400 IU vitamin E capsules daily. Neither situation is believable or realistic.
Taking still a third perspective, expressing ORAC values on the original mM Trolox basis, an
ORAC value of 1000 would be needed to provide the same protection as 1 mol α-tocopherol; on the
current μmol equivalent basis, ORAC value of 1000000 would be needed for this equivalent action. In
this context, no antioxidants in natural materials match the activity of the most important endogenous
antioxidant, tocopherol. Given these considerations, using ORAC values to make dietary decisions is
unwarranted and perhaps even unwise. 
3.2.3 Recommendations for standardisation and use of ORAC assays
•
Shift focus of reaction from screening to elucidating antioxidant reaction characteristics.
•
Replace FL with a target not susceptible to fluorescence quenching, side reactions, and inter -
actions.
•
Require blanks with extracts plus fluorescein, and also excitation/emission spectra for FL, extract,
and combinations of the two with a range of extract concentrations (without azide) to identify
interfering interactions.
•
Test a full range of antioxidant concentrations to develop rate constants, determine concentration
dependence of reactivity including threshold for activity, and identify potential prooxidant con-
centration ranges.
•
Information needed before standard protocols can be developed.
-
systematic study of fluorescein (FL): AAPH ratio effects on reaction characteristics to
determine FL concentrations where quenching cannot occur and obscure antioxidant
effects, effect of azide and FL concentrations on the rates and completeness of ORAC reac-
tions, and optimum conditions for running reactions.
-
systematic study of the effect of dissolved oxygen levels on reaction rates 
-
determination of minimum oxygen levels required for efficient reaction
-
development of analyses and methods to ensure adequate oxygen in reactions
•
Develop guidelines for monitoring and accurately controlling temperature during ORAC reac-
tions. 
•
Develop standards for plate reader performance in antioxidant activity assays, incorporate these
standards into official protocols, and award certification to force manufacturers to redesign instru-
mentation appropriately.
•
Develop one program for AUC calculations and make it available internationally to all users;
alternatively, develop step-by-step directions for AUC calculations using commonly available
computer programs such as Excel and include in standard protocols.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
973

•
Establish mandatory units and bases for sample size and form (dry vs. wet weight) to be used
when expressing results.
•
Require compositional analysis of all extracts (total phenol content at a minimum) for compari-
son with ORAC to begin developing activity profiles. 
•
Conduct ORAC assays of natural product extracts before and after binding of phenols by
polyvinylpyrrolidone to determine contributions of nonphenolic compounds to antioxidant activ-
ity of extracts.
3.3 TRAP assays 
Based on the original studies of Wayner et al. [30,51,52], TRAP assays measure antioxidant ability to
interfere with the reaction between peroxyl radicals and a target probe. TRAP assays are variants of
ORAC assays in principle, but they use a broader range of initiators, probes, and endpoint measure-
ments (including those used in ORAC and TEAC assays). Initiating radicals have been generated selec-
tively by azides such as AAPH {ABAP or [2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) dihydrochloride]}
[30,51,52], enzymes such as horseradish peroxidase [53], or by H2O2-hemin [54], NO• [55], or singlet
oxygen [56]. Probes used for TRAP assays include dichlorofluorescein diacetate [57], FL [56], phyco-
erythrin [58,59], luminol [53], and ABTS [60]. 
3.4 TEAC assays 
3.4.1 Experimental approach
TEAC assays use intensely coloured cation radicals of ABTS to test ability of antioxidants to quench
radicals. The original assay developed by Miller and Rice-Evans [61,62] (sometimes referred to as
TEAC I) utilized metmyoglobin-H2O2 to generate HO•, which then reacted with ABTS to generate the
cation radical, ABTS•+. However, quantitating antioxidant effects were equivocal because antioxidants
could react with the original radical oxidant as well as the ABTS•+, causing an overestimation of anti -
oxidant activity [63]. The assay has been revised to cleanly generate ABTS•+ by first using oxidising
agents such as potassium persulfate [64] and manganese dioxide [65,66], then adding antioxidants and
measuring direct reaction with the radical. In variations of this approach, laccase [67], Br2
•−[68],
H2O2 + horseradish peroxidase [69,70], and peroxyl radicals [71] have also been used as oxidants. Of
all these, persulfate oxidation is preferred for its high ABTS•+ yields and radical/antioxidant inertness.
This format (TEAC II) forms the basis for current TEAC assays. 
TEAC II assays are quite simple to perform. Stock solutions of concentrated ABTS•+ are gener-
ated and stored in the refrigerator (stable for several months) [64]. For reaction, the stock solution is
diluted with water or buffer to a workable absorbance, for example, A = 1.0, at 734 nm, initial
absorbance of the ABTS•+ solution at 734 nm is recorded, the antioxidant is added, and the drop in
absorbance is measured after reaction periods varying from four minutes to several hours. 
TEAC values are calculated from the ratio of test compound reaction (measured as inhibition) to
that of Trolox reaction. In concept,
(12)
In practice, TEAC has been calculated in several ways, which creates problems in comparing data
between laboratories. 
3.4.2 Constraints and challenges
Overall, TEAC assays offer many advantages that contribute to its widespread popularity in screening
antioxidant activities of a wide range of materials. TEAC is operationally simple, reactions are rapid
(most methods use 30 min or less) and run over a wide range of pH. ABTS•+, being a singly positive
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
974
=
TEAC value (unitless)
Inhibition by test compounds
Inhibition by trolox

charged cationic radical, is soluble in both aqueous and organic solvents and is not affected by ionic
strength, so it has been used in multiple media to determine both hydrophilic and lipophilic antioxidant
capacity. Reactions can be automated and adapted to microplates [72,73] as well as to flow-injection
[74] and stopped-flow methods. 
However, TEAC also has some major disadvantages. The high extinction coefficient of ABTS•+
(1.50 × 104 Lmol–1cm–1 at 734 nm [64]) limits the useful antioxidant concentration range that can be
analysed accurately to about 1.5–70 μM final concentrations. Antioxidant concentrations outside this
range require too much or too little ABTS•+ for accurate optical measurements. In addition, as with
ORAC assays, many reaction factors must be carefully controlled for reproducible reactions that can be
compared between laboratories, as follows:
•
the oxidising agent used for ABTS•+ generation
•
pH and time of ABTS•+ conversion 
•
buffer and pH control agents
•
wavelength for monitoring ABTS•+
•
age of ABTS•+ solution
•
storage conditions
•
concentrations of ABTS•+ and antioxidant
•
temperature of assay
•
time for reaction between ABTS•+ and antioxidant
•
solvent phase, phase equilibria
•
oxygen concentrations when AA or other strong reducing agents are present
•
calculation method(s)
Though all the issues are important for standardisation, this evaluation will focus only on ABTS•+
issues, reaction monitoring and timing, molecular size and steric accessibility, and calculation/report-
ing methods, all of which affect the validity of the assay.
3.4.3 Evaluation and recommendations for TEAC/ABTSmacrocyclizatio+ assay
Although the TEAC assay has been widely used in multiple forms, its usefulness and accuracy are being
questioned. We recommend that TEAC should be used with care as a routine assay for measuring rela-
tive antioxidant activity of the different classes of phenols and extracts with mixed antioxidants as well
as for predicting in vivo protective effects for the following reasons: 
•
Reactivity with ABTS+• appears to be controlled first and foremost by steric accessibility of phe-
nolic –OH groups to the ABTS+• radical site rather than by chemical properties of test anti -
oxidants.
•
ABTS+• reactions are complex and difficult to interpret in terms of antioxidant mechanism. 
•
As currently performed, the assay reports stoichiometry but does not distinguish differences in
reaction rates, which are the controlling factor in real-life applications.
•
The assay cannot be used for construction of SARs (structure–activity relationships) or for accu-
rate ranking of antioxidants, even within structural classes, for all the reasons listed above.
•
Nonspecific side reactions are common.
•
Chemistry of the N• in ABTS+• does not accurately model radical reactions in foods or biologi-
cal tissues.
•
Compounds that contribute strongly to in vivo antioxidant action, including proteins and gluta -
thione (GSH), react poorly or not at all with ABTS+•.
It is recommended that the assay should be modified in a manner similar to that described below
for DPPH, and its use should be limited to comparisons of compounds with closely similar structure.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
975

3.5 DPPH assays
3.5.1 Experimental approach 
DPPH is a stable radical with a deep purple colour whose reaction with other radicals, reducing agents,
or compounds capable of HAT leads to loss of colour at 515 nm and loss of its electron paramagnetic
resonance (EPR) free radical signal [26,29]. Like ABTS+•, DPPH• reacts with both electron and hydro-
gen donors [75,76], though more slowly, and steric accessibility to the radical site is a clear issue
[27,28].
No antioxidant assay is simpler or less expensive to run than the DPPH assay, which accounts for
its popularity and extensive use. Needed only are the reagent, some cuvettes, and a UV–vis spectro -
photometer, the latter of which are found in even the most rudimentary laboratories. DPPH crystals are
dissolved in MeOH or EtOH, initial DPPH• absorbance is recorded, an aliquot of the test antioxidant is
added, the mixture is incubated for 30 min, and the final absorbance is recorded. Reaction is measured
as (A0 −Af) and antioxidant activity is reported either as IC50 (the antioxidant concentration required
to reduce the DPPH absorbance by half) or % loss or original absorbance or EPR signal. The latter is
just a number for comparison, the former at least considers some concentration dependence. Both
approaches report extent of reaction and ignore reaction rates.
3.5.2 Reaction timing and monitoring 
As with ABTS+•, before-and-after measurements miss the important kinetics of the reaction and can
underestimate fast reactors while giving undue weight to slow reactors. In addition, protocols that
attempt to run the reaction to completion with long incubation times emphasize stoichiometry at the
expense of reaction rate. This focus is not useful for evaluating and predicting effectiveness of anti -
oxidants because if the reaction rate of putative antioxidants is not comparable to the annealing rates or
lifetimes of target radicals, whether DPPH•, HO•, or lipid radicals, radical quenching will not occur.
DPPH• is a stable radical, so slow antioxidant reactions with it may be detectable experimentally.
However, the relevance of these slow reactions to quenching of short-lived hydroxyl and lipid radicals
in foods and tissues is highly questionable. Even if the rationale for long incubation times is detecting
action of antioxidant products, radicals in real systems do not survive long enough to encounter these
products, and the products themselves react so do not accumulate to quench radicals as they are formed
in reactions. Thus, the orientation of the DPPH assay needs to be changed to determine early processes
that are most likely to be active with unstable radicals such as HO•, HOO•, LO(O)•, and NO•. This
means recording reactions preferably over 4 min and no more than 6–10 min.
Research in chemistry has recognized the mechanistic complexities of this fast reaction compo-
nent as well as the difficulties measuring it. Hence, pulse radiolysis and stopped-flow methodologies
are used routinely to detect the earliest species in fast reactions, including DPPH• [75,76]. Inexpensive
stopped-flow syringe assemblies are available, so antioxidant assays using DPPH should be moved to
this technology or at least to autodispensing with instantaneous absorbance recording in microplate
readers.
3.5.3 Recommendations for standardisation and use of DPPH assays
•
The limitations of using a nitrogen-centered radical to model antioxidant reactions with oxyl rad-
icals must be recognized. Accordingly, kinetics and specificity of antioxidant reaction with DPPH
should not be expected to match results from other antioxidant assays.
•
That reaction of antioxidants is influenced so strongly by, and in some cases is controlled by,
steric effects rather than innate chemical characteristics makes this assay unacceptable for screen-
ing antioxidant activity of extracts, comparing antioxidants of different structural classes, or com-
paring extracts of unknown composition and concentration because preference is given to small
reactive compounds and large molecule antioxidants are underestimated.
•
Recognising these drawbacks, there is nevertheless a very large body of fundamental chemical
research on reactions of phenols and other molecules with DPPH, identifying reaction products
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
976

and measuring rates and extent of reaction as a function of structure. With these studies as tem-
plates, DPPH reactions can still provide a very useful research tool if reoriented to elucidate
antioxidant chemistry rather than screen antiradical activity.
•
Current practices of blindly recording absorbance before and after incubation for 30 min or longer
should be replaced with kinetic and product analyses following procedures already well estab-
lished in chemistry. Reactions should be monitored continuously from mixing point, using opti-
cal or EPR analyses, and kinetics should be calculated on the first 30 s, except for very slow reac-
tors, where 1- or 5-min endpoints may be substituted for sensitivity. Long time incubations ignore
the initial fast reactions and give undue weight to slow reactions, so should be abandoned.
•
Plate readers with (accurate and reproducible) autodispensers for introducing DPPH to sample
can collect the first data point within about 0.2 s, much earlier than can be accomplished by man-
ual sample transfer. Thus, the use of plate readers for this assay should be encouraged. In addi-
tion, consideration should be given to developing standardized assays using stopped-flow tech-
niques to measure the early reaction more accurately.
•
DPPH reactions should be run using a full range of antioxidant concentrations covering three
orders of magnitude (e.g., 1 mM to 1 μM starting solutions), where the maximum concentration
does not greatly exceed the DPPH concentration. “Reactivity” determined using 10–100-fold
excess of antioxidant over DPPH is highly questionable, especially when large molecules and
extracts of unknown composition are being analysed.
•
DPPH reactions should be tested in multiple solvents, at a minimum MeOH (not EtOH, which
forms reactive radicals that may interfere with the assay) and MeOH:H2O (1:1, v/v), where the
water phase is variously high purity water, water acidified to pH 5 with Ultrex HCl (or equiva-
lent), and water raised to pH 9 with Ultrex NaOH. These solvents provide initial distinction
between ET and HAT mechanisms.
•
Each antioxidant should be evaluated for oxygen effects. While DPPH itself is believed not to be
affected by oxygen or its reduction product O2
•−, oxygen competes for reducing agents and reac-
tive intermediates, removing them from the reaction stream. For example, AA reaction with
DPPH is faster when solutions are saturated with nitrogen or argon because less undergoes autox-
idation. Kinetic studies of DPPH reactions in chemistry are all performed under nitrogen or argon.
This should become standard practice also with antioxidant assays to avoid side reactions.
•
The DPPH• reduction product, DPPH2, is a proton donor and hydrogen binder so it inhibits HAT
reactions of many phenols and reduces their apparent reactivity. A method for routine detection
of this effect in the DPPH assay needs to be developed.
•
Since all radical reactions are influenced by trace metals and adventitious contaminants, all
antioxidant assays should be run in high-purity distilled, deionized water of 18 MΩ resistivity. In
addition, standards should be established for glassware washing to remove metals and other con-
taminants before these assays.
•
Required reporting of reaction controls and reagent blanks should be a component of all stan-
dardized protocols. 
•
Total phenols and full compositional analysis should become standard required practice for all
natural extracts being tested for antioxidant activity. This information can be used to build a base
for correlating activity with specific compounds, for elucidating synergistic and antagonistic
interactions, and for understanding how phenol reactivity may change with reaction environment.
4. CUPRAC ASSAY AS A NOVEL ET-BASED ANTIOXIDANT CAPACITY ASSAY, AND ITS
VARIOUS MODIFICATIONS FOR CAPACITY/ACTIVITY MEASUREMENT IN DIVERSE
MATRICES (INCLUDING BIOLOGICAL FLUIDS)
The CUPRAC method of antioxidant capacity measurement, introduced by the analytical chemistry
laboratory of Istanbul University to world literature [16], is based on the absorbance measurement of
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
977

the CUPRAC chromophore, Cu(I)-neocuproine (Nc) chelate, formed as a result of the redox reaction of
antioxidants with the CUPRAC reagent, bis(neocuproine)copper(II) cation [Cu(II)-Nc], where absor-
bance is recorded at the maximal light absorption wavelength of 450 nm. The CUPRAC method of TAC
assay has been successfully applied to antioxidants in food plants, human serum, and to hydroxyl radi-
cal scavengers. In the assay of human serum antioxidants, hydrophilic antioxidants were measured after
precipitation of proteins with HClO4, while lipophilic ones like α-tocopherol and β-carotene were
determined by n-hexane extraction, evaporation, followed by colour development in dichloromethane
(DCM) of the Cu(I)-Nc charge-transfer complex formed from their CUPRAC reaction [77]. In a minia-
turized CUPRAC method without preliminary separation of phases, serum samples were centrifuged
after 10 % TCA precipitation, and CUPRAC was directly applied to the supernate. Since essentially
flavones and flavonols (and other flavonoids to a lesser extent) could be chelated with lanthanum(III)
in the form of basically nonpolar complexes, and AA either did not complex or formed very weak
hydrophilic complexes under the same conditions, AA assay with a high redox equilibrium constant of
the CUPRAC reaction with preliminary extraction of flavonoids as their La(III) complexes was endeav-
oured [78]. Lipophilic and hydrophilic antioxidants (e.g., β-carotene, α-tocopherol, AA, quercetin, etc.)
could be simultaneously assayed with a modified CUPRAC method in the same solvent medium of ace-
tone-water (9:1, v/v) with the aid of their inclusion complexes formed with 2 % methyl-β-cyclodextrin
(M-β-CD) [79]. In measuring the hydroxyl radical scavenging activity of certain water-soluble compo-
unds (metabisulfite, thio urea, glucose, lysine, etc.), the probes of p-aminobenzoate, 2,4-dimethoxy -
benzoate, and 3,5-dimeth oxybenzoate were used to detect hydroxyl radicals, and the •OH scavenging
rate constants of these compounds were determined by competition kinetics [80]. In the measurement
of hydroxyl radical scavenging activities of polyphenolics, special measures were taken so as to prevent
the redox cycling of phenolic compounds. In this newly developed method, the Fenton reaction was
stopped at the end of the 10th minute with the addition of catalase to degrade hydrogen peroxide and
cease •OH production, and the dihydroxybenzoates formed from the salicylate probe under hydroxyl
radical attack were measured with the CUPRAC method, rate constants being calculated with compe-
tition kinetics [81]. In another modified CUPRAC method, the superoxide anion radical was formed
with xanthine–xanthine oxidase (X–XO), and the inhibition of the enzyme was measured upon addition
of polyphenolics to the system [82]. The hydrogen peroxide scavenging (HPS) activity of the polyphe-
nolics was measured in the presence of Cu(II) (as catalyst) with the HPS-CUPRAC method [83]. A low-
cost optical antioxidant sensor (CUPRAC sensor) was developed by immobilising the Cu(II)-Nc
reagent onto a perfluorosulfonate cation-exchange polymer membrane matrix (Nafion®) [84]. A novel
on-line HPLC-CUPRAC method was developed for the selective determination of polyphenols in com-
plex plant matrices. This method combines chromatographic separation, constituent analysis, and post-
column identification of antioxidants in plant extracts [85]. CUPRAC in urea buffer also responded to
thiol-containing proteins in food [86]. Another modified CUPRAC method is comprised of a tert-butyl-
hydroquinone (TBHQ) probe with the phenazine methosulphate-β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(PMS-NADH) non-enzymic O2
•– generating system for superoxide radical scavenging activity (SRSA)
assay of thiol-type antioxidants (e.g., GSH, cysteine), amino acids (e.g., serine, threonine), plasma
antioxidants (e.g., bilirubin, albumin), and other antioxidants (e.g., methionine); the SRSA method is
based on the measurement of the CUPRAC absorbance of the remaining TBHQ in the reaction medium
(TBHQ is CUPRAC-reactive while its oxidation product is not, and this probe is isolated by ethyl
acetate extraction from other CUPRAC-reactive interferents remaining in the aqueous phase) [87].
In conclusion, the CUPRAC methodology is evolving into an “antioxidant measurement pac-
kage” in biochemistry and food chemistry comprising many assays, and the results are in accordance
with those of independent reference methods, having distinct advantages over certain established
 methods.
The CUPRAC method describes the development of a simple and widely applicable antioxidant
capacity assay for flavonoids, phenolic acids, hydroxycinnamic acids, thiols, synthetic antioxidants, and
vitamins C and E [5]. The chromogenic oxidising reagent used for the CUPRAC assay is the Cu(II)-Nc
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
978

cation, and the CUPRAC chromophore the Cu(I)-Nc cation (Fig. 10). This reagent is useful at pH 7,
and the absorbance of the Cu(I) chelate formed as a result of the redox reaction with reducing poly -
phenols and vitamins C and E is measured at 450 nm [see Fig. 10, for Cu(I)-Nc spectra obtained with
reacting varying concentrations of Trolox with the CUPRAC reagent]. The orange–yellow colour is due
to the Cu(I)-Nc charge-transfer complex formed. Liberated protons are buffered in ammonium acetate
medium. CUPRAC reactions are essentially complete within 30 min for most food/biological anti -
oxidants. 
The chromogenic oxidising reagent of the developed CUPRAC method, i.e., Cu(II)-Nc, reacts
with n-electron reductant antioxidants (AOX) in the following manner:
nCu(Nc)2
2+ + n-electron reductant (AOX) ↔nCu(Nc)2
+ + n-electron oxidized product + nH+ (13)
In this reaction, the reactive Ar–OH groups of polyphenolic antioxidants are oxidized to the cor-
responding quinones (Ar=O) and Cu(II)-Nc is reduced to the highly coloured Cu(Nc)2
+ chelate show-
ing maximum absorption at 450 nm. Although the concentration of Cu2+ ions is in stoichiometric
excess of that of Nc in the CUPRAC reagent for driving the redox equilibrium reaction represented by
(eq. 13) to the right, the actual oxidant is the Cu(Nc)2
2+ species and not the sole Cu2+, because the stan-
dard redox potential of the Cu(II/I)-Nc is 0.6 V, much higher that of the Cu2+/Cu+ couple (0.17 V) [88].
As a result, polyphenols are oxidized much more rapidly and efficiently with Cu(II)-Nc than with Cu2+,
and the amount of coloured product [i.e., Cu(I)-Nc chelate] emerging at the end of the redox reaction
is equivalent to that of reacted Cu(II)-Nc. The liberated protons are buffered in ammonium acetate
medium. In the normal CUPRAC method (CUPRACN), the oxidation reactions are essentially complete
within 30 min. Flavonoid glycosides require acid hydrolysis to their corresponding aglycons for fully
exhibiting their antioxidant potency. Slow reacting antioxidants may need elevated temperature incu-
bation so as to complete their oxidation with the CUPRAC reagent [16,77]. The CUPRAC antioxidant
capacities of a wide range of polyphenolics and flavonoids were experimentally reported as TEAC,
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
979
Fig. 10 The CUPRAC reaction and chromophore: Cu(I)-Nc chelate cation (protons liberated in the reaction are
neutralized by the NH4Ac buffer) (Inset figure: Visible spectra of Cu(I)-Nc chelate produced as a result of
CUPRAC reaction with varying concentrations of TR).

defined as the reducing equivalent concentration (expressed in the units of mmol Trolox L–1) of 1 mM
solution of the tested antioxidant compound. Experimentally, the TEAC values (unitless) were found as
the ratio of the molar absorptivity of each compound to that of Trolox in the CUPRAC assay. 
The TEAC coefficients of various hydrophilic antioxidant compounds found with the developed
CUPRAC method are tabulated in Table 5. The linear calibration curves of the tested antioxidants as
absorbance vs. concentration with respect to the CUPRAC method (figures not shown) generally gave
correlation coefficients close to unity (r ≥0.999) within the useful absorbance range of 0.1–1.1 [16].
The highest antioxidant capacities in the CUPRAC method were observed for epicatechin gallate, ros-
marinic acid, epigallocatechin gallate, quercetin, fisetin, epigallocatechin, catechin, caffeic acid, epi-
catechin, gallic acid, rutin, and chlorogenic acid in this order, in accordance with theoretical expecta-
tions, because the number and position of the hydroxyl groups as well as the degree of conjugation of
the whole molecule are important for easy ET.
Table 5 Antioxidant capacities of various polyphenolic compounds (in the
units of TEAC as measured by CUPRAC assay) [16,89,90].
TEACCUPRAC
Antioxidant
TEACN
TEACI
TEACH
TEACH&I
Flavonoids
Epicatechin gallate (ECG)
5.32
5.65
Epigallocatechingallate (EGCG)
4.89
5.49
Quercetin (QR)
4.38
Fisetin (FS) 
3.90
4.18
Epigallocatechin (EGC)
3.35
3.60
Catechin (CT)
3.09
3.56
3.08
3.49
Epicatechin (EC)
2.77
2.89
Rutin (RT)
2.56
3.80
Morin (MR)
1.88
3.32
Kaempherol 
1.58
1.87
Hesperetin (HT)
0.99
1.05
0.85
0.98
Hesperidin (HD)
0.97
1.11
0.79
0.95
Naringenin (NG)
0.05
2.28
3.03
Naringin (N)
0.02
0.13
Hydroxycinnamic acids
Caffeic acid (CFA)
2.89
2.96
2.87
3.22
Chlorogenic acid (CGA)
2.47
2.72
1.20
1.42
Ferulic acid (FRA)
1.20
1.23
1.18
1.34
p-Coumaric acid (CMA)
0.55
1.00
0.53
1.15
Vitamins
α-Tocopherol (TP)
1.10
1.02
0.99
0.87
Ascorbic acid (AA)
0.96
Benzoic acids
Gallic acid (GA)
2.62
Sinapic acid (SNA)
1.24
2.17
Vanillic acid (VA)
1.24
1.52
1.32
1.57
Syringic acid (SA)
1.12
1.64
1.13
1.67
N: normal measurement; I: incubated measurement; H: hydrolysed measurement;
H&I: hydrolysed and incubated measurement
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
980

In Figs. 11 and 12, the TACCUPRAC values of herbal infusions and some edible wild plants were
reported as TEs (mmol TR·g–1), respectively.
4.1 Some modifications of the CUPRAC method
4.1.1 TAC assay of human serum
Several methods have been developed to measure the TAC of biological fluids such as human serum or
plasma in view of the difficulties encountered in measuring each antioxidant component separately,
added to the problems caused by possible interactions between individual antioxidants [89,90]. Apak et
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
981
Fig. 11 TAC of herbal infusions, either prepared from dried plant material or manufactured tea bags, as measured
by the CUPRAC and ABTS assays, combined with their TP content as measured by the Folin assay [91].
Fig. 12 TAC values in TR equivalents of seven edible wild plants grown in Ayvalik as assayed by CUPRAC,
ABTS/persulfate, and Folin methods [92].

al. [77] were able to apply the CUPRAC method to a complete series of plasma antioxidants for the
assay of TAC of serum and the resulting absorbance at 450 nm was recorded either directly (e.g., for
AA, α-tocopherol, and GSH) or after incubation at 50 °C for 20 min (e.g., for uric acid, bilirubin, and
albumin), quantitation being made by means of a calibration curve. The lipophilic antioxidants, α-toco-
pherol and β-carotene, were assayed in DCM. Lipophilic antioxidants of serum were extracted with n-
hexane from an ethanolic solution of serum subjected to centrifugation. Hydrophilic antioxidants of
serum were assayed after perchloric acid precipitation of proteins in the centrifugate. For lipophilic and
hydrophilic antioxidants of human serum samples extracted with different solvents, the findings of the
developed CUPRAC method completely agreed with those of ABTS-persulfate for lipophilic phase
(first extracted with hexane, solvent evaporated under nitrogen purging, and subsequent colour devel-
opment performed in DCM). As for hydrophilic phase, a linear correlation existed between the
CUPRAC and ABTS findings for measurements carried out both at room temperature (r = 0.58) and in
50 °C-incubated solution (r = 0.53). This is also an advantage of the developed method, as relevant lit-
erature reports that either serum ORAC or serum FRAP does not correlate at all with serum TEAC. The
CUPRAC assay of TAC may be successfully applied to all types of biologically important antioxidants
[i.e., AA, α-tocopherol, β-carotene, reduced GSH, uric acid, and bilirubin] regardless of chemical type
or hydrophilicity, as well as to their mixtures and human serum.
4.1.2 Determination of ascorbic acid (AA) in the presence of flavonoids
A practical, rapid, and low-cost spectrophotometric method for AA assay in complex matrices includ-
ing flavonoids was developed to meet the needs of conventional analysis laboratories that are not so
well equipped [78]. AA in complex matrices such as synthetic AA + flavonoid mixtures, AA +
bioflavonoids pharmaceutical products, and fruit juices could be reliably assayed with preliminary
La(III)-chelation and EtAc extraction, followed by CUPRAC measurement in the aqueous phase con-
taining AA. AA could be sensitively determined over a wide concentration range, without interference
from flavones and flavonols.
4.1.3 CUPRAC assay for simultaneous measurement of lipophilic and hydrophilic
antioxidants 
The CUPRAC procedure was applied to both lipophilic and hydrophilic antioxidants simultaneously,
by making use of their “host–guest” complexes with M-β-CD, a cyclic oligosaccharide, in acetonated
aqueous medium [79]. M-β-CD was introduced as the water solubility enhancer for lipophilic anti -
oxidants. Two percent M-β-CD (w/v) in a 90 % acetone-10 % H2O mixture was found to sufficiently
solubilize β-carotene, vitamin E, vitamin C, oil-soluble synthetic antioxidants, and other phenolic
antioxidants. This method compensates for the wide variability in antioxidant capabilities of oil- and
water-soluble antioxidants showing different levels of accumulation at the interfaces of oil-in-water and
water-in-oil emulsions, and assigns an objective TEAC value to each antioxidant simply depending on
its chemical character (i.e., electron or H-atom donating ability).
4.1.4 CUPRAC assay modified for measuring hydroxyl radical scavenging activity of food
antioxidants
A novel “test tube” method was developed for hydroxyl radical scavenging antioxidant activity assay
by the modification of the CUPRAC method of TAC measurement [80]. Although the measurement of
aromatic hydroxylation with ESR or HPLC/electrochemical detection is more specific than the low-
yield thiobarbituric acid–reactive substances (TBARS) test, it requires sophisticated instrumentation.
As a more convenient and less costly alternative, p-aminobenzoate, 2,4- and 3,5-dimethoxybenzoate
probes were used for detecting hydroxyl radicals generated from an equivalent mixture of Fe(II) +
EDTA with hydrogen peroxide. The produced hydroxyl radicals attacked both the probe and the water-
soluble antioxidants in 37 °C-incubated solutions for 2 h. The CUPRAC absorbance of the ethyl acetate
extract due to the reduction of Cu(II)-Nc reagent by the hydroxylated probe decreased in the presence
of •OH scavengers, the difference being proportional to the scavenging ability of the tested compound.
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
982

A rate constant for the reaction of the scavenger with hydroxyl radical can be deduced from the inhibi-
tion of colour formation. Iodide, metabisulfite, hexacyanoferrate(II), thiourea, formate, and dimethyl-
sulfoxide were shown by the modified CUPRAC assay to be more effective scavengers than mannitol,
glucose, lysine, and simple alcohols, as in the TBARS assay. The developed method is less lengthy,
more specific, and of a higher yield than the classical TBARS assay. The hydroxyl radical scavenging
rate constants of AA, formate, and hexacyanoferrate(II) that caused interference in other assays could
be easily found with the proposed procedure.
4.1.5 Hydroxyl radical scavenging antioxidant activity of polyphenolic compounds 
Detection of hydroxyl radicals and measurement of hydroxyl radical scavenging activity is very impor-
tant in food and bioanalytical chemistry in regard to antiradical and antioxidant activity of foodstuffs
and antioxidant therapy. Currently, the most widely used colourimetric and chromatographic methods
for hydroxyl radical detection and/or •OH scavenging activity measurement are the TBARS colouri-
metric assay and HPLC with electrochemical detection of hydroxylated aromatic probes, respectively.
The proposed CUPRAC/salicylate assay of •OH detection is much more efficient than the conventional
TBARS assay as the conversion ratio of the probe is much higher [81]. The most important contribu-
tion of the developed assay is the stopping of the Fenton reaction in 10 min with catalase degradation
of hydrogen peroxide so that the remaining H2O2 would neither give a CUPRAC absorbance nor
involve in redox cycling of phenolic antioxidants. This enables the rapid and precise measurement of
•OH scavenging rate constants of polyphenolics which cannot be found by most other techniques.
4.1.6 Measurement of xanthine oxidase (XO) inhibition activity of polyphenolic compounds
The idea of this CUPRAC variation is to use a X–XO system for XO inhibitory activity assay of poly -
phenolics (i.e., ﬂavonoids, simple phenolic acids, and hydroxycinnamic acids) and other antioxidant
compounds (i.e., AA) [82]. As a part of antioxidant activity assays, XO activity has usually been deter-
mined by following the rate of uric acid formation from the X–XO system by making use of the UV
absorbance at 295 nm of uric acid formed as reaction product. Since polyphenolics have strong UV
absorption, XO inhibitory activity of polyphenolics was alternatively determined without interference
by directly measuring the formation of uric acid and hydrogen peroxide using the modified CUPRAC
spectrophotometric method at 450 nm. The CUPRAC absorbance of the incubation solution due to the
reduction of Cu(II)-Nc reagent by the products of the X–XO system decreased in the presence of
polyphenolics, the difference being proportional to the XO inhibition ability of the tested compound.
The developed assay was validated against classical UV and HPLC assays of uric acid, and was applied
to the measurement of XO-inhibition activity of herbal extracts. The proposed spectrophotometric
method was practical, low cost, rapid, and could reliably assay uric acid and hydrogen peroxide in the
presence of poly phenols (flavonoids, simple phenolic acids, and hydroxycinnamic acids) and less open
to interferences by UV-absorbing substances. The fact that the analysed real samples (such as plant
extracts) normally react with the CUPRAC reagent at elevated concentrations is not important for the
proposed method as long as sufficiently low amounts of these samples are taken for XO inhibition
measurement. 
4.1.7 Hydrogen peroxide scavenging activity of polyphenolic compounds
[with Cu(II) catalysis]
Measurement of HPS activity is very important in food and bioanalytical chemistry, and thus the HPS
activity of polyphenols (i.e., flavonoids, simple phenolic acids, and hydroxycinnamic acids) and other
antioxidant compounds (i.e., AA) was measured with a simple, low-cost, and versatile colourimetric
procedure [83]. In the most common UV method for determination of HPS activity, scavenging ability
depends on the change of the absorbance value at 230 nm when H2O2 concentration is decreased by
scavenger compounds. Since the UV method suffers from both the interference of some phenolics in
real samples having strong absorption in the UV region and from inefficient degradation of H2O2 with
polyphenols in the absence of Cu(II) (i.e., H2O2 is relatively stable, and not scavenged unless transi-
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
983

tion-metal compounds are present as catalysts), HPS activity of polyphenols was alternatively deter-
mined without interference by directly measuring the concentration of undegraded H2O2 using the mod-
iﬁed CUPRAC method in the presence of a Cu(II) catalyst. The modified CUPRAC method for HPS
activity is based on the incubation of a scavenger with H2O2 and analysing the reaction mixture for the
loss of H2O2. The proposed methodology is regarded superior to the rather nonspecific horseradish per-
oxidase-based assays. 
4.1.8 CUPRAC antioxidant sensor
A low-cost optical sensor was developed using an immobilised chromogenic reagent, Cu(II)-Nc com-
plex, for the assessment of antioxidant capacity of non-enzymatic antioxidant compounds, their syn-
thetic mixtures, and real samples [84]. The Cu(II)-Nc reagent was immobilized onto a cation-exchange
polymer (Nafion, a sulfonated tetrafluoroethylene-based copolymer) matrix, and the absorbance asso-
ciated with the formation of the highly coloured Cu(I)-Nc chelate as a result of reaction with antioxi-
dants was measured on the sensor membrane at 450 nm. The TEAC coefficients measured for various
antioxidant compounds suggest that the reactivity of the Nafion-immobilized reagent is comparable to
that of the standard solution-based CUPRAC assay. Testing of synthetic ternary mixtures of anti -
oxidants yielded the theoretically expected CUPRAC antioxidant capacities, in accordance with the
principle of additivity of absorbances of constituents obeying Beer’s law. This assay was validated
through linearity, additivity, precision, and recovery, demonstrating that the assay is reliable and robust.
The developed sensor was used to screen the TAC of some commercial fruit juices such as orange,
cherry, peach, and apricot juices, and proved to be an effective tool in measurement of TAC values of
food and plant samples without requiring pretreatment. The optical sensor-based CUPRAC assay was
shown not to be adversely affected by common food ingredients such as citrate, oxalate, fruit acids, and
reducing sugars. The developed molecular spectroscopic device offers good prospects of being used as
a general antioxidant sensor in food industries. With new experimental design for application to human
fluids, the sensor is expected to be useful to biochemical and medicinal chemical research on oxidative
stress.
4.1.9 On-line HPLC-CUPRAC method
Efforts directed to individual identification and quantification of antioxidant compounds in plant matri-
ces may give rise to problems, because the activities of antioxidant compounds may decrease during
their isolation and purification due to decomposition. Thus, procedures for the separation and quantifi-
cation of antioxidants should be performed simultaneously. More recently, certain assays have been
modified for post-column-coupled on-line HPLC applications. The most widely used assays in post-
column applications are free radical decolourisation methods, based on the scavenging of chromogenic
free radicals DPPH or ABTS. It is difficult to precisely quantify antioxidant activity because of the short
life-times of these radicals. Moreover, reaction kinetics may vary with these radicalic reagents as a func-
tion of phenolic steric effects, solvent composition, and pH. A method combining separation of com-
ponents in the complex matrix and evaluation of antioxidant capacity provides significant advantages
for such investigations [85].
A developed on-line HPLC-CUPRAC method [85] combines chromatographic separation, con-
stituent analysis, and post-column identification of antioxidants in plant extracts. In this system, the
HPLC-separated antioxidant compounds react with the Cu(II)-Nc reagent (prepared freshly from the
corresponding solutions of Cu(II):Nc:NH4Ac at a ratio of 1:1:1 (v/v/v) prior to analysis and pumped to
the post-column reactor at a flow rate of 0.5 mLmin–1) along a reaction coil, and the reagent is reduced
by antioxidants to the yellow-coloured Cu(I)-Nc complex having an absorption maximum at 450 nm. It
was observed that the antioxidant capacity of each substance is reflected by an increase in the area of
negative peaks as a function of increased concentration. The separation of polyphenols was performed
on a C18 column using gradient elution with two different mobile phase solutions, i.e., MeOH and
0.2 % o-phosphoric acid. The detection limits of polyphenols at 450 nm (in the range of 0.17–3.46 μM)
after post-column derivatisation were comparable to those at 280-nm UV detection without derivatisa-
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
984

tion. The developed method was successfully applied to the identification of antioxidant compounds in
crude extracts of Camellia sinensis, Origanum marjorana, and Mentha. The method is rapid, inexpen-
sive, versatile, nonlaborious, uses stable reagents, and enables the on-line qualitative and quantitative
estimation of antioxidant constituents of complex plant samples. The significant advantages of on-line
methods are that the antioxidant activity of a single compound can be measured and its contribution to
the overall activity of a complex mixture can be calculated, and also the activity of a single compound
can be compared to those of other constituents in the matrix. Moreover, the determination of a substance
that possesses no antioxidant activity can be observed simultaneously, by the absence of a negative peak
at 450 nm as opposed to the presence of a positive peak detected at 280 nm. For example, caffeine,
being a major constituent of both green and black tea extracts, appears only in the positive trace chro-
matogram, whereas it is nonexistent in the negative trace of post-column detection, because it lacks the
phenolic hydroxyl groups of reducing character, and consequently does not possess any antioxidant
behaviour.
4.1.10 Antioxidant capacities of thiol-containing proteins
Proteins are not considered as true antioxidants but are known to protect antioxidants from oxidation in
various antioxidant activity assays. To determine the antioxidant properties of thiol-containing proteins,
the modified CUPRAC method was adopted [86]. While the CUPRAC method is capable of determin-
ing all antioxidant compounds including thiols in complex sample matrices, the Ellman method of thiol
quantitation basically does not respond to other antioxidants. The antioxidant quantities in the selected
samples were assayed with the ABTS and FRAP methods as well as with the CUPRAC method. In all
applied methods, the dilutions were made with a standard pH 8 buffer used in the Ellman method, and
serum samples should be protected with the addition of citrate rather than EDTA. On the other hand,
the standard CUPRAC protocol was modified by substituting the pH 7 ammonium acetate buffer (at
1 M concentration) with 8 M urea buffer adjusted to pH 7 by neutralising with 6 M HCl. Urea helps to
partly solubilize and denaturate proteins so that their buried thiols be oxidized more easily. All meth-
ods used in the estimation of antioxidant properties of proteins (i.e., CUPRAC, Ellman, ABTS, and
FRAP) were first standardized with a simple thiol compound, cysteine, by constructing the calibration
curves. Then these methods were applied to various samples containing thiols, such as GSH (reduced
form: GSH), egg white, whey proteins, and gelatin. Additionally, known quantities of selected antioxi-
dants were added to these samples to show the additivity of responses.
4.1.11 Superoxide radical scavenging activity assay of biological samples
Superoxide anion radicals (O2
•–) generated as a result of normal intracellular metabolism have been
implicated in diseases ranging from Alzheimer’s to diabetes. As a more convenient, efficient, and less
costly alternative to ESR detection techniques and to the nonspecific nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) and
cytochrome c tests, a TBHQ probe was used for detecting superoxide radical (SR) generated by non-
enzymic PMS-NADH system [87]. The produced O2
•– attacks both the TBHQ probe and the SR scav-
engers that are incubated in solution for 30 min. Added SR scavengers compete with TBHQ for the O2
•–
produced, and enhance chromophore formation from Cu(II)-Nc. TBHQ, but not its O2
•– oxidation prod-
uct, tert-butyl-1,4-benzoquinone (TBBQ), is responsive to the CUPRAC spectrophotometric assay. The
absorbance of the incubation solution arising from the reduction of Cu(II)-Nc reagent by the remaining
TBHQ was higher in the presence of O2
•– scavengers (due to less conversion to TBBQ), the difference
being correlated to the SRSA of the tested compounds. With the aid of this reaction, a kinetic approach
was adopted to assess the SRSA of amino acids, vitamins, and plasma- and thiol-antioxidants. The pro-
posed assay proved to be efficient for cysteine, uric acid, and bilirubin for which the NBT test is basi-
cally nonresponsive. This assay allows rapid, high-throughput assessment of SRSA of small molecules
of interest, as well as for tissue homogenates.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
985

4.2 The advantages of the CUPRAC method
The advantages of the CUPRAC method may be summarized as follows [93,94]:
•
The CUPRAC reagent (outer-sphere e-transfer agent) is fast enough to oxidize thiol-type anti -
oxidants, whereas the FRAP method may only measure with serious negative error certain thiol-
type antioxidants like GSH (i.e., the major low-molecular-weight thiol compound of the living
cell). Redox potential of GSSG/GSH is the basic indicator of biological conditions of a cell, and
GSH acts as reconstituent of intercellular AA from the dehydroascorbic acid.
•
The reagent is selective, because it has a lower redox potential than that of the ferric (ferrous cou-
ple in the presence of o-phenanthroline) or batho-phenanthroline-type ligands. The standard
potential of the Cu(II,I)-Nc redox couple is 0.6 V, close to that of ABTS•+/ABTS (E° = 0.68 V),
and FRAP (E° = 0.70 V). Simple sugars and citric acid are not oxidized with the CUPRAC
reagent.
•
The reagent is much more stable and easily accessible than the chromogenic radical reagents
(e.g., ABTS, DPPH, etc.). The cupric reducing ability measured for a biological sample may indi-
rectly but efficiently reflect the total antioxidant power of the sample even though no radicalic
species are involved in the assay.
•
The method is easily and diversely applicable in conventional laboratories using standard colou-
rimeters rather than necessitating sophisticated equipment and highly qualified operators. Method
responds equally well to both hydrophilic and lipophilic antioxidants.
•
The redox reaction giving rise to a coloured chelate of Cu(I)-Nc is relatively insensitive to a num-
ber of parameters adversely affecting radicalic reagents such as DPPH, e.g., air, sunlight, humid-
ity, and pH, to a certain extent.
•
The CUPRAC reagent can be adsorbed on a cation-exchanger membrane to build a low-cost, lin-
ear-response antioxidant sensor.
•
The CUPRAC absorbance vs. concentration curves are perfectly linear over a wide concentration
range, unlike those of other methods yielding polynomial curves. The molar absorptivity for n-e
reductants, (8.5 ± 1.0) × 103 n Lmol–1cm–1, is sufficiently high to sensitively determine most
phenolic antioxidants.
•
The TAC values of antioxidants found with CUPRAC are perfectly additive, i.e., the TAC of a
phenolic mixture is equal to the sum of TAC values of its constituent polyphenols. Additivity in
other antioxidant measurements is not strictly valid.
•
HPLC-post-column CUPRAC is possible (direct methods of antioxidant assay are not suitable for
post-column applications).
•
The redox reaction producing coloured species is carried out at nearly physiological pH (pH 7 of
ammonium acetate buffer) as opposed to the unrealistic acidic conditions (pH 3.6) of FRAP or
basic conditions (pH 10) of Folin assay. At more acidic conditions than the physiological pH, the
reducing capacity may be suppressed due to protonation on antioxidant compounds, whereas at
more basic conditions, proton dissociation of phenolics would enhance a sample’s reducing
capacity.
•
Since the Cu(I) ion emerging as a product of the CUPRAC redox reaction is in a chelated state
[i.e., Cu(I)-Nc], it cannot act as a prooxidant that may cause oxidative damage to biological
macromolecules in body fluids. The ferric ion-based assays were criticized for producing Fe2+,
which may act as a Fenton-type prooxidant to produce •OH radicals as a result of its reaction with
H2O2. The stable Cu(I)-chelate was shown not to react with H2O2, but the reverse reaction, i.e.,
oxidation of H2O2 with Cu(II)-Nc, is possible.
•
By maintaining the CUPRAC reagent and related chemicals in the laboratory, one can measure
ROS scavenging activity as well as TAC of antioxidants. However, a battery of measurements are
required to adequately assess oxidative stress and antioxidative defense in biological systems.
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
986

5. ANTIOXIDANT CAPACITY/ACTIVITY ASSAYS APPLIED TO FRUITS, VEGETABLES,
AND CEREALS
Fruits, vegetables, and cereals were analysed for the composition of the major individual phenolic acids,
AA, flavonoids, flavanols, and anthocyanins [95]. The antioxidant capacities of aqueous/MeOH, ace-
tone, and hexane extracts were comparatively assessed using the CUPRAC, ABTS/TEAC, FRAP,
DPPH, β-carotene (β-carotene linoleate model system), and nitric oxide (NO) tests (scavenging activ-
ity against NO). Raw and processed vegetables were compared for their bioactive content. It was found
that raw natural products contain higher quantities of bioactive compounds and possess higher anti -
oxidant activity than processed ones, and the degree of the differences is directly connected to the pro-
cessing conditions. The antioxidant capacity/activity values for each extract were well correlated with
the content of polyphenols (R2 = 0.99). The antioxidant activity of the studied vegetables according to
all used antioxidant assays were in the following order: red onion > white onion = yellow onion > red
pepper > garlic = green pepper > white cabbage; of the common fruits, apples > peaches > pears; of the
citrus fruits, red grapefruits > oranges = lemons > sweeties; of exotic fruits, durian > snake fruit > man-
gosteen; of cereals, buckwheat > oat > amaranth > quinoa > rice [95]. 
Nowadays, natural products (vegetables, fruits, and cereals) are a very important part of different
diets [95]. Many authors recommend the consumption of vegetables, fruits, and cereals only of high
antioxidant activity [96,97]. In order to find vegetables, fruits, and cereals with high antioxidant activ-
ity, most investigators are using a combination of antioxidant tests [98,99]. Many investigators showed
the importance of the use of antioxidant assays in assessment of the bioactivity of natural products
[95,98,99].
Garlic, onions, peppers, cereals, and many different fruits possess many health-beneficial proper-
ties, which are related mainly to bioactivity of their phenolic compounds [100]. It was shown that these
natural products are active in prevention and treatment of some diseases including heart diseases [101]
and even of cancer [102]. Most of the natural products are consumed after processing. It was shown that
this process leads to changes in their bioactivity [103,104]. 
Samples of raw garlic (Allium sativum L.), white, yellow, and red onions (Allium cepa L.), red
and green peppers (Capsicum annuum L.), and white cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. capitata f. alba)
were analysed for their antioxidant activity. The extracts of the studied natural products were prepared
with EtOH, MeOH, water, acetone, and hexane. The results (shown below) are for MeOH extracts of
the studied natural products.
5.1 Vegetables
The total polyphenols of all studied raw vegetables (garlic, onions, peppers cabbages, lotus, and salad)
were determined as previously described [105–107], and were in the quantitative range of 3.2 ±
0.3–15.6 ± 1.3 mg GAEg–1 DW. The antioxidant activities of the same vegetables as determined by
FRAP assay, ABTS, DPPH, and CUPRAC varied significantly, and were in range of 6.2 ± 1.4–22.0 ±
1.9 μmol TEg–1 DW (DPPH values). 
As can be seen in Table 6, the antioxidant activities of the studied vegetables (as determined by
the mentioned antioxidant assays) were in following order: red onion > white onion = yellow onion >
red pepper > garlic = green pepper > white cabbage. As a result of thermal processing, decreases in the
content of total polyphenols and in related total antioxidant activities were registered, and directly con-
nected to the time of processing [103,104,108,109]. The contribution of total polyphenols to the antiox-
idant activities of raw and studied vegetables was high (R2 = 0.9971 and 0.9705 for FRAP and DPPH,
respectively). Short-term processing as blanching for 90" of vegetables essentially preserves their
bioactive compounds (polyphenols, flavonoids, flavanols, and tannins) and the level of antioxidant
activity [103,104,108,109].
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
987

Table 6 Contents of polyphenols and antioxidant activity in raw vegetables, extracted with MeOH (combined
data) (N = 3).
Polyphenols
DPPH
FRAP
CUPRAC
ABTS
(mg GAEg–1)
(μmol TEg–1)
(μmol TEg–1)
(μmol TEg–1)
(μmol TEg–1)
Red onion
15.6 ± 1.3
22.0 ± 1.9
19.2 ± 1.7
39.7 ± 3.2
49.7 ± 4.3
White onion
11.9 ± 0.9
19.4 ± 1.9
14.6 ± 1.3
32.5 ± 2.9
39.2 ± 3.2
Yellow onion
10.0 ± 0.8
19.7 ± 1.7
14.2 ± 1.2
33.2 ± 3.0
37.2 ± 3.0
Red pepper
8.6 ± 0.7
16.0 ± 2.0
13.6 ± 1.1
27.8 ± 2.2
28.6 ± 2.4
Garlic
6.4 ± 0.5
12.0 ± 3.4
9.9 ± 0.5
20.1 ± 1.4
23.7 ± 2.0
Green pepper
6.3 ± 0.5
11.8 ± 1.0
9.7 ± 0.5
20.1 ± 1.8
23.9 ± 2.3
White cabbage
3.2 ± 0.3
6.2 ± 1.4
8.1 ± 0.4
11.4 ± 0.9
10.5 ± 0.8
5.2 Olive oils 
The so-called Mediterranean diet, which is rich in vegetables, fruits, and olive oils, is effective in pre-
vention of some diseases including coronary atherosclerosis [110]. It was shown that this diet controls
blood lipid levels and decreases the plasma cholesterol [111]. It was shown that the Mediterranean diet
reduces the risk of acute myocardial infarction and decreases the overall mortality [112]. 
The above-mentioned data encouraged the assessment of the biochemical activity of 5 different
Spanish olive oils (arbequina, hojiblanca, virgin, picual, and lampante). Their bioactive compounds
including total polyphenols and antioxidant potential were determined in vitro. It was found that virgin
and lampante oils possessed the highest and lowest antioxidant activity, respectively. Then these oils
were added to basal diets (BDs) and the influence on plasma lipid metabolism and plasma antioxidant
activity of experimental animals were studied. Sixty male Wistar rats were used, divided into 6 diet
groups of 10, and adapted to cholesterol-free or 1 % cholesterol-containing diets. The control group
consumed the BD only, which contained wheat starch, casein, cellulose, and mineral and vitamin mix-
tures. To the BD were added 10 g per 100 g virgin (Virg group) or lampante (Lamp group) oils, 1 g per
100 g cholesterol (Chol group), or both (Chol/Virg group) and (Chol/Lamp group). Plasma total cho-
lesterol (TC), LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C), HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C), triglycerides (TG), total phos-
pholipids (TPH), HDL-phospholipids (HDL-PH), TRAP, malondialdehyde (MDA) lipid peroxidation,
and liver TC were determined. Groups did not differ before the experiment. In the Chol/Virg and
Chol/Lamp vs. Chol group, the oil-supplemented diets significantly (p < 0.05) hindered the increase
in plasma lipids due to dietary cholesterol feeding as follows: TC (25.1 and 23.6 %), LDL-C (39.3 and
34.7 %), TG (19.3 and 17.0 %), and TC in liver (36.0 and 35.1 %) for the Chol/Virg and Chol/Lamp,
respectively. In the Chol/Virg and Chol/Lamp diets, significant decreases were noted in the levels of
TPH (24.7 and 21.2 %; p < 0.05 in both cases) and HDL-PH (22.9 and 18.0 %; p < 0.05 in both cases),
respectively. Virgin oil and to a lesser degree lampante oil have increased the plasma antioxidant activ-
ity in rats fed BD without cholesterol (an increase in TRAP, 20.6 and 18.5 %; and a decrease in MDA,
23.2 and 11.3 %, respectively). In the rats of Chol/Virg and Chol/Lamp vs. Chol diet groups, the added
oils significantly hindered the decrease in the plasma antioxidant activity (TRAP, 21.2 and 16.7 %; and
MDA, 27.0 and 22.3 %, respectively). According to the used antioxidant assays (TRAP), virgin and to
less degree other olive oils possess high antioxidant potential [113,114].
5.3 Seed oils
It is almost common knowledge that olive oils are preferable to seed oils. Only a few researchers have
not agreed with these claims [115]. These investigators demonstrated that the highest TRAPs were in
sunflower oil, whereas the TRAP values of olive oils were lower. These data are very reliable: extra vir-
gin olive and seed oils were taken from a local oil mill and produced in the same month. Therefore, it
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
988

was decided to investigate four widely used seed oils (sunflower, sunflower high oleic, rapeseed, and
grapeseed) in order to compare their antioxidant potential.
As in the case of olive oil investigation, the fatty acids, sterols, antioxidant compounds, stability,
and TRAP in the studied oils were determined. The highest stability and the highest TRAP
(3.8 Rancimat 120 °C, hours and 324 nmolmL–1) and the lowest stability and the lowest TRAP
(2.4 Rancimat 120 °C, hours and 201 nmol/mL) were in rapeseed and sunflower oils, respectively. The
effect of these two seed oils on antioxidant activity was investigated on 60 (divided into 6 diet groups
of 10) male Wistar rats adapted to cholesterol-free or 1 % cholesterol-containing diets. The control
group received BD only. To the BD were added 10 g per 100 g rapeseed (Rapeseed group) or sunflower
(Sunflower group) oils, 1 g per 100 g cholesterol (Chol group) or both (Chol/Rapeseed group) and
(Chol/Sunflower group). The experiment lasted 4 weeks. Rapeseed and to a lesser degree sunflower oils
increased the plasma antioxidant activity in rats fed BD without cholesterol (an increase in TRAP: 20.8
and 16.0 % and a decrease in MDA: 22.0 and 14.9 %, respectively). In the rats of Chol/Rapeseed and
Chol/Sunflower vs. Chol diet group, the added oils significantly hindered the decrease in the plasma
antioxidant activity (TRAP: 21.7 and 16.3 % and MDA: 26.2 and 21.5 %, respectively). Therefore,
rapeseed and to a lesser degree sunflower oils possess antioxidant properties. The results of this inves-
tigation did not support the claim that olive oils are preferable to seed oils in regard to their antioxidant
content [116]. 
5.4 Fruits
5.4.1 Common fruits (peaches, pears, and apples)
The total polyphenols of peaches, pears and apples were in the range of 131 ± 10.1–154 ± 10.3; and in
their peels 145 ± 10.3–166 ± 10.6 mg per 100 g FW. Their antioxidant potential with respect to DPPH
were in the range of 1.72 ± 0.1–5.16 ± 0.3 μM TEg–1 FW. The antioxidant activities of common fruits,
as determined by all used antioxidant assays, were in the following order: apples > peaches = pears
[117–119].
5.4.2 Citrus fruits (grapefruits, oranges, lemons, sweeties) 
The total polyphenols of all studied peeled citrus fruits were in the range of 135 ± 10.1–164 ± 10.3; and
their peels 155 ± 10.3–190 ± 10.6 mg per 100 g FW. The content of total polyphenols in the peels of
fruits was significantly higher than in peeled fruits. Their antioxidant potential according to DPPH was
in the range of 1.92 ± 0.1–6.26 ± 0.3 μM TEg–1 FW. The antioxidant activities of citrus fruits (by all
assays tested) were in the following order: red grapefruits > oranges = lemons > sweeties [120–124].
5.4.3 Subtropical, tropical, and exotic fruits 
5.4.3.1 Persimmons
The total polyphenols of all studied cultivars were in the range of 125 ± 10.1–156 ± 10.3 mg per 100 g
FW. The antioxidant potential according to DPPH was in the range of 1.72 ± 0.1–5.96 ± 0.3 μM TEg–1
FW [125–127]. 
5.4.3.2 Kiwi fruit
The total polyphenols of all studied cultivars were in the range of 14.9 ± 1.5–26.7 ± 8.1 mg GAEg–1
DW. The antioxidant potential with respect to DPPH was in the range of 10.1 ± 1.1–13.7 ± 1.2 μM
TEg–1 DW [128–130]. 
5.4.3.3 Exotic fruits
The total polyphenols of all exotic fruits (5 different cultivars of durian, snake fruit, and mangosteen)
were in the range of 5.11 ± 0.2–11.3 ± 0.5 mg CEg–1 DW. Their antioxidant activities with respect to
DPPH were in the range of 7.12 ± 0.4–13.56 ± 0.7 μM TEg–1 DW. A good correlation between the
contents of total polyphenols and antioxidant activities was registered (R2 range of 0.9841–0.9859). The
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
989

antioxidant activities (as determined by all used assays) of exotic fruits were in the following order: all
cultivars of durian > snake fruit > mangosteen [131–133]. 
5.5 Cereals
The total polyphenols of all cereals (buckwheat, oat, rice, amaranth, quinoa) were in the range of
329 ± 15.3–927.3 ± 32.2 μg CEg–1 DW. The antioxidant activities of cereals were in the following
order: buckwheat > oat > amaranth > quinoa > rice [134–138]. 
The use of natural products has gained popularity, and the increase in their consumption is backed
by solid scientific evidence. One of these natural products is garlic, which has been used throughout the
history of civilisation for treatment of a wide variety of ailments. The same is true for other reviewed
vegetables, fruits, and cereals. The most studied and reported health-promoting effect of these vegeta-
bles is cardioprotection [139]. It was proved that contents of bioactive compounds in raw vegetables
were higher than in processed ones and that the antioxidant activity was directly related to the contents
of phenolic compounds [140].
6. CONCLUSIONS
This report provides an overview of various antioxidant activity/capacity assay methods used for meas-
uring non-enzymatic antioxidants in complex food/biological matrices, including the general charac-
teristics, comparisons, and correlations of these methods. Some critical terms regarding nomenclature
(e.g., antioxidant activity and antioxidant capacity) and mechanism (e.g., HAT- and ET-based assays)
have been defined. A number of key evaluation parameters have been listed such as method simplicity,
required time, and instrumentation, aiding researchers to decide which method to be followed to meas-
ure the targeted antioxidant property based on the feasibilities afforded to determine it. Methods based
on the inhibition of lipid peroxidation or biomarkers of oxidative stress have been deliberately left out
to devote more space to a detailed discussion on HAT- and ET-based assays. Both the advantages and
disadvantages of each mentioned method have been comparatively evaluated. 
Utmost care should be exercised in both the practice and evaluation of methods, ensuring the
repeatability/reproducibility of results. All methods are in vitro assays giving summed or integrated
parameters rather than individual antioxidant quantifications. The results obtained from the listed in
vitro assays cannot be extrapolated directly to the situation in the human body, however, experimental
conditions can be tailored to fit in vivo simulations. Antioxidant activity/capacity assays based on the
scavenging of free radicals like ABTS•+, DPPH•, and galvinoxyl do not use biologically relevant radi-
cals. Choice of solvent is also an important parameter, determining the extent of completion of TAC
assays (especially ET-based ones) within the prespecified protocol time. Hydrophilic and lipophilic
assays carried out in different polarity solvents can be used to compare the antioxidant properties of dif-
ferent compounds (antioxidative vitamins, polyphenolics, and secondary plant products) and to get a
first impression of the antioxidant capacity of food extracts and physiological materials. In the future,
further comparative studies are needed to improve the knowledge on the different structure–activity
relationships and on the various mechanisms of these test systems. In addition, interlaboratory com-
parison and standardisation as mentioned by Prior et al. [8] are needed to improve the reproducibility
of the methods and to make results more comparable and reliable. At the moment, absolute results in
publications have to be used carefully as they are not comparable from one laboratory to the other,
because each antioxidant assay has a different mechanism, redox potential, reaction media, etc.
However, in one laboratory the results within one test system can be used for a ranking. It is strongly
recommended to use at least two different methods (preferably with different mechanisms) and three
sample dilutions within each assay [22]. 
The end result of antioxidant action for different assays (regardless of mechanism) is similar in
the sense of quenching/reducing reactive species/radicals or oxidant probes, but kinetics, potential for
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
990

side reactions, and dependence on reaction conditions may differ. HAT and ET mechanisms almost
occur in parallel in all systems (though one mechanism may be prevalent for a given assay), and the
dominant mechanism will be determined by antioxidant structure and properties (such as chemical
accessibility), solubility and partition coefficient, system solvent, and presence of trace components or
contaminants. These discussions lead to the recommendation that no single “universally accepted”
assay is adequate in itself to precisely and quantitatively detect/determine all actions of a putative
antioxidant. Thus, a combination of HAT and ET assays or of reduction- and free radical scavenging-
based assays may be preferred to be the standard, required practice for antioxidant research, preferably
coordinated also with a metal ion binding/chelation assay. It can be concluded that raw and mildly
processed vegetables, fruits, and cereals contain significant levels of bioactive compounds possessing
high total antioxidant potential, and this potential can be evaluated by antioxidant assays having rea-
sonable correlations among themselves (though there may exist relatively low correlations between
HAT and ET assays for certain analyte matrices).
7. NOTES ADDED IN PROOF
The following corrections were made after the Report was published online and before it was published
in print:
8. MEMBERSHIP OF SPONSORING BODIES
Membership of the IUPAC Analytical Chemistry Division Committee for the period 2012–2013 is as
follows:
President: M. F. Camões (Portugal); Vice President: D. Hibbert (Australia); Secretary: Z. Mester
(Canada); Past President: A. Fajgelj (Austria); Titular Members: C. Balarew (Bulgaria); A. Felinger
(Hungary); J. Labuda (Slovakia); M. C. Magalhães (Portugal); J. M. Pingarrón (Spain); Y. Thomassen
(Norway); Associate Members: R. Apak (Turkey); P. Bode (Netherlands); Y. Chen (China); H. Kim
(Korea); Y. H. Lee (Malaysia); T. Maryutina (Russia); National Representatives: A. Alam
(Bangladesh); O. Chande Othman (Tanzania); L. Charles (France); M. Eberlin (Brazil); K. Grudpan
(Thailand); J. Hanif (Pakistan); D. Mandler (Israel); P. Novak (Croatia); H. Sirén (Finland); N. Torto
(South Africa).
This document was prepared under the framework of IUPAC Project #2008-031-1-500: Methods
of measurement and evaluation of natural antioxidant capacity/activity. Membership of the project was
as follows:
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
991

Project Coordinator: R. Apak; Task Group Members: S. Gorinstein, V. Böhm, K. M. Schaich,
K. Güçlü.
9. REFERENCES
1. B. Halliwell, J. M. C. Gutteridge. Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine, Oxford University
Press, Oxford (1989). 
2. K. B. Pandey, M. M. Mehdi, P. K. Maurya, S. I. Rizvi. Disease Markers 29, 31 (2010).
3. J. M. C. Gutteridge. Rev. Clin. Gerontol. 4, 279 (1994).
4. G. Bartosz. Free Radical Res. 44, 711 (2010).
5. D. Christodouleas, C. Fotakis, K. Papadopoulos, D. Dimotikali, A. C. Calokerinos. Anal. Lett. 45,
625 (2012). 
6. I. Gülçin. Arch. Toxicol. 86, 345 (2012).
7. D. Huang, B. Ou, R. L. Prior. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 1841 (2005).
8. R. L. Prior, X. Wu, K. Schaich. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 4290 (2005).
9. W. Brand-Williams, M. E. Cuvelier, C. Berset. Lebensm.-Wiss.-Technol. 28, 25 (1995).
10. V. Bondet, W. Brand-Williams, C. Berset. Food Sci. Technol. 30, 609 (1997).
11. C. Sanchez-Moreno, J. A. Larrauri, F. A. Saura-Calixto. J. Sci. Food Agric. 76, 270 (1998). 
12. O. Folin, V. Ciocalteu. J. Biol. Chem. 73, 627 (1927).
13. V. L. Singleton, R. Orthofer, R. M. Lamuela-Raventos. Methods Enzymol. 299, 152 (1999).
14. I. F. F. Benzie, J. J. Strain. Anal. Biochem. 239, 70 (1996).
15. I. F. F. Benzie, Y. T. Szeto. J. Agric. Food Chem. 47, 633 (1999).
16. R. Apak, K. Güçlü, M. Özyürek, S. E. Karademir. J. Agric. Food Chem. 52, 7970 (2004).
17. D. Ozyurt, B. Demirata, R. Apak. Talanta 71, 1155 (2007).
18. K. I. Berker, K. Güçlü, B. Demirata, R. Apak. Anal. Methods 2, 1770 (2010).
19. K. I. Berker, K. Güçlü, İ. Tor, B. Demirata, R. Apak. Food Anal. Methods 3, 154 (2010).
20. K. Schlesier, M. Harwat, V. Böhm, R. Bitsch. Free Radical Res. 36, 177 (2002).
21. K. Kranl, K. Schlesier, R. Bitsch, H. Hermann, M. Rohe, V. Böhm. Food Chem. 93, 171 (2005).
22. C. Hengst, S. Werner, L. Müller, K. Fröhlich, V. Böhm. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 230, 249 (2009).
23. V. Böhm, N. L. Puspitasari-Nienaber, M. G. Ferruzzi, S. J. Schwartz. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50,
221 (2002).
24. L. Müller, K. Theile, V. Böhm. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 54, 731 (2010).
25. L. Müller, K. Fröhlich, V. Böhm. Food Chem. 129, 139 (2011).
26. G. J. Papariello, M. A. M. Janish. Anal. Chem. 38, 211 (1966).
27. J. C. McGowan, T. Powell, R. Raw. J. Chem. Soc. 3103 (1959).
28. J. S. Hogg, D. H. Lohmann, K. S. Russell. Can. J. Chem. 39, 1588 (1961).
29. M. S. Blois. Nature 181, 1199 (1958).
30. D. D. M. Wayner, G. W. Burton, K. U. Ingold, S. J. Locke. FEBS Lett. 187, 33 (1985).
31. E. N. Frankel, A. S. Meyer. J. Sci. Food Agric. 80, 1925 (2000).
32. R. L. Prior, S. A. Lazarus, G. Cao, H. Muccitelli, J. F. Hammerstone. J. Agric. Food Chem. 49,
1270 (2001).
33. E. A. Decker, K. Warner, M. P. Richards, F. Shahidi. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 4303 (2005).
34. W. A. Pryor. Annu. Rev. Phys. 48, 657 (1986).
35. A. N. Glazer. Methods Enzymol. 186, 161 (1990).
36. A. Ghiselli, M. Serafini, A. Ferro-Luzzi. Free Radical Biol. Med. 16, 135 (1994).
37. G. H. Cao, H. M. Alessio, R. G. Cutler. Free Radical Biol. Med. 14, 303 (1993).
38. A. N. Glazer. FASEB J. 2, 2487 (1988).
39. G. H. Cao, C. P. Verson, A. H. B. Wu, H. Wang, R. L. Prior. Clin. Chem. 41, 1738 (1995).
40. G. Cao, E. Sofic, R. L. Prior. J. Agric. Food Chem. 44, 3426 (1996). 
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
992

41. G. J. Handelman, G. Cao, M. F. Walter, Z. D. Nightingale, G. L. Paul, R. L. Prior, J. B. Blumberg.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 47, 4888 (1999).
42. B. Ou, D. Huang, M. Hampsch-Woodill, J. A. Flanagan, E. K. Deemer. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50,
3122 (2002).
43. B. Ou, M. Hampsch-Woodill, R. L. Prior. J. Agric. Food Chem. 49, 4619 (2001).
44. B. Ou, M. Hampsch-Woodill, J. A. Flanagan, E. K. Deemer, R. L. Prior, D. Huang. J. Agric. Food
Chem. 50, 2772 (2002).
45. D. Huang, B. Ou, M. Hampsch-Woodill, J. A. Flanagan, E. K. Deemer. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50,
1815 (2002).
46. D. Huang, B. Ou, M. Hampsch-Woodill, J. A. Flanagan, R. L. Prior. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50,
4437 (2002).
47. R. L. Prior, A. Hoang, L. Gu, X. Wu, M. Bacchiocca, L. Howard, M. Hampsch-Woodill,
D. Huang, B. Ou, R. Jacob. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 3273 (2003).
48. W. Zheng, S. Y. Wang. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 502 (2003).
49. C. Sanchez-Moreno. Food Sci. Technol. Int. 8, 121 (2002).
50. X. Wu, L. Gu, J. Holden, D. B. Haytowitz, S. E. Gebhardt, G. Beecher, R. L. Prior. J. Food
Compos. Anal. 17, 407 (2004).
51. D. D. M. Wayner, G. W. Burton, K. U. Ingold, L. R. C. Barclay, S. J. Locke. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 924, 408 (1987).
52. D. D. M. Wayner. Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg. 18, 219 (1987).
53. T. P. Whitehead, G. H. G. Thorpe, S. R. J. Maxwell. Anal. Chim. Acta 266, 265 (1992).
54. E. L. Bastos, P. Romoff, C. R. Eckert, W. J. Baader. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 7481 (2003).
55. H. Kojima, Y. Urano, K. Kikuchi, T. Higuchi, Y. Hirata, T. Nagano. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 38,
3209 (1999).
56. K. Tanaka, T. Miura, N. Umezawa, Y. Urano, K. Kikuchi, T. Higuchi, T. Nagano. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 123, 2530 (2001).
57. M. Valkonen, T. Kuusi. J. Lipid Res. 38, 823 (1997).
58. R. J. Delange, R. N. Glazer. Anal. Biochem. 177, 300 (1989).
59. A. Ghiselli, M. Serafini, G. Maiani, E. Azzini, A. Ferro-Luzzi. Free Radical Biol. Med. 18, 29
(1995).
60. G. Bartosz, A. Janaszewska, D. Ertel, M. Bartosz. Biochem. Mol. Biol. Int. 46, 519 (1998).
61. N. J. Miller, C. A. Rice-Evans, M. J. Davies, V. Gopinathan, A. Milner. Clin. Sci. 84, 407 (1993).
62. N. J. Miller, C. A. Rice-Evans. Free Radical Res. 26, 195 (1997).
63. M. Strube, G. R. M. M. Haenen, H. van den Berg, A. Bast. Free Radical Res. 26, 515 (1997).
64. R. Re, N. Pellegrini, A. Proteggente, A. Pannala, M. Yang, C. A. Rice-Evans. Free Radical Biol.
Med. 26, 1231 (1999).
65. N. J. Miller, J. Sampson, L. P. Candeias, P. M. Bramley, C. A. Rice-Evans. Fed. Eur. Biochem.
Soc. Lett. 384, 240 (1996).
66. O. Benavente-Garcia, J. Castillo, J. Lorente, A. Ortuno. Food Chem. 68, 457 (2000).
67. G. Cantarella, C. Galli, P. Gentili. J. Mol. Catal. B 22, 135 (2003).
68. B. S. Wolfenden, R. L. Willson. J. Chem. Soc. 805 (1982).
69. M. B. Arnao, A. Cano, J. Hernandez-Ruiz, F. Garcia-Canovas, M. Acosta. Anal. Biochem. 236,
255 (1996).
70. E. N. Kadnikova, N. M. Kostic. J. Mol. Catal. B 18, 39 (2002).
71. A. M. Campos, E. Lissi. Free Radical Res. 29, 219 (1997).
72. I.-C. Chen, H.-C. Chang, H.-W. Yang, G.-L. Chen. J. Food Drug Anal. 12, 29 (2004).
73. O. Erel. Clin. Biochem. 37, 277 (2004).
74. N. Pellegrini, D. Del Rio, B. Colombi, M. Bianchi, F. Brighenti. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 260
(2003).
75. L. R. C. Barclay, C. E. Edwards, M. R. Vinqvist. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 6226 (1999).
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
993

76. G. Litwinienko, K. U. Ingold. J. Org. Chem. 68, 3433 (2003).
77. R. Apak, K. Güçlü, M. Özyürek, S. E. Karademir, M. Altun. Free Radical Res. 39, 949 (2005). 
78. M. Özyürek, K. Güçlü, B. Bektaşoğlu, R. Apak. Anal. Chim. Acta 588, 88 (2007).
79. M. Özyürek, B. Bektaşoğlu, K. Güçlü, N. Güngör, R. Apak. Anal. Chim. Acta 630, 28 (2008).
80. B. Bektaşoğlu, S. E. Çelik, M. Özyürek, K. Güçlü, R. Apak. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
345, 1194 (2006).
81. M. Özyürek, B. Bektaşoğlu, K. Güçlü, R. Apak. Anal Chim. Acta 616, 196 (2008).
82. M. Özyürek, B. Bektaşoğlu, K. Güçlü, R. Apak. Anal. Chim. Acta 636, 42 (2009).
83. M. Özyürek, B. Bektaşoğlu, K. Güçlü, N. Güngör, R. Apak. J. Food Comp. Anal. 23, 689 (2010).
84. M. Bener, M. Özyürek, K. Güçlü, R. Apak. Anal. Chem. 82, 4252 (2010).
85. S. E. Çelik, M. Özyürek, K. Güçlü, R. Apak. Anal. Chim. Acta 674, 79 (2010).
86. S. Demirci Çekiç, K. Sözgen Başkan, E. Tütem, R. Apak. Talanta 79, 344 (2009).
87. B. Bekdeşer, M. Özyürek, K. Güçlü, R. Apak. Anal. Chem. 83, 5652 (2011).
88. E. Tütem, R. Apak, F. Baykut. Analyst 116, 89 (1991).
89. R. Apak, K. Güçlü, B. Demirata, M. Özyürek, S. E. Çelik, B. Bektaşoğlu, K. I. Berker, D. Özyurt.
Molecules 12, 1496 (2007). 
90. R. Apak, K. Güçlü, M. Özyürek, S. E. Çelik. Microchim. Acta 160, 413 (2008).
91. R. Apak, K. Güçlü, M. Özyürek, S. E. Karademir, E. Erçağ. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 57, 292 (2006).
92. K. Alpınar, M. Özyürek, U. Kolak, K. Güçlü, Ç. Aras, M. Altun, S. E. Çelik, K. I. Berker,
B. Bektaşoğlu, R. Apak. Food Sci. Technol. Res. 15, 59 (2009).
93. M. Özyürek, K. Güçlü, R. Apak. Trends Anal. Chem. 30, 652 (2011).
94. M. Özyürek, K. Güçlü, E. Tütem, K. Sözgen-Başkan, E. Erçağ, S. E. Çelik, S. Baki, L. Yıldız,
Ş. Karaman, R. Apak. Anal. Methods 3, 2439 (2011).
95. A. R. Proteggente, A. S. Pannala, G. Paganga, L. Van Buren, E. Wagner, S. Wiseman, F. Van De
Put, C. Dacombe, C. A. Rice-Evans. Free Radical Res. 36, 217 (2002).
96. H. Wang, G. Cao, R. L. Prior. J. Agric. Food Chem. 44, 701 (1996). 
97. G. Paganga, N. Miller, C. A. Rice-Evans. Free Radical Res. 30, 153 (1999).
98. J. A. Vinson, X. Su, L. Zubik, P. Bose. J. Agric. Food Chem. 49, 5315 (2001).
99. T. Bahorun, A. Luximon-Ramma, A. Crozier, O. I. Aruoma. J. Sci. Food Agric. 84, 1553 (2004).
100. L. D. Lawson, D. K. Ransom, B. G. Hughes. Thromb. Res. 65, 141 (1992).
101. K. Rahman, G. M. Lowe. J. Nutr. 136, 736 (2006).
102. B. Velmurugan, S. Nagini. J. Med. Food 8, 494 (2005).
103. S. Gorinstein, Z. Jastrzebski, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, J. Namiesnik, K. Najman, Y.-S.
Park, B.-G. Heo, J.-Y. Cho, J.-H. Bae. Food Control 20, 407 (2009).
104. Z. Jastrzebski, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, J. Namiesnik, Z. Zachwieja, H. Barton,
E. Pawelzik, P. Arancibia-Avila, F. Toledo, S. Gorinstein. Food Chem. Toxicol. 45, 1626 (2007).
105. S. Gorinstein, Y.-S. Park, B.-G. Heo, J. Namiesnik, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, K.-S. Ham,
J.-Y. Cho, S.-G. Kang. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 228, 903 (2009).
106. S. Gorinstein, M. Leontowicz, H. Leontowicz, K. Najman, J. Namiesnik, Y.-S. Park, S.-T. Jung,
S.-G. Kang, S. Trakhtenberg. Nutr. Res. 26, 362 (2006).
107. B. Kusznierewicz, A. Bartoszek, L. Wolska, J. Drzewiecki, S. Gorinstein, J. Namiesnik.
Lebensm.-Wiss.-Technol. 41, 1 (2008).
108. S. Gorinstein, J. Drzewiecki, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, K. Najman, Z. Jastrzebski,
Z. Zachwieja, H. Barton, B. Shtabsky, E. Katrich, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 2726
(2005).
109. S. Gorinstein, M. Leontowicz, H. Leontowicz, J. Namiesnik, K. Najman, J. Drzewiecki,
M. Cvikrova, O. Martincova, E. Katrich, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Agric. Food Chem. 56, 4418 (2008).
110. M. de Lorgeril, S. Renaud, N. Mamelle, P. Salen, J. L. Martin, I. Monjaud, J. Guidollet,
P. Toubolt, J. Delaye. Lancet 343, 1454 (1994).
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
994

111. A. Ambring, P. Friberg, M. Axselsen, M. Laffrenzen, M.-R. Taskinen, S. Basu, M. Johansson.
Clin. Sci. 106, 519 (2004).
112. A. Trichopoulou, T. Costacou, C. Bamia, D. Trichopoulos. New Engl. J. Med. 348, 2599 (2003). 
113. S. Gorinstein, H. Leontowicz, A. Lojek, M. Leontowicz, M. Číž, R. Krzeminski, G. Gralak,
J. Czerwinski, Z. Jastrzebski, S. Trakhtenberg, N. Grigelmo-Miguel, R. Soliva-Fortuny,
O. Martin-Belloso. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50, 6102 (2002). 
114. S. Gorinstein, O. Martin-Belloso, E. Katrich, A. Lojek, M. Číž, N. Grigelmo-Miguel, Y.-S. Park,
S.-T. Jung, R. Haruenkit, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Nutr. Biochem. 14, 154 (2003).
115. L. Cabrini, V. Barzanti, M. Cipollone, D. Fiorentini, G. Grossi, B. Tolomelli, L. Zambonin,
L. Landi. J. Agric. Food Chem. 49, 6026 (2001). 
116. S. Gorinstein, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, A. Lojek, M. Ciz, R. Krzeminski, Z. Zachwieja,
Z. Jastrzebski, E. Delgado-Licon, O. Martin-Belloso, S. Trakhtenberg. Nutr. Res. 23, 317 (2003).
117. S. Gorinstein, O. Martin-Belloso, A. Lojek, M. Číž, R. Soliva-Fortuny, Y.-S. Park, A. Caspi,
I. Libman, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Sci. Food Agric. 82, 1166 (2002).
118. H. Leontowicz, S. Gorinstein, A. Lojek, M. Leontowicz, M. Číž, R. Soliva-Fortuny, Y.-S. Park,
S.-T. Jung, S. Trakhtenberg, O. Martin-Belloso. J. Nutr. Biochem. 13, 603 (2002). 
119. M. Leontowicz, S. Gorinstein, H. Leontowicz, R. Krzeminski, A. Lojek, E. Katrich, M. Číž,
O. Martin-Belloso, R. Soliva-Fortuny, R. Haruenkit, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51,
5780 (2003).
120. S. Gorinstein, M. Cvikrová, I. Machackova, R. Haruenkit, Y.-S. Park, S.-T. Jung, K. Yamamoto,
A. L. Martinez-Ayala, E. Katrich, S. Trakhtenberg. Food Chem. 84, 503 (2004). 
121. S. Gorinstein, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, R. Krzeminski, M. Gralak, O. Martin-Belloso,
E. Delgado-Licon, R. Haruenkit, E. Katrich, Y.-S. Park, S.-T. Jung, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 52, 4853 (2004).
122. S. Gorinstein, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, R. Krzeminski, M. Gralak, E. Delgado-Licon,
A. L. Martinez Ayala, E. Katrich, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Agric. Food Chem. 53, 3223 (2005).
123. S. Gorinstein, A. Caspi, I. Libman, H.-T. Lerner, D. Huang, H. Leontowich, M. Leontowich,
Z. Tashma, E. Katrich, S. Feng, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Agric. Food Chem. 54, 1887 (2006). 
124. Y.-S. Park, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, J. Namiesnik, Z. Tashma, E. Katrich, A. Caspi,
I. Libman, H.-T. Lerner, S. Trakhtenberg, S. Gorinstein. Acta Horticult. 841, 137 (2009).
125. S. Gorinstein, E. Bartnikowska, G. Kulasek, M. Zemzer, S. Trakhtenberg. J. Nutr. 128, 2023
(1998). 
126. S.-T. Jung, Y.-S. Park, Z. Zachwieja, M. Folta, H. Barton, J. Piotrowicz, E. Katrich,
S. Trakhtenberg, S. Gorinstein. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 56, 105 (2005).
127. Y.-S. Park, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, J. Namiesnik, I. Jesion, S. Gorinstein. Adv. Hort. Sci.
22, 250 (2008).
128. Y.-S. Park, S.-T. Jung, S. Gorinstein. Sci. Horticult. 108, 22 (2006).
129. Y.-S. Park, S.-T. Jung, S.-G. Kang, B.-G. Heo, P. Arancibia-Avila, F. Toledo, J. Drzewiecki,
J. Namiesnik, S. Gorinstein. Food Chem. 107, 640 (2008).
130. Y.-S. Park, S.-T. Jung, S.-G. Kang, H.-B. Heo, S.-H. Lee, F. Toledo, P. Arancibia-Avila,
J. Drzewiecki, S. Gorinstein. J. Food Biochem. 33, 674 (2009).
131. H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, J. Drzewiecki, R. Haruenkit, S. Poovarodom, Y.-S. Park, S.-T.
Jung, S.-G. Kang, S. Trakhtenberg, S. Gorinstein. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 223, 697 (2006).
132. R. Haruenkit, S. Poovarodom, H. Leontowicz, M. Leontowicz, M. Sajewicz, T. Kowalska,
E. Delgado-Licon, N. E. Rocha-Guzmán, J.-A. Gallegos-Infante, S. Trakhtenberg, S. Gorinstein.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 55, 5842 (2007).
133. R. Haruenkit, S. Poovarodom, S. Vearasilp, J. Namiesnik, M. Sliwka-Kaszynska, Y.-S. Park,
B.-G. Heo, J.-Y. Cho, H.-G. Jang, S. Gorinstein. Food Chem. 118, 540 (2010).
134. J. Drzewiecki, E. Delgado-Licon, R. Haruenkit, E. Pawelzik, O. Martin-Belloso, Y.-S. Park, S.-T.
Jung, S. Trakhtenberg, S. Gorinstein. J. Agric. Food Chem. 51, 7798 (2003).
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
995

135. S. Gorinstein, E. Pawelzik, K. Yamamoto, S. Kobayashi, H. Taniguchi, R. Haruenkit, Y.-S. Park,
S.-T. Jung, J. Drzewiecki, S. Trakhtenberg. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 39, 183 (2004).
136. S. Gorinstein, M. Vargas, O. J. Jaramillo, I. Arnao Salas, A. L. Martinez-Ayala, P. Arancibia-
Avila, F. Toledo, E. Katrich, S. Trakhtenberg. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 225, 321 (2007).
137. S. Thanapornpoonpong, S. Vearasilp, E. Pawelzik, S. Gorinstein. J. Agric. Food Chem. 56, 11464
(2008).
138. P. Pasko, H. Barton, P. Zagrodzki, S. Gorinstein, M. Fołta, Z. Zachwieja. Food Chem. 115, 994
(2009).
139. B. H. S. Lau. J. Nutr. 136, 765S (2006). 
140. N. Benkeblia. Braz. Arch. Biol. Technol. 48, 753 (2005). 
Republication or reproduction of this report or its storage and/or dissemination by electronic means is permitted without the
need for formal IUPAC permission on condition that an acknowledgment, with full reference to the source, along with use of the
copyright symbol ©, the name IUPAC, and the year of publication, are prominently visible. Publication of a translation into
another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval from the relevant IUPAC National Adhering
Organization.
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
996

10. ABBREVIATIONS
α-TE
α-tocopherol equivalent
α-TEAC
α-tocopherol equivalent antioxidant capacity
AA
ascorbic acid
AAPH
2,2'-azobis(2-amidinopropane) hydrochloride
ABAP
2,2'-azobis(2-aminopropane)
ABTS
2,2'-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid)
ACL
lipid-soluble substance
ACW
water-soluble substance
AOX
antioxidant
AOC
antioxidant capacity
AUC
area under curve
BD
basal diet
BHA
butylated hydroxyanisole
BHT
butylated hydroxytoluene
B-PE
β-phycoerythrin
CD
cyclodextrin
CL
chemiluminescence
CUPRAC
cupric reducing antioxidant capacity
Cu(I)-Nc
bis(neocuproine)copper(I) cation
Cu(II)-Nc
bis(neocuproine)copper(II) cation
DCM
dichloromethane
DMPD
N,N-dimethyl-p-phenylenediamine
DPPH
2,2-di(4-tert-octylphenyl)-1-picrylhydrazyl
DW
dry weight
EPR
electron paramagnetic resonance
ET
electron transfer
EtAc
ethyl acetate
EtOH
ethanol
FCR
Folin–Ciocalteu reagent
FL
fluorescein
FRAP
ferric reducing antioxidant power
FW
fresh weight
FZ
ferrozine
GSH
glutathione
HAT
hydrogen atom transfer
HPS
hydrogen peroxide scavenging
IC50
half maximal inhibitory concentration
LDL
low-density lipoprotein
M-β-CD
methyl-β-cyclodextrin
MDA
malondialdehyde
MeOH
methanol
NEAC
non-enzymatic antioxidant capacity
NC
neocuproine
NBT
nitro blue tetrazolium
ORAC
oxygen radical absorbance capacity
PCL
photochemoluminescence
PG
propyl gallate
PMS-NADH
phenazine methosulphate-β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
Natural antioxidant capacity/activity
997

ROS
reactive oxygen species
RNS
reactive nitrogen species
SOD
superoxide dismutase
SR
superoxide radical
SRSA
superoxide radical scavenging activity
TAC
total antioxidant capacity
TBA
thiobarbituric acid
TBARS
thiobarbituric acid–reactive substance
TBBQ
tert-butyl-1,4-benzoquinone
TBHQ
tert-butyl hydroquinone
TE
Trolox equivalent
TEAC
Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity
TP
total phenolics 
TPTZ
tripyridyltriazine
TRAP
total peroxyl radical-trapping antioxidant parameter
X–XO
xanthine–xanthine oxidase
R. APAK et al.
© 2013, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 957–998, 2013
998
