© 1971 Nature Publishing Group
NATURE VOL. 229 FEBRUARY 12 1971 
LASERS 
Isotope Separation 
from our Molecular Physics Correspondent 
THE announcement of a successful sepa-
ration of hydrogen isotopes by selective 
laser-induced chemical reaction (S. W. 
Mayer, M. A. Kwock, R. W. F. Gross 
and D. J. Spencer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 17, 
516; 1970) will carry a stage further the 
reputation of the laser as a magic wand 
which can be pointed with startling 
results at practically all things physico-
chemical. 
This new application, which follows 
close on the development of a continuous-
wave hydrogen-fluorine laser in the same 
Aerospace Corporation group (see Appl. 
Phys. Lett., 16, 386; 1970), underlines 
more than any other so far the now com-
plete involvement of physics with chem-
istry in the field of continuous-wave gas 
lasers. The isotope separation is achieved 
by irradiation of mixtures of ordinary 
and deuteromethanol and bromine with 
0.44 eV (2.64 11m) photons at a total 
power of about 100 watts (6 x 1020 pho-
tons per second). Of this some 50 per cent 
is absorbed in the band characteristic of 
-OH groups whereas almost none is 
absorbed by the deutero-alcohol. 
Be-
cause the activation energy for attack of 
CH30H by Br2 is only some 0.27 eV 
(25 kJ mol- 1) the reaction of this can 
be made virtually specific at laboratory 
temperature. 
Mayer and his colleagues 
do not actually separate the deuterated 
fraction but their absorption spectra 
show beyond doubt that the composition 
of the gas remaining indicates an enrich-
ment from 50 per cent to more than 95 
per cent CD3CD. 
It is important to notice that the 
selectivity exploited in this experiment 
depends only on the careful matching of 
the laser frequency to the vibration of the 
-OH bond and involves no kind of 
kinetic isotope effect. At the same time, 
because the energy of the photon is 
deliberately kept low, there is no actual 
photolysis of the alcohol and no dissocia-
tion of the bromine leading to the photo-
bromination reactions familiar at shorter 
wavelengths. In fact, the process occur-
ring is not easily labelled by any of 
the terms currently in use in photo-
chemical kinetics-a sure indication of 
its originality and potential application. 
The authors, whose outlook, one imagines, 
is not primarily chemical, choose the 
rather misleading term "photocatalysis" 
-a better description might be simply 
"specific photo-activation", in line with 
thermal, chemical, electron impact activa-
tion and the like. 
Unfortunately it does not seem likely 
that such a clean separation will be 
possible with heavier isotopes, though, 
given chemical ingenuity and some form 
of recycling arrangement, the method 
could be competitive with others cur-
rently available. 
Whether or not this is so and whatever 
name comes to be given to the experi-
ment, it will almost certainly become a 
classic of chemical kinetics in its own 
right for, forgetting about isotopes alto-
gether, the prospect of pumping infrared 
energy at such power into a specific 
vibrational mode of a reactive molecule 
opens the way to the kind of observation 
of which experimental kineticists dream. 
I feel sure that we shall begin to see the 
fruits of this from a number of different 
laboratories before long. 
FIBRES 
Reinforcing Boron 
from our Materials Science Correspondent 
A STUDY has been made recently (J. 0. 
Carlsson and T. Lundstrom, J. Less-
Common Metals, 22, 317; 1971) of the 
efficacy of a group of solutes consisting 
of all 3d transition metals and copper, 
on the indentation hardness of 13-boron. 
All the solute metals-Sc, Ti, V, Cr, 
Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu-were arc-melted 
with boron at a concentration of 5 atm 
per cent, which in each instance was suffi-
cient to produce a saturated solid solution 
(though the saturation concentration was 
not determined). The unit cell volumes of 
the solid solutions were determined and 
plotted against micro hardness; the two 
variables were found to be closely 
453 
correlated. 
The maximum increase in 
hardness of about 20 per cent relative to 
pure 13-boron was obtained for Cu, Sc and 
Mn solutes, corresponding to 1-2 per 
cent increase in unit cell volume. 
In view of the importance of boron as 
a fibre-reinforcing metal, and because 
single crystals of boron are readily grown 
when transition metals are dissolved in it, 
Carlsson and Lundstrom suggest that 
alloyed boron should be investigated 
with a view to obtaining fibres or perhaps 
whiskers of enhanced strength. 
It was recently reported from the 
National Physical Laboratory (S. Allen 
et al., Nature, 224, 684; 1969) that carbon 
fibre can be strengthened by alloying it 
with a little boron. 
The findings now 
reported for boron containing metal 
solutes suggest that boron fibres alloyed 
with carbon (assuming that any solu-
bility exists) may turn out to be particu-
larly strong. 
NIAGARA 
Regressing Falls 
from our Geomagnetism Correspondent 
THE Niagara River, like a good woman, is 
unusually constant. 
For one thing, no 
great uncontrolled river joins it above 
the principal (Horseshoe) falls; and in 
the drainage basin there is not much 
variation in discharge because upstream 
Structural Inorganic Chemistry 
0RGANOTRANSITION metal chemistry has 
been a definite growth point in chemistry 
during the past decade. 
The related 
themes of the reactivity of ligands coor-
dinated to metals and the stabilization of 
unusual and reactive organic moieties 
through coordination are of particular 
importance because of their implications 
for mechanisms of homogeneous and 
heterogeneous 
catalysis. 
Diffraction 
methods in parallel with synthetic and 
mechanistic studies have provided precise 
data on the geometries of coordinated 
unsaturated ligands and the past three 
years have seen several attempts to 
evolve a generalized bonding theory. The 
molecules of real chemical interest are too 
large for any non-empirical quantum 
mechanical calculation of their energy 
levels and structure to be attempted, so 
much reliance has to be placed on 
symmetry arguments; fairly comprehen-
sive calculations are at present restricted 
to such molecules as tetracarbonyl nickel. 
There are obvious shortcomings in this 
type of approach but the latest discussion 
by Mingos in next Monday's Nature 
Physical Science goes a long way to 
rationalizing the structural results. 
The first order Jahn-Teller effect, which 
comments on the removal of orbital 
degeneracy in molecules or ions of high 
symmetry, has been used widely by 
inorganic chemists to discuss stereo-
chemical distortions in transition metal 
complexes. 
Pearson has recently taken 
up earlier work by Bader and Longuet-
Higgins on the second order Jahn-Teller 
effect, which can make useful predictions 
of the consequences of "mixing in" 
electronically excited states on the ground 
state geometries of molecules. 
The 
importance of such admixture in organo-
metallic molecules has been discussed by 
Mason, and now Mingos shows how 
simple symmetry considerations of the 
donor and acceptor orbitals of a Lewis 
acid-base pair give a clear indication 
of which nuclear rearrangements are 
favoured by ligands on coordination. 
The theory is based on symmetry alone, 
so it cannot discuss such matters as bond 
length variations in coordinated olefins 
and dienes as a function of the metal, 
the remaining ligands in a molecule and 
ligand substituents. 
But the general 
approach, linked with earlier theories, 
may prove as useful for organometallic 
molecules as Walsh's rules have been for 
simpler systems.