BOOK REVIEW
1752
Synthesis 2003, No. 11, Print: 05 08 2003. 
Art Id.1437-210X,E;2003,0,11,1752,1752,ftx,en;B11103SS.pdf. 
© Georg Thieme Verlag Stuttgart · New York
Ionic Liquids in Synthesis; Edited by P. Wasserscheid
and T. Welton; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 2003, hardcover,
380 pp, €155.00, ISBN 3527305157
The 2003 monograph edited by Wasserscheid and Welton
is a collection of nine chapters, which are contributed by
a group of scientist/researchers involved in various
aspects of ionic liquid chemistry.  The preface provides a
strong endorsement/justification and calls attention to the
ever-increasing number of papers involving ionic liquids. 
The book begins with a historical introduction on the
evolution of molten salts. Chapter 2 deals with synthesis
and purification of various classes of ionic liquids but
with emphasis on the more widely used imidazolium-
based onium salts.  Essential preparative issues such as
anion exchange/metathesis and purification protocols are
addressed together with aspects focusing on the commer-
cial production and scale-up. This chapter also contains
an enlightening section on designing ‘task-specific’ ionic
liquids. 
Chapter 3 (the 2nd largest chapter in the book) focuses on
physiochemical properties of ionic liquids from melting
points, viscosity, and density to solubility and solvation.
Included in this chapter is an interesting section on explo-
ration of polarity of ionic liquid media via its effect on
chemical reactions. As examples in the field (considered
by authors to be presently in its infancy) are C- versus O-
alkylation of sodium 2-naphthoxide, the exo/endo rate
ratio in the Diels–Alder reaction, and the rate dependency
of certain photochemical reactions on the ionic liquid sol-
vent. Other aspects such as electrochemistry, conductiv-
ity, and transport properties are extensively dealt with as
part of this chapter. 
Aspects dealing with the molecular structure and dynam-
ics in ionic liquids are presented in chapter 4. These
include neutron and X-ray diffraction, molecular dynam-
ics simulations, and ab initio, DFT and semi-empirical
calculations on representative ionic liquids.
The largest chapter in the book is chapter 5, which deals
with organic synthesis
in ionic liquid media. This chapter is probably most rele-
vant to the synthetic organic/organometallic chemistry
community. It provides a review of various categories of
organic transformations that have been conducted in
acidic and neutral ionic liquid solvents. The review is
reasonably comprehensive without necessarily being
exhaustive. A separate section under this heading deals
with transition metal catalysis in ionic liquids, where fun-
damental reactions such as hydrogenation, hydroformyla-
tion, oxidation and coupling reactions (Heck, Suzuki,
Stille, Negishi) are performed.
Chapter 6 focuses on inorganic synthesis. Judging from
the limited number of examples for synthesis of coordi-
nation compounds and for organometallic reactions, this
area is not as yet well-developed  (as compared to
organic/organometallic reactions in molten salts). The
chapter also deals with the electrochemical synthesis of
inorganic materials.
Chapters 7 and 8 highlight the progress made towards
polymer synthesis in ionic liquids and the potential of
ionic liquid solvents in bio-transformations respectively. 
The last chapter is an ‘outlook’ section by the volume
editors in which they emphasize the potentialities and
leave the reader with an optimistic view of the future
development of this area and its potential benefits to
‘clean syntheis’.
Overall the book is a valuable source for both the
researchers active in the field and those who might be
just curious about the prospects. This volume when
placed alongside of the two 2002 volumes ‘Ionic Liquids;
Industrial applications to Green Chemistry’ (ACS sym-
posium series 818) and ‘Clean Solvents; Alternative
Media for Chemical Reactions and Processing’ (ACS
symposium series 819), create a worthy triad for those
who wish to develop a broader, more comprehensive,
perception of the progress in the field, in particular in
relation to synthesis. 
Kenneth K. Laali, Kent State University, USA.
Downloaded by: University of Notre Dame. Copyrighted material.