Ultra-thin PbS sheets by two-dimensional oriented attachment
Constanze Schliehe, Marie Pelletier, Sebastian Jander, Denis Greshnykh, Mona Nagel,
Andreas Meyer, Stephan Foerster, Andreas Kornowski, Christian Klinke, and Horst Weller∗
Institute of Physical Chemistry, University of Hamburg, 20146 Hamburg, Germany
Beatriz H. Juarez
IMDEA Nanoscience, 28049 Madrid, Spain
Controlling anisotropy is a key concept to generate complex functionality in advanced materials.
For this, oriented attachment of nanocrystal building blocks, a self assembly of particles into larger
single crystalline objects, is one of the most promising approaches in nanotechnology. We report here
the 2D oriented attachment of PbS nanocrystals into ultra-thin single crystal sheets with dimensions
on the micrometer scale. We found that this process is initiated by co-solvents which alter nucleation
and growth rates during the primary nanocrystal formation and ﬁnally driven by dense packing of
oleic acid ligands on {100} facets of PbS. The obtained nanosheets can be readily integrated in a
photo-detector device without further treatment.
Controlled assembly leading to anisotropic nanostruc-
tures poses a conceptual challenge in materials research.
Penn and Banﬁeld [1, 2] described crystal growth, in
which oxide nanoparticles coalesce in well deﬁned crys-
talline orientations.
Their method of oriented attach-
ment of nanocrystals is now one of the most favorable
techniques to grow linear or zig-zag-type one-dimensional
nanostructures. In addition to strong size quantization
eﬀects occurring in these structures, their big advantage
is solution processability making them attractive candi-
dates for optoelectronic and thermoelectric applications
in low-cost integrated systems. One-dimensional assem-
blies of oriented attachment have been reported, and in
most cases the anisotropy during self-assembly is caused
by crystal planes with preferred reactivity and dipole
moments in the crystallites. Systems with cubic crystal
symmetry, however, like PbS and PbSe, where beautiful
one-dimensional oriented attachment occurs, are some-
what more diﬃcult to explain.
Oriented attachment,
in this case, should result in three-dimensional networks
rather than one-dimensional structures. The common ex-
planation assumes that despite the strict monodispersity
of the samples inhomogeneities in the chemical compo-
sition of surface planes exist and result in dipole mo-
ments within the nanocrystals. On the other hand or-
ganic ligand molecules play a crucial role in such pro-
cesses by capping nanoparticle surfaces selectively and
may hinder, modify, or trigger an oriented attachment
[3]. In this work we show that the formation of ordered
and densely packed ligand surface layers of oleic acid on
{100} PbS surfaces can drive the normally isotropic crys-
tal growths into a two-dimensional oriented attachment
of nanocrystals. Hereby the presence of chlorine contain-
ing co-solvents during the initial nucleation and growth
process of the nanocrystals plays a prominent role.
Syntheses of lead chalcogenide nanoparticles [4–7] can
∗Electronic address: weller@chemie.uni-hamburg.de
FIG. 1: TEM image of stacked PbS nanosheets using 1,1,2-
trichloroethane TCE.
lead to a large variety of particle shapes through slight
changes of the reaction conditions. It has been reported
how small traces of organo-phosphine compounds may
alter the course of the reactions, which underlines their
complexity [8]. For other systems, like CdS nanoparti-
cles, shape control has been reported by adding of small
amounts of HCl [9] or chlorine containing solvents like
1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) for example in the case of CdSe
nanorods attached to carbon nanotubes [10]. Reported
strategies to generate 2D nanostructures are based on the
use of lamellar-like templates [11] or thin superstructures
by assembly [12–14].
Our approach is based on a standard synthetic pro-
cedure to generate nearly spherical PbS nanoparticles
[15]. After 3 minutes the resulting dot-like particles have
a mean diameter of around 5 nm.
In contrast, ultra-
arXiv:1103.2920v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  15 Mar 2011

2
FIG. 2: (A) Absorption and emission spectra of the nanopar-
ticles with reaction time. The absorption spectra were normal-
ized to the absorption at 400 nm, and the emission spectra to
the maximum of each curve. (B) TEM image of an ultra-small
PbS nanoparticle at early stages of the reaction. Inset: Model
structure of a truncated cuboctahedron. (C) First step of at-
tachment.
(D) Later the structures merge with some holes
due to non-ideal attachment. (E) At the end of the synthesis
quasi continuous sheets are formed. Inset: Electron diﬀrac-
tion pattern of the PbS sheets.
thin PbS nanosheets as depicted in Fig. 1, are formed
in the presence of chlorine containing compounds like
1,2-dichloroethane or similar linear chloroalkanes. The
nanosheets have lateral dimensions of several hundred
nanometers and stack showing Moire patterns caused by
the interference between the crystalline lattices of the
individual sheets.
The formation of the sheets occurs
within the ﬁrst one to three minutes of the reaction. To
investigate the mechanism of formation we followed the
temporal evolution of the sheets by optical spectroscopy
and HRTEM. For practical reasons we slowed down the
sheet formation by reducing the reaction temperature im-
mediately after the thioacetamide injection.
Fig.
2A
shows the absorption and emission spectra at various
stages of the reaction. Within the ﬁrst 50 seconds the
solution turned red-brown and clearly structured spectra
evolved with an absorption maximum at 675 nm and a
narrow emission band at 790 nm. These features indicate
small isolated quantum dots of 2.8 ± 0.5 nm, which can
clearly be identiﬁed by TEM. As the reaction evolved the
ﬂuorescence band of the quantum dots decreased and an
unstructured absorption of sheets arose, partially due to
the occurrence of turbidity. The spectral position of the
original bands, however, and thus the size of the particles,
does not change during this process proving that sheets
are formed directly from the nanoparticles by oriented at-
tachment. The growth of either ultrathin sheets or larger
particles (in the absence of DCE) is determined by the
behavior of the PbS nanocrystals originally formed.
Nanocrystals as small as 2.8 nm could not be isolated
if DCE (or a similar chlorine containing compound) was
not added to the reaction mixture. A TEM sample taken
during the rapid process of oriented attachment shows
various stages of sheet formation. The original particles
(Fig. 2B) can be recognized together with fused aggre-
gates (Fig. 2C) as well as porous structures similar to the
one shown in Fig. 2D. In Fig. 2B, where an individual
particle in a slightly tilted [100] orientation is depicted,
an angle of 135◦at the crystalline edges can be identiﬁed.
This is taken as an indication for the presence of {110}
surface planes. A reasonable model for such a small crys-
tallite is shown in the inset of this ﬁgure. A close inspec-
tion of Fig. 2C identiﬁes this structure as an aggregate
of three nanocrystals fused in 2 dimensions. Even in the
porous framework structure of Fig. 2D the size and shape
of the original particles as well as their crystalline orien-
tation is visible. Uniform nanosheets, however, can be
obtained several minutes after the sulfur precursor injec-
tion (Fig. 2E). The HRTEM image of a sheet region de-
picted in Fig. 2E shows a single crystalline structure with
crossed (200) lattice planes displaying an angle of 45◦rel-
ative to the sheet edges. This indicates a sheet growth
parallel to the <110> axes. Although most of their edges
in <110> directions are atomically ﬂat over large dis-
tances, some regions clearly show a zig-zag pattern with
exposed {100} facets with dimensions corresponding to
those of the original quantum dots. Selected area elec-
tron diﬀraction (SAED) pattern of individual sheets con-

3
ﬁrm this observation showing a monocrystalline galena
structure in [100] orientation with pronounced (200) and
(220) reﬂexes. The X-ray diﬀraction pattern shows that
the HRTEM characterization of individual sheets is rep-
resentative of the entire sample.
FIG. 3: Schematic illustration of large particle (A) and sheet
formation (B, C) from small PbS quantum dots.
Murray and co-workers found in the crystalline equiv-
alent PbSe and PbTe systems that truncated cubes with
sizes of roughly 10 nm evolve from approximately 5 nm
cuboctahedrons with 6 {100} and 8 {111} facets. They
explained this by a faster growth perpendicular to the
{111} facets [16, 17].
These results also suggest that
{110} facets are highly reactive and therefore are prefer-
entially consumed during the nanoparticle growth. The
structure of PbS nanocrystals which merge into PbS
sheets is shown in Fig. 3. The shape is that of a trun-
cated cuboctahedron with 6 {100}, 8 {111} and 12 {110}
facets. Upon crystal growth the particles try to minimize
the most energetically unfavorable surface facets by a fast
growth perpendicular to the respective facet. In the case
of PbS particles bigger than 10 nm [18] this results in
truncated cubes with mainly {100} surface planes (path
A in Fig. 3). We do not observe the formation of PbS
sheets in the absence of DCE (or a similar chloride com-
pound), whereas in the presence of chloride compounds,
which are known to act as lead complexing agents [19],
the kinetics of nucleation and growth are altered, lead-
ing to approximately 3 nm particles (as shown in Fig.
2A) which should still exhibit the reactive {110} sur-
faces. Since Ostwald ripening plays only a negligible role
during PbS nanoparticle formation, these small crystal-
lites stabilize by oriented attachment via the {110} facets
(path B in Fig. 3). The expected egg tray like structure
is unlikely to be stable and will undergo a surface re-
construction (path C in Fig. 3) resulting in a ﬂat sheet
(Fig. 2E). The ensuing sheet should be thinner than the
original building blocks by up to 30 percent. This recon-
struction, understood as the diﬀusion and accommoda-
tion of the atoms under favorable thermodynamic condi-
tions (100◦C) also contributes to a decrease in the poros-
ity of the sheets. We performed small-angle x-ray scat-
tering (SAXS) of the stacked PbS layers (Fig. 4). The
sample was positioned in a coplanar conﬁguration with
the SAXS beam in order to obtain information about the
sheet thickness and orientational distribution. A highly
anisotropic dumbell-type scattering pattern characteris-
tic for sheets oriented nearly parallel to the qx-direction
can be seen in the upper inset of Fig 4. The best sim-
ulation ﬁt was calculated assuming a regular stacking of
disks with a long period of 5.8 nm and PbS sheet thick-
ness of 2.2 nm. The resultant distance between the sheets
of 3.6 nm is attributed to an oleic acid bilayer.
This
behavior strongly supports the notion of an interplanar
crystalline oleic acid bilayer, not understandable by ran-
domly coiled and interpenetrating chains. The formation
of the stacked layers occurs most probably by an attach-
ment of quantum dots or small sheet structures on top of
already formed nanosheets, which than acts as a nucleus
for further 2D attachment. The stacked structure can
also be observed by AFM.
FIG. 4: Cross section of the scattering intensity along the
qy axis (black points) and simulated diﬀraction curve. The
scattering image is depicted in the inset. The result could be
modeled with assumed disks of 2.2 nm thickness and a spacing
ligand of 3.6 nm.
One question remains, however, as to why oriented at-
tachment leads to 2D instead of a 3D structure.
Our
results strongly support that the assembly of oleic acid
in a highly ordered monolayer on the {100} surfaces plays
a key role in the formation and further stacking of PbS
sheets. Oleic acid is well known to assemble vertically on

4
FIG. 5: I-V curves of PbS sheets with and without illumina-
tion with a green laser. The thin ﬁlm of stacks of PbS sheets
cover a detection area of 0.5 µm x 6 µm between two gold
electrodes.
various substrates and to form bilayer structures [20–22].
The thickness of a monolayer was determined from single
crystal data and ranges from 1.7 to 2.4 nm in the reported
crystal structures. The latter mainly varies by the con-
formation next to the double bond and the relative ori-
entation of the oleic acids within one monolayer. These
reported values ﬁt well with the observed interplanar dis-
tance of 3.6 nm in stacked sheets. The formation of a
dense and highly ordered oleic acid layer covering the PbS
nanosheets also allows the system to bind a maximum
number of oleic acid molecules. The resulting release of
adsorption enthalpy combined with the stabilization by
inter-alkyl van der Waals forces obviously overcompen-
sates the decrease in entropy and results in a net release
of Gibbs energy. The 2D oriented attachment and the
reconstruction from the egg tray structure to ﬂat sheets
would, from this point of view, not only be driven by
minimizing high energy surfaces, but also by structural
changes caused by the oleic acid molecules. Whereas one
expects the ligands to exist in a randomly coiled state on
the highly curved surface of small particles, in fact they
appear in a highly ordered phase on the ﬂat {100} planes.
We believe that similar eﬀects may hold in general in
shape control, self-assembly, and templated growth of
nanocrystals. For example, ligand driven self-assembly
of nanocrystals into aggregated wires (1D) and vesicles
(curved 2D) was recently observed for amphiphilic CdSe
quantum dots [23].
The thin ﬁlm structure of the sheets should decisively
aﬀect the quantum conﬁnement of photogenerated car-
riers. In accord with the reported dimensions, no con-
ﬁnement is expected in lateral direction while the struc-
tures should be strongly conﬁned vertically. Diﬀerences
in layer thickness and conﬁnement in one dimension may
strongly inﬂuence the optical features. Correlated con-
focal microscopy and TEM inspections conﬁrms this as-
sumption showing an emission signal coming from two
diﬀerent individual stacks of PbS sheets at a wavelength
of about 720 nm.
Lead chalcogenide nanoparticle arrays are currently in
the spotlight for photodetector fabrication. Typical 2D
assemblies require physical or chemical treatments to re-
move the insulating organic shell capping [24–26]. The
lack of ligands in the in-plane dimensions of raw PbS 2D
sheets produces intrinsically outstanding photoconduc-
tive properties, as shown in Fig. 5. PbS sheets bridging
two gold electrode on a SiO2 substrate exhibit low dark
conductance between ±0.1 V without substantial hys-
teresis. Upon illumination with a 532 nm laser, however,
the conductance increases by more than two orders of
magnitude at an illumination intensity of 2.0 mW/cm2.
This yields an eﬃciency value (actual photocurrent di-
vided by the theoretical max. current due to photon im-
pact) of about 1.1 at 0.1 V (corresponds to a responsivity
of 0.472 A/W). Taking into account that the number of
absorbed photons is only a small fraction of the incident,
this value shows that the increase in current cannot be
due to harvesting of photogenerated charge carriers only.
The ﬁlling of trap states is most probably responsible
for the current gain.
In contrast to currently investi-
gated devices made from ligand stabilized PbS nanocrys-
tals [27, 28] the ready-made, non-treated nanosheets re-
ported here are remarkably conductive due to missing
in-plane ligands and continuous connection through the
monocrystal.
In conclusion we have shown that chlorine contain-
ing co-solvents can direct the colloidal synthesis of PbS
nanoparticles into two-dimensional nanosheets by ori-
ented attachment.
We believe that this is a conse-
quence of the size of the nanoparticles and hence the
presence of {110} reactive facets, which disappear as
the nanoparticle grow.
The presence of DCE or simi-
lar chlorine-containing compounds yields small nanopar-
ticles of around 3 nm in diameter, exposing the highly
reactive {110} facets so as to trigger an oriented attach-
ment process.
Both the oriented attachment and the
strong crystalline correlation between the nanosheets in
stacked aggregates are most likey driven by the forma-
tion of a highly ordered oleic acid bilayer between the
PbS nanosheets. The absence of ligands in the in-plane
direction of the ultra thin sheets yields a prominent pho-
toconductivity response in the pristine dried nanomate-
rial.

5
[1] R. L. Penn, J. F. Banﬁeld, Science 281, 969 (1998).
[2] J. F. Banﬁeld, S. A. Welch, H. Zhang, T. T. Ebert, R.
L. Penn, Science 289, 751 (2000).
[3] J. Polleux, N. Pinna, M. Antonietti, M. Niederberger,
Adv. Mater. 16, 436 (2004).
[4] Y. W. Jun, J. S. Choi, J. Cheon, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
21, 3414 (2006).
[5] S. M. Lee, S. N. Cho, J. Cheon, Adv. Mater. 15, 441
(2003).
[6] W. Lu, J. Fang, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B.
109, 19219 (2005).
[7] T. Mokari, M. Zhang, P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129,
9864 (2007).
[8] J. S. Steckel, B. K. H. Yen, D. C. Oertel, M. G. Bawendi,
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 13032 (2006).
[9] K. T. Yong, Y. Sahoo, M. T. Swihart, P. N. Prasad, J.
Phys. Chem. C 111, 2447 (2007).
[10] B. H. Juarez et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 130, 15282 (2008).
[11] J. S. Son et al., Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48, 6861 (2009)
[12] Z.Y. Tang et al., Science 314, 274 (2006)
[13] H. G. Yang, H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 43, 5930
(2004).
[14] Z. Huo et al., Nano Lett. 9, 1260 (2009).
[15] M. Nagel, G. S. Hickey, A. Frmsdorf, A. Kornowski, H.
Weller, Z. Phys. Chem. 221, 427 (2007).
[16] K. S. Cho, D. V. Talapin, W. Gaschler, C. B. Murray, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 7140 (2005).
[17] J. J. Urban, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B.
Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 3248 (2006).
[18] T. Duan, W. Lou, X. Wang, Q. Xue, Colloids Surf. A
310, 86 (2007).
[19] E. Capek, K. E. Schwarzhans, Monatsh. Chem. 118, 419
(1987).
[20] F. Kaneko, K. Yamazaki, K. Kitagawa, T. Kikyo, M.
Kobayashi, J. Phys. Chem. B 101, 1803 (1997).
[21] S. R. Craig et al., J. Cryst. Growth 128, 1263 (1993).
[22] S.
Abrahamsson,
I.
Ryderstedt-Nahringbauer,
Acta
Cryst. 15, 1261 (1962).
[23] M. S. Nikolic et al., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 48, 2752
(2009).
[24] D. V. Talapin, C. B. Murray, Science 310, 86 (2005).
[25] J. M. Luther et al., ACS Nano 2, 271 (2008).
[26] M. V. Kovalenko, M. Scheele, D. V. Talapin, Science 324,
1417 (2009).
[27] K. Szendrei et al., Adv. Mater. 21, 683 (2009).
[28] T. S. Mentzel et al., Phys. Rev. B 77, 075316 (2008).
