Pure & Appl. Chern., Vol. 63, No. 5, pp. 71 1-734, 1991 
I 
Printed in Great Britain. 
@ 1991 IUPAC 
ADONIS 206922209100080K 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF PURE 
AND APPLIED CHEMISTRY 
PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY DIVISION 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY* 
REAL SURFACE AREA MEASUREMENTS 
IN ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
Prepared for publication by 
S .  TRASATTI' and 0. A. PETRI12 
'Dipartimento di Chimica Fisica ed Elettrochimica, Universith di Milano, Italy 
2Faculty of Chemistry, Lomonosov Moscow State University, USSR 
*Membership of the Commission during the period the report was prepared (1985-1989) was 
as follows: 
Chairmen: K. Niki (Japan; 1985-1987); G. Gritzner (Austria; 1987-1991); Vice Chairman: 
L. R. Faulkner (USA; 1985-1987); Secretaries: G. Gritzner (Austria; 1985-1987); G. S. Wilson 
(USA; 1987-1991); Titular Members: B. E. Conway (Canada; 1985-1989); L. R. Faulkner 
(USA; 1983-1989); G. Gritzner (Austria; 1983-1991); D. Landolt (Switzerland; 1983-1991); 
V. M. M. Lob0 (Portugal; 1985-1993); R. Memming (FRG; 1983-1987); K. Tokuda (Japan; 
1987-1991); Associate Members: C. P. Andrieux (France; 1987-1991); J. N. Agar (UK; 1979- 
1987); A. Bewick (UK; 1983-1987); E. Budevski (Bulgaria; 1979-1987); Yu. A. Chizmadzhev 
(USSR; 1987-1991); K. E. Heusler (FRG; 1983-1987); J. C. Justice (France; 1983-1987); 
J. Koryta (Czechoslovakia; 1983-1991); B. Miller (USA; 1979-1987); 0. A. Petrii (USSR; 
1983-1991); D. Pletcher (UK; 1987-1991); J. A. Plambeck (Canada; 1979-1987); W. Plieth 
(FRG; 1987-1989); M. Sluyters-Rehbach (Netherlands; 1985-1989); K. Tokuda (Japan; 1985- 
1987); M. J. Weaver (USA; 1987-1991); A. Yamada (Japan; 1983-1987); National Representatives: 
A. J. Arvia (Argentina; 1980-1991); M. L. Berkem (Turkey; 1987-1991); T. Biegler (Australia; 
1985-1991); A. K. Covington (UK; 1979-1991); D. DraiiC (Yugoslavia; 1981-1991); E. Gileadi 
(Israel; 1983-1991); C. Gutierrez (Spain; 1987-1991); G. Horinyi (Hungary; 1979-1991); 
H. D. Hunvitz (Belgium; 1985-1991); R. W. Murray (USA; 1985-1989); K. Niki (Japan; 1987- 
1989); R. L. Paul (RSA; 1983-1989); D. Pavlov (Bulgaria; 1987-1991); S. Trasatti (Italy; 1985- 
1991); G. A. Wright (New Zealand; 1985-1991); Z. Zembura (Poland; 1983-1989); B. E. 
Conway (Canada; 1979-1985). 
Republication of this report is permitted without the need for formal IUPAC permission on condition that an 
acknowledgement, with full reference together with IUPAC copyright symbol (0 
1991 IUPAC), is printed. 
Publication of a translation into another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval from the 
relevant IUPAC National Adhering Organization. 

Real surface area measurements in 
electrochemistry 
Abstract - Electrode reaction rates and most double layer parameters are 
extensive quantities and have to be referred to the unit area of the 
interface. Knowledge of the reel surface area of electrodes is therefore 
needed. Comparison of experimental data with theories or of experimental 
results for different materials and/or from different laboratories to each 
other is physically groundless without normalization to unit reel area of 
the electrode surface. Different methods have been proposed to normalize 
experimental data specifically with solid electrodes. Some of them are not 
sufficiently justified from a physical point of view. A few of them are 
definitely questionable. The purpose of this document is to scrutinize the 
basis on which the various methods and approaches rest, in order to assess 
their relevance to the specific electrochemical situation and, as far as 
possible, 
their 
absolute 
reliability. 
Methods 
and 
approaches 
are 
applicable to 
( a )  liquid electrodes, (b) polycrystalline and single 
crystal face solids, ( c )  supported, compressed and disperse powders. The 
applicability of the various techniques to each specific case is to be 
verified. After an introductory discussion of the "concept" of real 
surface area, fifteen methods, eleven applied in situ and four ex situ, 
are scrutinized. For each of them, after a description of the principles 
on which i t  is based, limitations are discussed and recomnendations are 
given. 
CONTENTS 
1. 
Introduction 
1.1 Generalities 
1.2 General concepts 
2.1 Drop weight (or volume) 
2.2 Capacitance ratio 
2.3 Parsons-Zobel plot 
2.4 Hydrogen adsorption from solution 
2.5 Oxygen adsorption from solution 
2.6 Underpotential deposition of metals 
2.7 Voltammetry 
2.8 Negative adsorption 
2.9 Ion-exchange capacity 
2.10 Adsorption of probe molecules from solution 
2.1 1 Mass transfer 
2. 
In Situ Methods 
3. 
Ex Situ Methods 
3.1 Adsorption of Probe molecules from gas phase 
3.2 X-ray diffraction 
3.3 Porosimetry 
3.4 Microscopy 
3.5 Other methods 
4. 
References 
71 2 
71 2 
713 
71 5 
71 6 
71 7 
719 
7 20 
721 
722 
723 
7 24 
7 24 
725 
726 
728 
729 
730 
731 
73 1 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Generalities 
T h e  surface area w h i c h  can b e  determined w i t h  o r d i n a r y  t o o l s  designed to 
m e a s u r e  a length is the g e o m e t r i c  surface a r e a ,  A s .  It is defined (ref. 1 )  a s  
the projection of the real surface o n  a plane parallel to the m a c r o s c o p i c ,  
712 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
713 
visible phase boundary.. 
Thus, A= 
is calculated on the basis of known 
geometric 
dimensions 
of 
the 
object 
constituting 
the 
electrode, 
whose 
resolution is normally that of macroscopic measurements. Only for liquids does 
the real surface coincide in principle with the geometric surface. In the case 
of solids,asperities are normally present whose height may be orders of 
magnitude greater than the atomic or molecular size, though lower than the 
visible resolution. in this case the real surface area is higher than AK and 
experimental data must be normalized to the real surface to become universally 
comparable. 
Electrode reaction rates and most double layer parameters are extensive 
quantities and have to be referred 
to the unit area of the interface. 
Knowledge of 
the 
real 
surface area 
of electrodes 
is therefore needed. 
Comparison of experimental data with theories or of experimental results for 
different materials and/or from different 
laboratories to each other is 
physically groundless without normalization to unit real area of the electrode 
surf ace. 
While the surface area, A ,  is normally expressed a s  a squared length (SI 
Units: mz), i t  is often expedient to report specific values referred either to 
unit mass (Aa/m2 g-1). or to unit volume (Av/mz m-3 E m-1); they are related 
by the fbllowing equation: 
Av = A / V  = A p / m  = A m p  
( 1 )  
where p is the mass density, m the mass and V the volume of the system. Note 
that the (real) surface area per unit geometric surface area is called the 
roughness factor, fr = A/AK ( c f  ref. 1 )  
Different methods have been proposed to normalize experimental data specific- 
ally with solid electrodes. Some of them are not sufficiently justified from a 
physical point of view. A few of them are definitely questionable. 
The purpose of this document is to scrutinize the basis on which the various 
methods and approaches rest, in order to assess their relevance to the 
specific electrochemical situation and, as far as possible, their absolute 
reliability. Methods and approaches are applicable to (a> liquid electrodes, 
(b) polycrystalline and single crystal face solids, ( c )  supported, compressed 
and disperse powders. The applicability of the various techniques to each 
specific case is to be verified. 
This document is related to previous IUPAC publications, such a s  the Manual of 
Symbols and Terminology (ref. a ) ,  its Appendix 1 1  (ref. 3), Appendix 1 1 1  (ref. 
4 ) ,  and the papers on adsorption from solution (ref. 5 )  and on interphases 
between conducting phases (ref. 1 ) .  The final list of references given is not 
intended to be exhaustive: only a few illustrative and exemplificative papers 
have been chosen for quotation. 
1.2 General concepts 
The meaning of real surface area depends on the method of measurement of A ,  on 
the theory of this method, and on the conditions of application of the method. 
Thus, for a given system, various "real surface areas" can in principle be 
defined, depending on the characteristic dimension of the probe used. This is 
so even if phenomena of surface reconstruction, relaxation and faceting. which 
often occur during adsorption or electrochemical measurements, should not be 
taken into account. The most appropriate is the one estimated using a method 
which best approaches the experimental situation to which the area determined 
is to be applied. 
Besides the concept of real surface area. other aspects should be taken into 
consideration when dealing with solid electrodes: 
( a >  surface topography 
(macro- and microroughness); (b> homogeneity/heterogeneity of the surface; (c) 
dispersion of the active material, including 
(d) distribution law of the 
dispersed active material. These aspects are closely interrelated and are to 
be thoroughly considered in order to achieve a correct comprehension of the 
meaning of normalization of data to the unit real area of the electrode 
surf ace. 
Note thmt if the surfmce includes a macroscopic verticml step between two planar regions, a l s o  the phmse boundary 
haa a step whose ares is thus obviouely counted in the calculetion of A=. If the step is microscopic, i t  turns out 
not to be included into tho g8Omet?iC surface. 

714 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
Surface heterogeneity and surface roughness are crucial 
aspects of solid 
surfaces. The difference between the two concepts lies in the fact that 
periodicity is not 
required 
for surface heterogeneity while for surface 
roughness i t  becomes a determining condition. Such irregularities which should 
not be considered a s  roughness due to their non-periodic character may be 
important in the definition of surface quality. The concept of roughness is 
well illustrated by the above distinction between real and geometric surface 
area. A surface is ideally homogeneous as its properties do not depend on the 
position on the surface at the atomic size resolution. The surface of liquids 
simulates homogeneity at the best since the local properties are smoothed by 
thermal fluctuations. For solids, ideally ordered single crystal faces may be 
representative of homogeneous surfaces. 
A 
surface is heterogeneous a s  its properties depend on the position. The 
simplest example of a heterogeneous surface is a single crystal face with 
randomly distributed point defects. The commonest example is a polycrystalline 
surface where the periodicity of distribution o f  atoms differs from place to 
place. In both cases the surface, though heterogeneous, may be ideally smooth. 
However, 
pits 
on 
a 
single crystal 
face 
entail 
both 
heterogeneity 
and 
roughness. Consistently, a rough surface may in principle be homogeneous. 
However, a rough single crystal face implies also surface heterogeneity. 
In very general terms, surface roughness may be treated in certain cases using 
the 
theory 
of 
fractal 
geometry 
(ref. 6). Recent 
developments 
in 
the 
understanding of the fractel nature of (especially) surface roughness and of 
its consequences for all extensive interfacial quantities, complicate the 
phenomenological approach adopted in the previous paragraphs. For instance, 
the dimension of a "surface area" is no longer the square of length in the 
theory of fractals. Also "bulk properties" such as electrical conductivity are 
no 
longer merely bulk but 
they become (partly) interfacial. Since this 
document is devoted to the experimental determination of the surface area and 
not to its mathematical description, the customary phenomenological approach 
to the problem will be followed in the various sections. 
Polycrystalline solid materials consist of an ensemble of randomly oriented 
crystellites, which are the smallest units of single crystals. In the case of 
a disperse material, two or more crystallites may aggregate through grain 
boundaries to form particles. These are characterized by their dimension 
(size), shape and 
size distribution function. Patchwise models simulate 
heterogeneous surfaces as a collection of homogeneous patches. Heterogeneity 
is thus expressed in terms of a spatial distribution function. 
The particle (crystallite) size is normally given in terms of a length, d, 
whose geometric significance depends on the particle shape. However, d is 
customarily referred to as the particle (crystallife) diameter. For a given 
material, the experimental value of d is always an average over the number of 
particles examined. 
Various kinds of d may be defined (ref. 7 ) .  For crystallites of diameter di 
and number 
ni, the 
number average diameter for a 
given particle size 
distribution is given by: 
d = Znidi/Pni 
( 2 )  
the surface average diameter by: 
and the volume average diameter by: 
dv = Pni did /2ni di3 
Which of the three diameters above are experimentally obtained depends on the 
technique and the procedure used for the determination. 
Other examples illustrating the above aspects are: (a> mechanically treated 
polycrystalline solid electrodes, always involving a disturbed surface layer 
whose atomic arrangement differs from the equilibrium one in the bulk; ( b >  
dispersed electrode materials usually involving an unknown size distribution 
of particles whose shape and crystallographic orientation may depend on the 
nature of the material, and whose surface structure may include different 
defects depending on the kind of preparation procedure. 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
715 
The above paragraphs, while not exhausting the problem, are illustrative of 
the fact that the simple concept of "real surface area" may be misleading if 
not related to the numerous other parameters which depend on the surface 
structure and determines the reactivity of an electrode surface. 
2. 
IN SlTU METHODS 
2.1 Drop weight (or volume) 
This method is that classically used with liquid metal electrodes (refs. 8-11) 
such a s  Hg, G a ,  amalgams, and gallium liquid alloys (In-Ga, TI-Ga, etc.). 
Electrodes may be static (hanging or sessile drop) or dynamic (falling drop). 
In general terms, the area of such drop electrodes can be calculated as the 
surface of rotation on the basis of diameters of sections which belong to 
different fixed levels on the drop drawing. More specific approaches are 
described below. 
2.f.f Principles. For dropping electrodes, the rate of flow ( m )  of the liquid 
metal down a glass capillary is measured by weighing the mass of metal dropped 
in a given period of time. The area A of the extruded drop at a selected time 
t of the drop life is calculated, assuming spherical shape, from the equation 
(refs. 9,12,13): 
A = 4n(3mt/4np)z/3 
(1.1) 
where p is the density of the dropping liquid. With m in g s - 1 ,  t in s and p 
in g cm-3 the resulting surface area is in cmz. 
2 . 1 . 2  Limitations. Equation ( 1 . 1 )  
is strictly valid only for the area of a 
single drop at the end of the drop life. It may be valid at a different moment 
of the drop life only if i t  is allowed to assume that the flow rate is not 
significantly depending on time. However, the assumption of constant flow rate 
is rendered invalid by the effect of the back pressure (refs. 12-16) given by 
2y/r where y is the surface tension of the liquid metal and r the drop radius. 
Thus, the action of the back pressure is maximum at the moment of drop 
detachment. Consequently, the flow rate increases during the growth of a drop. 
The back pressure is seen to decrease with drop size and drop life. Its 
relative effect becomes smaller with increasing height of the liquid metal 
head (pressure) over the capillary. The quantity m ,  measured as indicated 
above, will be the average of the time-dependent flow rate, m ( t ) ,  over the 
whole drop life, r ,  ie m = (l/r)J;rn(t)dt. 
At T = r the area is correctly 
calculated by eqn.(l.l). but a t  t < r  the real area will be smaller than the 
calculated one. Since y is potential dependent, the back pressure effect is 
also expected to depend on potential, being greatest at the potential of zero 
charge ref. 3). On the other hand, there is a compensating effect caused by 
the inertia of the Hg stream downwards the Capillary. 
These problems do not occur if the weight of the drop is measured at exactly 
the time where the electrochemical quantity is recorded, for instance, at 
mechanically knocked-off electrodes and at the hanging-drop electrode. 
The condition of perfect sphericity of the drop is not met toward the end of 
the drop life especially with capillaries of relatively large bore. Under 
similar circumstances the drop will become pear-shaped (refs. 11,12,17). 
Part of the surface of the (assumed) sphere is actually excluded at the place 
where the drop connects with the column in the capillary. Under similar 
circumstances, the drop can be treated as a "truncated" sphere (refs. 18,19). 
The excluded area is approximately equal to 7rrc2, where rc is the radius of 
the capillary at the orifice (refs. 12,20). 
An experimental approach to the determination of the excluded area resting on 
the assumption of constant flow rate with drop life is the following. Under 
similar circumstances i t  is possible to write: 
T C I / ( A I - A X )  = T C Z / ( A Z - A ~ )  
= . . .  = T C ~ / ( A ~ - A ~ )  
= const(€) 
(1.2) 
where T C ~ ,  
T C Z , . .  .TC,, 
are the total capacitances (ie not referred to unit 
surface area) measured at some times ti , t z  . . . t n  of the drop 1 ife. Ai , Az . . .An 
are the surface areas determined at the various times by means of eqn.(l.l) 
and Ax is the excluded area. By solving eqn.(l.l), an average value < A x >  can 

COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
thus be estimated. Strictly, i t  should result to be a function of potential 
( c f  above). The order of magnitude of Ax is about 1 %  of the drop surface area. 
Other complications which have to be mentioned are shielding effects and 
solution creeping. if the glass of the capillary shields a part of the drop 
surface. 
a 
non-linear 
relationship may result between, eg capacitance or 
current, and the surface area derived from the drop weight. On the other hand, 
solution may 
creep into 
the capillary 
causing an opposite effect. The 
occurrence of solution creeping is usually shown by the erratic formation of 
drops. 
2 . 1 . 3  Evaluations. The back pressure effect is important only at the birth of 
a drop. I t  is observable at short times of the drop life. I t  is minimized by 
using relatively high values of 
t ,  high pressure over the capillary and 
relatively high flow rates. 
The non-sphericity of the drop becomes important only toward the end of the 
drop life and is minimized by working at short t values compared to the drop 
time and with narrow capillaries. 
Back-pressure and non-sphericity are usually not a problem with dropping Hg 
electrodes with flow rates of the order of 0.2 mg s-1 and time of measurement 
of about 7-9 s over a 
drop life of 12-15 s. Both effects can have some 
importance with oxidizable liquid electrodes, such a s  G a  and its alloys, for 
which high 
flow rates, 
low overpressure, and 
short 
drop 
times can be 
necessary. 
Excluded area effects have been reported (refs. 13,201 and have been claimed 
to be more important than the other two, up to ca 1%. However, its bearing is 
greater at short times and decreases rapidly with the expanding drop surface 
area. I t  is minimized by using very narrow capillary and large drops. With the 
characteristics specified above, the drop surface area is of the order of 1-2 
mm2. The excluded area effect becomes negligible with respect to the intrinsic 
accuracy of the measured quantities (<O.l%) as the radius of the orifice is 
<20-25 pm. Again, this effect may be a problem with oxidizable liquid metals 
for which large bore capillaries may be necessary. 
The recommended procedure to check whether any of the above effects are 
operative is to carry out measurement at different times with the same 
capillary under otherwise constant conditions. Corrections for the screened 
area can be made where necessary by measuring re by a suitable technique. 
2.2 Capacitance ratio 
This method is normally used with solid electrodes, but i t  is also applicable 
to liquid metals and disperse systems. I t  is widely adopted for the estimation 
of the surface area ratio for different samples of the same electrode material 
(eg ref. 21-24>. 
2.2.1 Principles. The experimental differential capacitance of the electrode 
under investigation in aqueous solutions is divided by 15-17 pF cm-2, the 
empirically established range of capacitance per unit area measured with a Hg 
electrode at moderately negative charges (around -12 pC cm-2) where C goes 
through a shallow minimum. This implies assuming that the structure of the 
double layer is exactly the same for the investigated electrode as for Hg. The 
potential of measurement 
should be the same on the rational 
scale. viz 
referred to the potential of zero charge. 
A variant of this method consists in measuring the capacitance in very dilute 
solutions ((10-3 
mol dm-3) and in assuming that the minimum value at the 
potential of zero charge is entirely governed by the diffuse layer capacitance 
so that the surface area can be obtained by dividing the experimental value by 
that calculated by means of the Gouy-Chapman theory. This modification implies 
that the position of the potential of zero charge (the point of zero charge in 
the case of ionic solids) is experimentally identifiable. 
2.2.2 Limitations. Although there is some evidence that the capacitance falls 
in a narrow range of values at negative charges in the region -10 to -15 pC 
cm-2, this value may span from 15 for Hg to 25 for the ( 1 1 1 )  face of Ag. 
Moreover, the capacitance is potential dependent in a way which depends 
dramatically on the nature of the metal. In many cases the position of the 
potential of zero cCharge is not known, hence the observation of a plateau does 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
717 
not necessarily mean that i t  may be treated as equivalent to the shallow 
minimum of H g  at negative charges. 
In the case of the capacitance minimum at the potential of zero charge, taking 
i t  a s  determined entirely by the diffuse layer is tantamount to assuming that 
the inner layer capacitance is as low a s  that on Hg. Results for Ag, A u ,  G a  
and In-Ga have shown that this is definitively not a general case. This 
approach 
is 
even 
less 
reliable with 
ionic 
solids, whose 
inner 
layer 
capacitance and its potential dependence are a s  a rule unknown ( c f  section 
7.2). 
Since techniques based on alternating electric signals are used for the 
measurement. 
for 
rough 
solid 
surfaces 
the 
capacitance usually 
shows a 
frequency dispersion which prevents the assignment to i t  of a physically 
significant value. Also, measured capacitances are often vitiated by some 
faradaic components due to the fact that most electrochemical interfaces are 
not ideally polarizable (ref. 5). 
2.2.3 Evaluations. This method has n o  physical basis; i t  cannot even be 
defined as empiric since i t  goes against the experimental evidence. Apart from 
the nature of the electrode, the electrolyte may have unpredictable effects. 
For instance, F- ions are not specifically adsorbed on H g  but they are on Ag 
and other sp-metals. 
The potential 
of zero charge of d-metals 
is mainly 
unknown and the behaviour of the double layer capacitance with potential has 
not been investigated. In the case of oxidizable transition metals like Ni and 
Fe, the Capacitance depends dramatically on the presence of oxide films. In 
non-aqueous solvents 
the difference between H g  and d-metals ( c f  Pt and Pd in 
DMSO and ACN) is even more striking and use of this method to estimate surface 
areas may be in error by even an order of magnitude. 
The method is more reasonable in its variant. However, the approximation of 
constancy in the inner layer capacitance must be verifiable and can anyway 
lead to inaccuracy of 10-20%. The method is acceptable a s  an internal check 
(or for the estimation of the relative surface area) for different samples of 
the 
same metal 
or 
of 
the 
same 
ionic 
solid 
( e g  oxide), 
provided 
the 
repeatibility of the experimental results is ascertained at a given constant 
frequency of the alternating signal. With liquid metals, i t  is a correct way 
to normalize experimental data to unit surface area, provided .accepted values 
for exactly the same system and the same conditions are available, and the 
measuring 
apparatus 
is 
known 
to 
give 
correct 
results. 
Experimental 
difficulties may arise from the high ohmic resistance due 
to 
the 
low 
electrolyte concentrations needed. Moreover, double layer charging may become 
a.diffusion-controlled process. 
2.3 Parsons-Zobel plot 
This method rests on the comparison of the experimental data with the double 
layer theory. The difference with respect to the previous one is that this is 
a multiple-point and not a single-point method. 
2.3.1 Principles. Originally, the method stemmed from the application of the 
Gouy-Chapman-Stern theory of the double layer refined by Grahame (GCSG model), 
according to which the interface is depicted as equivalent to two capacitors 
in series. The interfacial capacitance per unit surface area is given by (ref. 
25): 
l / C  = 1 / C i  + l / c S  
(3.1) 
where Cd 
is the capacitance associated with the diffuse layer (on the solution 
side of the interface) end Ci is the inner layer capacitance associated with 
an ion-free 
layer of solution adjacent 
to the solid surface. The model 
predicts that cS depends on the electrolyte concentration while 0 is not 
directly measurable but i t  can be derived from eqn.(3.1) provided the ions are 
not specifically adsorbed. If the interface has an area A .  
eqn.(3.1) may be 
rewritten as: 
(3.2) 
where Cd is given by the Gouy-Chapman theory in terms of the unit surface area 
(Sl units: F m-2). Subscript T has been introduced - cf eqn(l.2) - to denote 
the total capacitance, ie T C  = CA (SI units: F). The experimental evidence 
indicates that Ci 
is in fact independent of electrolyte concentration in the 

COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
absence of ionic specific adsorption (refs. 25,26). Thus, a plot of 1 / T C  
(experimental quantity) vs 1 1 0  (calculated for different concentrations of 
the electrolyte) will result in a straight line whose slope and intercept give 
1/A and T C ~ ,  
respectively (refs. 27.28). 
In more recent theories the physical separation of the interface into an inner 
and a diffuse layer is not included as a necessary concept (ref. 29). The 
reciprocal of the capacitance of the electrode/solution interface turns out to 
be described by a power series with respect to the Debye length, x-1: 
If the surface area is made explicit, eqn.(3.3) becomes: 
~ / T C  
= ax-i/A + b x o / A  + cxl/A +..... 
(3.4) 
The first term depends on the square root of the electrolyte concentration as 
in the Gouy-Chapman theory, the second term is independent of the electrolyte 
concentration as the inner layer capacity does in the GCSG model, and the 
third term becomes important only at high electrolyte concentrations, say 
> 1  mol dm-3. 
Although some evidence for the importance of the third term is experimentally 
available 
(ref. 30), 
in the electrolyte concentration range up to ca 
1 mol dm-3 eqn.(3.4) is equivalent to eqn.(3.2) and can be used to derive the 
real surface area. Thus, this method is in fact not bound to the validity of 
any existing specific double layer theory. 
2.3.2 Limitations. Equation (3.2) has been verified in the case of liquid 
electrodes, including Ga. It is however inconvenient for such electrodes since 
a single-point experiment at the diffuse layer minimum may be sufficient ( c f  
section 2). For liquid electrodes conformation to eqn.(3.2) is often used to 
verify the absence of specific adsorption (ref. 25). 
For the applicability of the method to solid electrodes the electrode surface 
must be absolutely homogeneous and the measured capacitance must be frequency 
independent. Thus, i t  is strictly valid only for single crystal 
face 
electrodes (ref. 31). 
lnhomogeneities on the surface result in a marked curvature of the plot of 
l/TC vs 1 / C a  
(refs. 31.32). Paradoxically, the method is useful to measure 
surface 
roughness, 
but 
rough 
surfaces 
of 
single 
crystal 
faces 
are 
inhomogeneous so that the requirements for the applicability of the method are 
lost. In any case the asperities which can be "seen" by this method are those 
of 
height 
greater 
than 
the 
diffuse 
layer 
thickness 
at 
the 
highest 
concentration (normally 1 mol dm-3 since the mod,el probably breaks down in 
more concentrated solutions). ie of the order of 1 nm. 
2.3.3 
Eveluetions. While the method is unacceptable for polycrystalline 
surfaces in principle, i t  can be reasonably used with polycrystalline metals 
of low melting points (soft surfaces) since inhomogeneities are of minor 
effect on the electronic structure of these surfaces. Thus, the method is to a 
first approximation acceptable with Pb, Sn, Cd, In, Bi. 
With single crystal faces the applicability of the method depends on the 
extent of the surface defects. If the surface is perfect, the method serves to 
give an exact measure of the geometric surface which in case of complex 
electrode shape is difficult to determine optically. If the surface shows only 
small deviations from ideality (roughness factor < 
l.l), the method will give 
the real surface within a few percent (2-3X). Better resolution is probably 
possible by a somewhat different approach based on trials (refs. 26.32). The 
most probable roughness factor is that resulting in the most regular variation 
of Ci with potential. The approach is more empiric because i t  is not based on 
a model but on an intuitive view of how a capacitance curve should be as a 
function of potential around the zero charge. I t  seems to work with silver, 
but there are problems with Au. At the moment the latter approach lacks the 
general validity necessary to be recommended here. I t  necessitates further 
investigation. 
The applicability of the method to disperse systems (mainly ionic solids) is 
still under evaluation (refs. 33.34). 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
719 
2.4 
Hydrogen adsorption from solution 
The method is used a s  a rule with a few transition metals showing hydrogen 
adsorption 
in 
potential 
regions 
prior 
to 
massive 
Hz 
evolution. 
The 
experimental technique may be cyclic voltammetry or current step (chrono- 
potentiometry) (refs. 35,36). The method has been established mainly with Pt 
electrodes (ref. 37), but i t  has been extended to Rh and lr (refs. 38,39), and 
to Ni (refs. 40.41). 
2 . 4 . 1  
Principles. 
The charge under 
the voltammetric peaks for hydrogen 
adsorption or desorption (or associated with the appropriate section of the 
potential-time curves). corrected for double layer charging ( i e  the capacitive 
component), is assumed to correspond to adsorption of one hydrogen atom on 
each metal atom of the surface ( 9 ) .  The charge associated with a one-to-one 
H-M correspondence per unit surface area ( Q s )  
is calculated on the basis of 
the distribution of metal atoms on the surface. This is well defined for a 
perfect single crystal face (ref. 42), whereas i t  is taken as an average value 
between the main low-index faces for polycrystalline surfaces. The resulting 
value is as a rule very close to that pertaining to the (100) face (ref. 43). 
The true surface area is thus derived from: 
A = Q / Q s  
(4.1) 
In the c a s e  of polycrystalline Pt the accepted value is 210 pC cm-2, based on 
the assumption that the density of atoms on such a surface is 1 . 3 1 ~ 1 0 1 5  cm-2 
(refs. 44,45). 
The validity of the method implies that the point where hydrogen adsorption is 
complete can be exactly identified, and that the coverage is completed before 
the rate of hydrogen evolution becomes significant. In addition, i t  rests on 
the assumption that there is a definite quantitative relation between the 
charge measured and 
the amount of 
substance deposited, ie total 
charge 
transfer takes place from the adsorbate to the metal. Finally, no alteration 
of the surface upon adsorption is assumed to take place. These assumptions are 
common also to methods 5 and 6. 
2.4.2 Limitations. Some of the assumptions on which the method rests may not 
be valid. 
In particular, adsorption may 
take place with partial 
charge 
transfer, and phenomena related to surface alteration may also occur upon 
deposition of species from the solution. 
The completion of the monolayer probably takes place only with Pt electrodes 
whereas with Rh and lr such condition is not fulfilled. This involves some 
independent determination of coverage by pseudo-capacitance measurements which 
introduces additional uncertainties. The identification of the end-point for 
adsorption is also a problem since its position depends on the operating 
conditions ( e g  the partial pressure of Hz gas). 
I t  has been suggested that 
this point is better seen at very low temperatures (ref. 39), which introduces 
the assumption that the temperature does not modify the situation essentially. 
Alternatively, the end-point can be attained by extrapolating Q to infinite 
sweep rate which enables a separation between adsorption and faradaic charges 
for Hz evolution to be achieved (ref. 46). 
The method cannot be used with metals absorbing hydrogen such a s  Pd. Hydrogen 
absorption a t  low potential sweep rates ( e g  < 5  mV s - 1 )  is also a problem with 
highly porous electrodes (ref. 47). The independence of Q on the sweep rate 
should 
be 
ascertained 
to 
find 
out 
the 
best 
experimental 
conditions. 
Extrapolation to infinite sweep rate (or current pulse) could in principle 
separate adsorption from absorption. However, distorsion of the voltammogram 
due to ohmic drops and/or kinetic restrictions may appear at high sweep rates, 
especially with highly porous materials. The problem of the overlapping of the 
hydrogen and oxygen adsorption regions is more serious and prevents the 
application of the method to easily oxidizable transition metal such a s  Ni. 
Fe, R u ,  Os, etc. 
The method has been applied also to finely divided powders (ref. 48). In the 
case of supported metals, the H atoms deposited on the metallic particles may 
diffuse 
along 
the 
surface 
to 
regions where 
the 
support 
is 
uncovered 
(spillover). Spillover effects may render the results of hydrogen adsorption 
ambiguous, thus invalidating the quantitative significance of the measured Q .  
The absolute significance of the accepted Q
s
 is questionable. Apart from the 
distribution of the adsorbate which might be verified spectroscopically (but 

720 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
adsorption in solution does differ from the gas phase situation because of the 
competition with solvent molecules), the assumption that the surface density 
of atoms is a 
constant for a given metal is inconsistent with the widely 
diffuse idea of basic unreproducibility of polycrystalline surface structures. 
The adsorbability of hydrogen varies very much on different crystal faces 
(refs. 42,49). In addition, the double layer correction, a s  usually made, is 
arbitrary. Besides being in principle unfeasible, the separation of "faradaic" 
and the capacitive charges rests on the assumption that the interfacial 
capacitance is constant over the potential region of hydrogen adsorption, and 
equal to its magnitude in the potential region prior to hydrogen discharge. 
However, the very presence of the adsorbate may modify the capacitative 
parameters of the phase boundary. 
Another aspect to be taken into account is the influence of ions on hydrogen 
adsorption 
(ref. 50). 
The height 
of 
the peaks and 
their position 
are 
influenced by 
the nature 
of 
the 
electrolyte. 
Ionic 
adsorption may 
be 
significant at the potentials where hydrogen is adsorbed or even evolved. 
2.4.3 Evaluations. This is the only method which enables an in situ approach 
to the real surface area of d-metal 
electrodes to be attempted. The total 
inaccuracy and unreproducibility of these measurements can be expected to be 
about + l o %  (refs. 43,46), which is quite satisfactory in this case. Although 
surface area values for different metals estimated with this approach may not 
bear the same physical significance, the method allows a good normalization of 
experimental data for the same metal. The reliability of the method depends 
very much on the cleanliness of the electrode surface (hence of the solution) 
which should be ascertained before conducting the specific determinations for 
the measurement of the real surface area. 
2.5 Oxygen adsorption from solution 
The method is applicable to metals showing well developed regions for oxide 
monolayer formation and reduction. In addition to some d-metals, i t  has been 
used with Au for which the previous technique cannot be applied since no 
hydrogen adsorption region is recognizable. 
2.5.1 Principles. The method rests on the same grounds a s  the previous one 
(ref. 51). Oxygen is assumed to be chemisorbed in a monoatomic layer prior to 
0 2  evolution with a one-to-one correspondence with surface metal atoms (ref. 
52). This implies that the charge associated with the formation or reduction 
of the layer is: 
8 = 2 e N ~ n A  
(5.1) 
where NA is the Avogadro constant, and ro, the surface concentration of atomic 
oxygen, is assumed to be equal to fi. the surface density of metal atoms. From 
the value of lh per unit surface area, the value of a s ,  the reference charge, 
is calculated so that: 
A = Gb/C&- 
(5.2) 
The approach implies that: 
Q l - / Q .  = 2 
(5.3) 
so that the accepted value for polycrystalline Pt is 420 pC cm-2. A value of 
390210 pC 
cm-2 has been suggested for polycrystalline Au (refs. 52.53). 
Calculated values of Q -  for Au single crystal faces are also available (ref. 
54), 
2.5.2 Limitations. Oxygen adsorption usually results in oxide formation by a 
place-exchange mechanism. This leads to Q 
being a function of time. The 
potential where the monolayer is completed is difficult to assess. Sometimes 
overlapping of oxygen and hydrogen adsorption regions occurs. 
Qp 
may be measured either during oxygen adsorption (positive potential sweep 
or positive current pulse) (ref. 52) or during adsorbed oxygen reduction 
(refs. 55,56). In the former case 8 may include oxidizable impurity effects 
and some charge associated with evolved 0 2 .  In the latter case, the adsorbed 
monolayer may in fact be a multilayer (oxide film) of undefined stoichiometry. 
The double layer correction usually implies that G I  
is constant and equal to 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
721 
that in the double layer region prior to oxide formation. The correction may 
come out to differ depending on the direction of potential sweep (or on the 
sign of the current pulse). 
A s  for the absolute value of 8.. the method suffers from the same short- 
comings as Q+. 
( c f  section 4 ) .  
2.5.3 
Evaluations. The method 
is 
less reliable 
than 
that 
based 
on H 
adsorption, but in some cases i t  is the only applicable of the two (eg A u ,  
Pd). 
The reliability decreases a s  the affinity of the metal 
for oxygen 
increases. Thus, 
i t  should be the best 
for Au, for which however 
the 
stoichiometry of the oxide formed is uncertain. If anodic sweeps or current 
pulses are used, QJ should be determined down to constant values a s  the 
experimental parameter is varied. Also, the determination of the potential 
range where 
eqn.(5.3) 
is verified 
(for 
the metals 
allowing 
that) may 
constitute an indicative criterion of the absence of anomalous effects. This 
entails a careful selection of the limits of the potential range where QJ 
should be determined. The cleanliness of the surface and the solution should 
be ensured. Using cathodic sweep or current pulses may enable a single-point 
experiment to suffice. However, the condition of 80 = 1 should be ascertained 
if an accepted praxis does not exist. 
The method can be used with A u  electrodes since H adsorption does not take 
place, but 
i t  is to be borne in mind that the treatment the surface is 
subjected to may not be without any effect on its structure, especially in the 
case of single crystal faces. 
2.6 Underpotential deposition of metals 
This method has been used for electrodes for which neither of the previous 
ones can be applied, eg Ag (ref. 57). Cu (ref. 58). and for metals for which a 
better separation between H and 0 adsorption cannot be achieved, eg Ru (ref. 
59). An advantage of this method over method 4 (hydrogen adsorption) is that 
no spillover effects are expected, hence selective deposition is possible. 
Thus, the method may be particularly convenient to determine the (active) 
surface of supported electrodes where the (inactive) support comes in contact 
with the solution (ref. 60). 
2.6.1 Principles. The charge associated with the underpotential deposition of 
a 
suitable metal 
ion 
is measured 
usually 
by 
voltammetry. 
The maximum 
adsorption in a monolayer is calculated on the basis of a chosen model so that 
the surface area of the sample is given by: 
A = Q/Q. 
( 6 . 1 )  
Usually, Ag and C u  adatoms are used. 
2.6.2 Limitations. This method suffers from the same shortcomings a s  method 4, 
in particular the correction for double layer charging is arbitrary and the 
identification of the end point for the metal adsorption is uncertain. In 
addition, ( i )  the UPD region may interfere with hydrogen or oxygen adsorption, 
( i i )  the surface distribution of the U P D  species may be unknown, ( i i i )  the 
adatom deposition may occur with partial charge transfer thus making the value 
of Q *  specifically system-dependent, and (iv) the usual assumption of one-to- 
one correspondence with H and 0 adsorption may not be valid in the case of UPD 
because the new phase formation may result in more condensed monolayers. 
multilayers or cluster growth (ref. 61). Thus, in the case of P b  on Cu ( 1 1 1 )  
the coverage has been found 
(ref. 58) to correspond 
to a 
close-packed 
configuration, while in the case of P b  on Ru the one-to-one correspondence 
(epitaxial growth) is more probable (ref. 59). The occurrence of the one or 
the other possibilities depends on a number of factors including size ratio 
between supporting metal and UPD metal, strength of the bond between overlayer 
and support in comparison with lateral interactions in the monolayer, 'etc. 
The calculation of Q. 
for polycrystalline surfaces is based on empirical 
considerations. The same is also the case of single crystal faces for which 
the method gives strictly the number of surface active sites rather than the 
true surface area. 
The response of 
the single crystal 
face is however 
different from that of the polycrystalline surface of a given metal because of 
the possible penetration of the discharged atoms into grain boundaries in the 
latter case. 

722 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
2.6.3 Evaluations. The reproducibility of the measurements is usually high. If 
established knowledge about the system does not exist, the formation of a 
monolayer should be checked experimentally. The surface distribution of UPD 
metal atoms should be assessed also on the basis of spectroscopic data for the 
same system in gas phase adsorption, where however the situation may not be 
the same in view of the absence of the competitive effect of solvent 
adsorption at the solid/liquid interface (ref. 62). 
In the case of epitaxial growth, the value of Q s  
is expected to depend on the 
surface structure of the sample, whereas this is not the case if close-packed 
monolayers are formed. 
The methods of monolayer formation are claimed (ref. 57) to be more sensitive 
than those based on double layer charging since the charge spent in UPD is as 
a rule one order of magnitude higher. However, this consideration is tenable 
only in case double layer charging is operated by the same technique a s  that 
used to measure Q .  
I t  is to be borne in mind that UPD may have undesired effects on the 
properties of the electrode surface owing to retention of some UPD atoms in 
the metal lattice even after complete desorption. and to possible surface 
reconstruction (refs. 63-65). 
2.7 Voltammetry 
In some cases none of methods 4-6 can be used because neither hydrogen nor 
oxygen adsorption, nor UPD takes place. This may be the case of non-metallic 
electrodes (refs. 66-68). Voltammetry. chronopotentiometry, current step and 
potential 
step techniques, differential 
chrono-potentiometry, etc. 
(ref. 
69.70). can be used to determine the apparent total capacitance of the 
electrode surface. The voltammetric approach, which is the most popular, is 
described in some details below. 
2.7.1 Principles. Voltammetric curves are recorded in a narrow potential range 
(a few tens of mV) at different sweep rates (ref. 69). The current in the 
middle of the potential range is then plotted as a function of the sweep rate. 
Under the assumption that double layer charging is the only process, a 
straight 
line 
should be 
obtained, whose 
slope gives the 
differential 
capacitance (total value) of the interface: 
r C = dQ/dE = Idt/dE = I/(dE/dt) 
(7.1) 
The capacitance thus obtained is then compared to some reference value 0 so 
that the surface area is obtained from: 
A = r C / 0  
( 7 . 8 )  
The method is not different in substance from that in sec. 2 except for the 
fact that the technique used is not specific for capacitance measurement and 
is generally applied to large surface area and porous electrodes. 
2.7.2 Limitations. This method has been several 
times applied to oxide 
electrodes. The assumption of 0 = 60 pF cm-2 for the capacitance of the unit 
true surface area of an oxide (irrespective of its nature) (ref. 67) is not 
established. The dependence of capacitance on potential for oxides is unknown, 
so that the error may be very large. Since voltammetric curves of oxides show 
maxima related to surface redox processes, the value of capacitance may differ 
in different potential regions (ref. 71). 
Porous materials or oxide electrodes usually show a dependence of I on sweep 
rate due to exclusion of some less accessible surface at the highest rate 
(ref. 71). The mechanism of charging of oxide electrodes is more complex than 
that of metals since i t  is also governed by pH through surface proton exchange 
(ref. 72). The state of charge of a surface is thus strongly dependent on the 
solution pH. Therefore, the determinations should at least be normalized to a 
reference pH. 
2.7.3 Evaluations. The method has no universal significance since 0 has only 
an 
empiric validity. No 
comparison 
is quantitatively 
possible 
between 
different oxides since the physical meaning of the charge may change in the 
different cases. Nevertheless, the method is useful for an internal comparison 
for a given material, provided the technique is normalized to appropriate 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
723 
experimental conditions. 
The comparison of capacitance values between different oxides is also 
invalidated by the fact that the fraction of surface sites being oxidised or 
reduced in a given potential range may differ for different systems. The 
determination of an absolute capacity has been attempted in some cases by 
using an independently determined BET surface area (ref. 68). However, while 
this approach does not add anything to the validity of an internal comparison, 
i t  adds the vexing question of the relative meaning of in situ and ex situ 
surface area determinations, relevant also to other methods dealt with in this 
document . 
2.8 Negative adsorption 
The method has been proposed for large surface area solids suspended or 
colloidal ly dispersed in an electrolyte solution (ref. 73). In principle, i t  
can also be used with massive systems. 
2 . 8 . 1  Principles. The method assumes the validity of the diffuse layer model. 
Ions are repelled from surfaces carrying charges of like sign. The Gouy- 
Chapman theory predicts that their negative surface excess (depletion) is 
charge (potential) dependent and reaches asymptotically an almost constant 
value at relatively small charges (at potentials in the OHP, outer Helmholtz 
plane, not too far from zero). A s  a consequence of the repulsion into the 
solution, the concentration level of these species is increased in the bulk 
since they are excluded from all the interfacial regions (refs. 7 4 - 7 6 ) .  
The method usually employed involves the analytical determination of the 
change in the concentration of the negatively adsorbed ion in the solution. 
The surface area is proportional to the measured Ac through the following 
equation: 
A = B Vt (Ac/c)c1/2 
( 8 . 1 )  
Vt 
is the total liquid volume where the solid is suspensed and B is a constant 
for a given electrolyte type and charge sign on the solid surface. Normally, 
negative adsorption is measured at negatively charged surface since the 
probability of specific adsorption of cations is more remote. 
2 . 8 . 2  Limitations. Since the increase in concentration (Ac) is usually small, 
this sets a lower size limit to the specific area that can be measured. The 
potential at the OHP or the charge of the diffuse double layer must be known 
to apply the method not far enough from the zero charge condition where 
negative adsorption has not yet reached its limiting value. With porous 
solids, the negative adsorption from the pores is incomplete because of double 
layer overlap. In some cases the response of the method is unreliable because 
the technique is extremely sensitive to the release of traces of impurities 
from the solid. 
Different equations have to be used depending on whether flat or spherical 
double layers are best approximated (ref. 77). The results can be unreliable 
if inhomogeneous suspensions are dealt with. In any case, being a double layer 
technique, i t  can reveal surface asperities whose height is comparable to the 
diffuse layer thickness. 
2 . 8 . 3  Evaluations. The particle size of the disperse solid should be as 
homogeneous as possible. The method is best suited for crystalline non-porous 
solids. In general, negative adsorption measurements can be performed at one 
concentration, but a check of the applicability of the technique is obtained 
by plotting VtB(Ac/c) vs c-112. A straight line of slope A should be obtained. 
The potential a t  the OHP should not be < 1 5 0  mV, otherwise i t  should be fairly 
accurately known ( c f  sec. 8 . 2 ) ;  
the surface area to be measured must be 
greater than 1 m2 g - 1 ;  the interparticle distance in the suspension should be 
more than 10 times the diffuse layer thickness. The analytical technique to 
determine Ac should be precise owing to the small value of Ac. A method to 
alleviate the strict analytical requirements has been proposed (ref. 78). 
However, if all recommended conditions are met, the accuracy may be of the 
order of flOX. 
The method is not a routine one and must be assessed case by case. 

724 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
2.9 Ion-exchange capacity 
This method has been specifically suggested for some oxides such a s  MnOz (ref. 
79) and tested also for SiOz (ref. 80). Compared to the previous method, i t  is 
still a double layer approach, but based on positive adsorption. 
2.9.1 Principles. Specific adsorption on oxides is substantially an ion- 
exchange process (ref. 72). Surface complexation of the surface OH groups 
takes place through the release of acidity (ref. 81). For instance: 
I 
I
0
 
MnloH + Znz+ + M n /  ‘Zn + 2H+ 
I ‘OH 
I ‘ o /  
( 9 . 1 )  
The method 
is based 
on the determination (radiochemically or by other 
analytical means) of the amount of complexing ions taken up by the oxide 
surface. The surface area is then calculated by assigning a given cross- 
section to the adsorbate (ref. 82). 
2.9.2 Limitations. Specific adsorption does not necessarily go to completion, 
ie not all available surface sites undergo ion exchange ( c f  9.3). This has 
been ascertained even in the case of MnOz. The maximum amount taken up by the 
oxide surface depends on the nature of the solid, presumably on its acid-base 
properties (ref. 81). The pH of the solution plays a paramount role and the 
amount adsorbed will depend on i t  (ref. 79). 
The cross-sectional 
area assigned to the adsorbate (Zn++ is that usually 
recommended) will depend on the distribution of the adsorbing sites on the 
oxide surface and has n o  definite physical meaning, since i t  is as a rule 
established so as to bring the calculated area into agreement with the BET 
surface area. This makes the method not an absolute one, since the results are 
complicated by the problem of identity between BET and in situ wet surface 
area. 
2.9.3 Evelustions. This method has been scrutinized only for MnOz and the 
procedure has been normalized to this particular oxide. The maximum surface 
coverage on A1203 has been found to be lower than on MnOz 
(ref. 81). An 
attempt with RuOz has resulted in a surface area three times lower than the 
BET value (ref. 83). Moreover, also in the case of MnOz, the claimed 1 to 1 
correlation between BET and Z n + +  adsorption surface area deviates at high 
surface area values probably because of pore exclusion (ref. 81). Finally, the 
adsorbability of Z n + +  decreases with increasing calcination temperature, a 
fact which makes this method fully applicable (reliability apart) only with 
hydrous oxides (ref. 80). 
Since this method is insufficiently established, i t  is not recommended for 
routine use. 
2.10 Adsorption of probe molecules from solution 
The method is usually applied to high surface area and/or disperse solids 
(refs. 84-86). While ionic species are used a s  probe species in previous 
methods, neutral compounds are essentially used here. The amount of adsorbate 
may 
be 
detected 
directly 
or 
indirectly 
using 
electrochemical 
or 
non- 
electrochemical techniques. 
2 . 1 0 . 1  Principles. A probe molecule is adsorbed on the solid in solution and 
the extent of adsorption is determined analytically from the depletion in the 
solution. Dyes, 
surfactants, fatty acids and polyalcohols are generally 
suggested a s  suitable probe molecules (refs. 81.88). 
From the (apparent) 
monolayer surface concentration the surface area of the solid is derived by 
the equation : 
A = f. NAA. 
(10.1) 
where f. 
is the saturation coverage in mol cm-2 and A* 
is the projected area 
assigned to one adsorbed probe molecule. 
In the electrochemical variant, for instance, C O  and 1 2  
have been used as 
probe molecules (refs. 45.89-91). A monolayer of atomic iodine is assumed to 
form in the case of 12 adsorption. The amount of adsorption is determined from 
the charge required to anodically oxidize the adsorbate (anodic stripping). 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
725 
The electrode surface area is obtained by the equation: 
A = ( Q  - @ ) / n F r .  
(10.2) 
where Q is the charge associated with the anodic oxidation of the probe 
molecule, Gb is the charge spent in the same potential range in the absence of 
adsorbate (background charge), 
n 
is the charge number of the oxidation 
reaction (CO + C02; 1 + 1 0 3 - 1 ,  F the Faraday constant, and r. 
the ca1culeted 
saturation coverage in mol cm-2. 
2.10.2 Limitations. In the non-electrochemical 
version of this method, the 
major drawback is that the orientation and conformation of the adsorbate may 
depend on surface charge, on surface coverage, and on the nature of the 
adsorbent and of the solvent (refs. 62,92). Therefore the value of A* 
does not 
possess a 
certain physical significance. In addition, the adsorbing species 
may produce micelles in solution and at the surface, a s  well as multilayers, 
so that i t  is often necessary to introduce a correcting factor (refs. 93,94). 
The value of r. 
is usually derived from extrapolation procedures based on a 
specific isotherm. The obtained value may not correspond to a 
complete 
monolayer if the competition with the solvent is strong. Finally, adsorption 
of hydrophilic molecules on hydrophobic surfaces is generally weak and gives 
no practical basis for surface area determinations. 
The electrochemical detection of the adsorbate by "anodic stripping" (in the 
case of CO and 1 2 )  suffers from the same shortcomings as the methods based on 
H, 0 and metal adsorption (methods 4 to 6) with the additional problem that 
the "background charge" usually includes processes of surface oxidation which 
may be affected by the presence of the adsorbate. The surface stoichiometry of 
the adsorbed layer has been found to depend on the metal nature and on the 
crystallite size in the case of CO (ref. 45). The assumption of a close-packed 
monolayer 
of 
unassociated 
atoms 
of 
iodine 
or 
of 
C O  
may 
not 
be 
straightforwardly extensible to all systems. 
2.10.3 Eveluetions. Large molecules may generally not have access to pores, 
cracks or grain boundaries so that different surface areas can be obtained by 
using different molecules (ref. 87). This may enable the external from the 
internal surface area to be separated. Another possibility is to follow the 
rate of adsorption; the area accessible to the adsorbate can then be evaluated 
as a function of time. 
A s  in previous cases, this method can be used to assess the relative size of 
two or more solids of the same nature. The absolute values of surface area are 
vitiated by the assumption of complete coverage at saturation or of a given 
molecular orientation and conformation. This makes the comparison of the 
results for different solids rather difficult. 
The electrochemical variant should be used only with electrode materials for 
which 
the surface stoichiometry of adsorption and 
the structure of 
the 
adsorbed layer have been reliably established, bearing in mind that, due to 
its nature, 
the 
approach 
is particularly 
affected by 
the 
presence 
of 
oxidizable organic impurities. 
2.1 1 Mass transfer 
This method has been particularly suggested for surface area determination of 
complicated objects in galvanic depositions (ref. 95) but i t  is in fact used 
much more frequently, even in research situations. I t  can in principle be used 
for any system irrespective of the extent of the surface area. 
2.11.1 Principles. Under the assumption of homogeneous current distribution, 
the current associated with the charge transfer to a reactant whose supply is 
controlled by diffusion is given by (refs. 96-99): 
I = nFADc/S 
( 1 1 . 1 )  
where D is the diffusion coefficient, c the bulk concentration and d 
the 
thickness of the diffusion layer. Under the proviso that c = c at t = 0 and c 
= 0 at the electrode surface at t > 0, S at time t is given by: 
(11.2) 

726 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
From ( 1 1 . 1 )  and (11.2) the measured current is related to the surface area by: 
A = I(nDt)l/2/nFDc 
(11.3) 
The measurement is carried out potentiostatically by recording the current a s  
a function of time. 
Equation (11.3) is strictly 
electrode. For non-linear dif 
I = nFADcC(nDt)-1/2 + 
I = nFADcC(nDt)-i/2 + 
I = nFADcC(nDt)-1/2 + 
where r is the radius of the 
Thus, a plot of I vs t-112 wi 
valid only for linear diffusion at a plane 
usion the complete equations are the following: 
1-11 
(spherical electrode) 
(11.4) 
r-1 + ..I (disk electrode) 
(11.5) 
O.5r-1 - ..I (cylindrical electrode) 
(11.6) 
sphere, the disk or the cylinder, respectively. 
1 give a straight line of slope nFAcCD/n)1/2 for 
~ 
linear diffusion ( c f  eqn.Cll.3)). while i t  can be approximated to a straight 
line with the same slope for non-linear diffusion. 
A variant of this method (mainly applied to voltammetric situations) makes use 
of 
a 
linear 
potential-time 
scan 
instead 
of 
stationary 
potentiostatic 
conditions. If the solution is quiescent, the current as a function of 
potential goes through a maximum (j,) given by (ref. 100): 
j, = A(kn3/2&1/2cg)v1/2 
(11.7) 
where & and CB are the diffusion coefficient and the bulk concentration of 
the reacting species B ,  respectively. n is the charge number of the electrode 
reaction, v the potential sweep rate and k a numerical constant which is 
determined empirically. The method is tested by checking the functional 
dependence of j, on the two parameters, A and v. 
Equation (11.7) was originally derived for one-dimensional convection-free 
linear diffusion, but it is also obeyed in experiments with unshielded 
electrodes possessing a hemispherical diffusion domain in chronopotentiometry 
and chronoamperometry for short transition times. 
2 . 1 1 . 2  Limitations. The method is not limited by the surface size but simply 
by the sensitivity of the measuring apparatus. Nevertheless, the applicability 
calls for an homogeneous distribution of current which is difficult to achieve 
precisely a t  surface asperities. Since the diffusion layer thickness has a 
macroscopic order of magnitude, the surface roughness detected by this 
technique is of the same order of magnitude, ie >lo-100 pm. 
The current measured may contain an unknown contribution from surface 
modifications of the electrode, although cathodic polarization is usually 
suggested. For the correct applicability of the method, the current yield of 
the probe reaction must be strictly unity. 
For purely diffusive systems, the thickness of the diffusion layer varies with 
time; this may be a problem for rough and porous electrodes, in that different 
effective surface areas may be determined at different times. Using convective 
systems (eg pipe flow, rotating disc, etc) for which the thickness of the 
diffusion layer can be controlled although i t  will depend on the convection 
conditions. This will make the experimental approach simpler but the ambiguity 
of the physical meaning of the measured surface area remains. 
2.11.3 Evaluations. 
This 
method 
is 
not 
suitable 
for 
surface 
area 
determinations to be used in systems where atomic roughness is important. I t  
is applicable to systems for which knowledge of a self-consistent macroscopic 
surface area, which may be higher than A s ,  but lower than the real surface 
area, (eg large electrode surfaces of complicated shapes) is all that is 
needed. 
3. EX SlTU METHODS 
3.1 Adsorption of probe molecules from gas phase 
The well-known BET (from Brunauer, Emmett and Teller) (ref. 101) method 
belongs to this category; i t  is undoubtedly the most popular technique to 
measure surface areas in all branches of surface chemistry. 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
727 
3 . 1 . 1  Principles. Probe molecules are adsorbed from the gas phase onto the 
solid surface a s  a function of gas pressure. The amount adsorbed in a mono- 
layer (saturation surface concentration, r.) is derived from an appropriate 
treatment of 
the adsorption data on the basis of a specific adsorption 
isotherm. Finally, the surface area is calculated from fr after assignment of 
an effective cross-sectional area A* 
to the adsorbate molecule (ref. 102). 
The most popular treatment makes use of the BET isotherm to derive rr, but 
variants have been suggested and used (ref. 103). In particular, f. 
is derived 
from the first monolayer region, but 
i t  can also be obtained from the 
multilayer region (ref. 104). Selective adsorption on some specific sites can 
be 
achieved 
by 
using 
molecules 
undergoing 
chemisorption 
instead 
of 
physisorption a s  implied in the BET treatment. In this case the experimental 
data are as a rule worked out on the basis of different 
isotherms ( e g  
Freundlich's) (ref. 105). 
3 . 1 . 2  Limitations. I t  is not the purpose of this document to discuss the basic 
validity of this method. Being an ex s i t u  technique, what is to be assessed is 
its relevance to the electrochemical situation. 
Various kinds of probe molecules can be used: N2, K r ,  Ar mostly (ref. 106), 
but also H2O (refs. 107,108) and n-butane (ref. 109). and for chemisorption 
C02, 0 2 .  CO. N20, (refs. 105, 110,111) etc. Different surface area values are 
usually obtained with different adsorbates. This is especially true for porous 
solids since the accessibility of probe molecules to inner surfaces depends of 
course on their size. Thus, the surface area on the basis of N2 (assigned area 
0.162 nm2) (ref. 102.109), the classic probe molecule in this technique, may 
be 
lower than that with Kr or HzO. Accordingly, hydrocarbons are large 
molecules and can only give the external surface. The use of two judiciously 
chosen probe molecules can enable external 
and 
internal 
surfaces to be 
distinguished (ref. 107). 
The most vexing question in this method is obviously the value of A* 
(ref. 
102,112). Hexagonal close packing is usually assumed to calculate the cross- 
sectional area: 
A* 
= 1.091 
( M / P N A  1 2 1 3  
(12.1) 
where 1.091 is a packing factor, M is the molar mass of the adsorbate, p is 
its density and NA 
the Avogadro constant 
(a cube of space was instead 
originally suggested by Emmett and Brunauer to be occupied by each adsorbate 
molecule). However, there is the possibility of choosing between the density 
of the liquid and the density of the solid, depending on the degree of 
localization of adsorption. This is tantamount to implying that the cross- 
sectional area of the adsorbate may depend on the strength of the interaction 
with the solid adsorbent. Despite the usual claim that in the case of N2 the 
constancy of A* 
can be taken with confidence over a large class of solid 
surfaces, i t  is now well established (refs. 109,112) that there exists an 
inverse proportionality between A* 
and the C constant in the BET equation 
(which is a measure of the degree of interaction between adsorbent and 
adsorbate). Therefore the same value of A* 
might not be valid with different 
surfaces. Moreover, for sufficiently strong interaction, adsorption may become 
localized so that also the assumption of close arrangements may break down. 
3.1.3 Evaluations. 
If 
disperse 
solids 
are 
the 
working 
systems 
under 
investigation, the BET surface area may be too low due to some packing of the 
grains during the surface area measurement. The situation may be opposite if a 
packed layer is scraped from the support to measure its specific area, or if 
the powder on which the BET measurement has been carried out is then used to 
prepare pellets, since packing may be lower under the conditions of surface 
area determination. 
Use of H2O as the probe molecule may appear as most appropriate for studies 
relevant to electrochemical interfaces. However, H2O is reactive towards most 
catalysts so that localized adsorption, and sometimes decomposition, may take 
place. Moreover, liquid water may have a different access to the more internal 
surface than the vapour at relatively low pressure due to surface tension and 
hydrostatic pressure effects. 
I t  is very difficult to establish a firm correlation between the BET (or 
other) surface area and the electrochemical active surface area, each method 
measuring a surface which responds to the specific probing. However, the BET 
is a routine method and its use for a first approximation assessment is always 

COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
welcome. Caution should be exerted in treating the obtained values on a 
quantitative (or semi-quantitative) basis. Attempts should always be made to 
complement 
the 
BET 
surface 
area 
measurements 
with 
other 
independent 
approaches. 
I t  is to be mentioned in this context that modern surface spectroscopic 
techniques such as AES, have been recently used to extract information about 
adsorbate absolute packing density 
(ref. 113). 
Although 
not 
explicitly 
developed 
for 
surface area 
measurements, 
the approach 
contains such 
a 
potentiality implicitly (ref. 92). 
3.2 X-ray diffraction 
The method, which gives information on crystallite size, is a s  a rule applied 
to crystalline powders 
(refs. 
114,115) although 
i t  can be extended 
to 
supported microcrystalline layers (ref. 116). A variant, the small-angle X-ray 
scattering (SAXS), will not be treated here because its use is not common with 
electrode systems. 
3.2.1 
Principles. X-ray 
diffraction 
lines 
broaden 
(ref. 
117) when 
the 
crystallite size falls below about 100 nm: at this size broadening in excess 
of the instrumental width is a s  a rule not obtained. If Gaussian shape is 
assumed for the diffraction lines, then (ref. 118): 
we.2 
= W i n 2  + Wpr2 
(13.1) 
where subscripts refer to experimental, instrumental and particle-size widht, 
respectively. win is usually obtainable by a calibration procedure. Thus, ~
p
.
 
can be derived. The average crystallite diameter d is then obtained by the 
classical Scherrer equation (refs. 119,120): 
d = KX/W.~ c o s  e 
(13.2) 
where X 
is the X-ray wavelength, wax is here expressed in radians and K 
(Scherrer's constant) depends on how the peak width is measured; as a 
rule, 
the full width at half maximum (FWHM) is measured, for which K takes a value 
close to 0.9. More sophisticated deconvolution procedures have also been 
proposed (ref. 121). 
Once d is known, A can be calculated by assuming a particular geometry for the 
particles (refs. 122,123). Thus, for cubic particles, the surface area is a 
max i mum : 
A = 6& 
(13.3) 
whereas i t  is a minimum for spherical particles: 
A = n& 
(13.4) 
3.2.2 Limitations. T h e  method is restricted to crystalline solids of about 
3.5-60 nm particle size. Below 3.5 nm the diffraction line is very broad and 
diffuse or even absent, while above ce 60 nm the change in lineshape is too 
small. The crystallite size obtained with this approach is averaged over the 
sample volume penetrated by the incident radiation, therefore the resulting 
value is a volume average diameter ( c f  method 15). Strictly, the surface area 
calculated by means of eqns.(13.3) 
and (13.4) is thus not the true surface 
area since the latter is related to the surface average crystallite size. 
Other factors may contribute to the observed linewidth, eg difference in 
lattice 
parameters 
of 
the 
individual 
particles. 
Moreover, 
the 
exact 
geometrical shape of the particles is not known. The size distribution may be 
very wide (ref. 124). 
In the case of supported material, pellets and layers the whole surface of 
each single particle is not exposed to the environment. A packing factor is to 
be adopted to take account of the excluded area (ref. 122). Also in the case 
of disperse systems and powders, the grains may be composed of more than one 
crystellite which causes the real surface area to deviate from the calculated 
one the more the smaller the particle size (ref. 125). 
3.2.3 Evaluations. This technique is very useful to obtain rapid information 
about the dispersion degree of a catalyst present at the surface of a support 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistw 
729 
or even embedded in i t  (ref. 126). However, for surface area measurements i t  
should be used only in conjunction with other more appropriate techniques, 
mainly to obtain a more complete analysis of the morphology of a solid 
surf ace. 
3.3 Porosimetry 
The methods considered above make i t  possible to estimate the specific area of 
solids and also in principle to find the pore distribution according to the 
radius. These methods could be named molecular or atomic probe methods (ref. 
127). In addition, a number of nonadsorptive methods of porosity determination 
have been developed to estimate the real surface area. 
3.3.1 Principles. The method is based on the relation betwen the real surface 
area of a sample and its porosity 8 :  
(14.1) 
where rmin and r m a x  are the minimal and maximal pore radii, and 
Bf is the 
shape factor. For cylindric pores, Bf = 2 ,  for pores between globula, Br 
= 
1.45. Av 
is the surface area per unit volume of the material. Therefore, ( 1 -  
B o )  is the true volume occupied by the solid phase (total volume minus pore 
volume). Porosity B0 
is the ratio of the volume of open pores (connected with 
the outer surface of a solid) to the total volume of the porous solid. 
According to the eqn.(l4.1), the real surface area can be calculated from the 
integration of the integral curve of radius pore distribution 8(r). Such a 
curve is called an integral porosimetric curve or a porogram. 
Actually there are many methods for measuring porograms: ( 1 )  the method of 
pressing mercury into mercury unwettable porous solids (mercury porosimetry); 
(2) small angle X-ray scattering; (3) electron and optical microscopy; ( 4 )  
centrifugal porosimetry; ( 5 )  capillary displacement of wetting liquids by gas; 
( 6 )  methods based on gas penetration; (7) method of standard porosimetry. 
While in individual concrete cases each of these methods can be used, the 
methods of mercury and standard porosimetry are the most universal ones. 
When using the method of mercury porosimetry (ref. 128) the side surface of 
pores into which mercury is pressed can be obtained directly by integration of 
the Young-Dupr6 equation: 
(14.2) 
where B is the contact angle of mercury on the solid boundary, y the mercury 
surface tension, p 
the pressure, V, 
the volume of mercury pressed into the 
sample, 
the pressure as the pores are completely filled with mercury. 
The method of standard porosimetry (ref. 129) is based on the measurement of 
the equilibrium curve of relative moisture capacity, that is the relationship 
between the liquid contents of a test sample and of a standard one with a 
known pore distribution. The moisture capacity is the ratio of the volume of 
the liquid content in a solid to the volume of the solid. If the sample 
contains hydrophilic (metal. oxide, etc) and hydrophobic (polymeric binder) 
components, when using the method of standard porosimetry with two different 
wetting liquids (eg, water and liquid hydrocarbons) i t  is possible to identify 
hydrophilic, hydrophobic and mixed pores. Thus, the possibility arises of 
charcaterizing the real surface areas with the above-mentioned different types 
of pores. 
3.3.2. Limitations. 
The main 
difficulty 
lies 
in 
the 
determination 
of 
micropores with radii (2 nm, ie of molecular sizes (ref. 130). Such pores 
could form the main part of the real surface area value in some materials. The 
lower limit in pore diameter measurable by the H g  porosimeter is set by the 
highest pressure at which the H g  can be forced into the pores of the sample. 
In this respect, the technique presents the difficulty that high pressure can 
disrupt the pore system to be measured. 
Another complication is related to the difficulty of choosing the shape factor 
for real materials. In the method of mercury porosimetry the value of A 

730 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
depends on the 8 estimation. The latter depends on the nature of the material 
and also whether during the measurements mercury is pressed into pores or, on 
the 
contrary, i t  
leaves 
them 
(ref. 
1 3 1 ) ,  
and on 
the possibility 
of 
amalgamation and contamination of mercury. The last two factors also change y .  
The often observed hysteresis phenomena also complicate the measurements and 
the interpretation of the results (ref. 1 3 2 ) .  
3 . 3 . 3 .  Evaluations. The method can be applied to materials with sufficiently 
extended surface. The reliability of results depends largely on the choice of 
the method of porogram measurement and of its conditions. For electrode 
materials, especially multicomponent porous electrodes, the most promising is 
the standard porosimetry method, which allows to distinguish the surface by 
the hydrophobicity factor. Other advantages of this method are its relative 
simplicity, the possibility of acheeving conditions of measurement resembling 
most closely the real operating ones and of monitoring the surface area during 
the measurements thanks to the nondestructive nature of this method. 
3.4 Microscopy 
Microscopy is one of the direct physical methods of determination of the real 
surface area. The capacity of resolution goes from the macroscopic to the 
atomic size depending on the technique. Thus, the order of magnitude of the 
range of observation of the optical microscopy is the millimeter, that of the 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) the micrometer, and that of the scanning 
tunneling microscopy (STM) the nanometer. The progress in the development of 
STM is making its use in s i t u  possible (ref. 1 3 3 ) .  
3 . 4 . 1  Principles. The method is based on the determination of the particle 
size of the material by optical or electron microscopes (refs. 7 , 1 3 4 ) .  In its 
simplest version the specific surface area is calculated according to the 
equation : 
Am = (Bd/p)(2nidi2/2nidi3) 
( 1 5 . 1 )  
where p is the real density of the material. and ni is the number of particles 
with size di. The shape factor Bd amounts to 6 for strictly spheric and cubic 
particles, while 
i t  exceeds 6 
for any other shape. Since the size of 
individual particles can be determined with this technique, the results of the 
microscope 
can 
be 
compared 
both with 
data 
from direct 
surface 
area 
measurements, giving values based on cis, 
and with those from the X-ray 
analysis, giving values based on dv. 
In the method of projections, the surface area is calculated via the Cauchy 
expression: 
A = (42a,/n) 
( 1 5 . 2 )  
or 
AV = (4npNmZap/n) 
( 1 5 . 3 )  
where Pe, is the sum of the plane projected areas of n randomly oriented 
convex particles and N, is the number of particles per unit mass. 
The modification of 
the microscopic 
method 
based 
on the 
interference 
phenomenon makes i t  possible to determine the real surface area without 
dispersion of material. 
Electron microscopy can be used for surface roughness measurements with 
lateral and vertical resolution of 1 nm. Transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) offers the possibility of providing direct imaging of individual metal 
particles and is one of the most used and useful tool to characterize size, 
shape 
and 
distribution 
of 
supported metal 
particles 
(refs. 
1 3 5 , 1 3 6 ) .  
Crystallites as small as 1 nm have been resolved and average crystallite 
diameters of less than 2 nm have been obtained by TEM in its bright-field and 
dark-field versions. 
The fullest data on the surface profile of massive electrodes and in principle 
on the A value can be obtained by means of the scanning tunneling microscopy 
(STM) with a high resolving power (nanotopography). At ambient pressure, 
lateral and vertical resolutions of 1 nm and better than 0 . 1  nm, respectively, 
can be achieved (refs. 137-139). 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
731 
3 . 4 . 2  Limitations. Eqns.(l5.1) to (15.3) are statistical and their use gives 
satisfactory results in cases where the size of a great number of particles 
(at least hundreds) 
is known, and especially when 
the particle 
size 
distribution is sufficiently wide-ranging. The method is limited to materials 
with 
particles 
of 
no 
porosity 
and 
roughness. 
The 
reliability 
of 
A 
determination depends on the accuracy of the Bd 
estimation. When electron 
microscopy is used, samples have to withstand high vacuum treatment without 
showing structural changes. Electron bombardment 
should not affect the 
material. In transmission electron microscopy the accelerating voltage may be 
up to several hundred kV. The presence of contaminations (vacuum is rarely 
better than 10-10 bar) and the heating due to the incident electron beam could 
result in adsorbate-induced changes of the surface structure. In the STM 
method, where the electron energy lies in the meV and eV range and is in 
principle non-destructive. the accuracy of surface area determination depends 
on the accuracy of the corresponding shape approximation of surface formation. 
STM is a promising new tool for surface characterization (refs. 140-143). but 
as a technique for quantitative measurement of real surface areas i t  has not 
yet been unambiguously established. 
3.4.3 Evaluations. In the simplest version, the method is applicable for 
estimating the surface of some types of nonporous powder-like electrode 
materials. I t  gives reliable results i f  the particle size exceeds (by one 
order of magnitude or more) the distance resolved by the microscope ( 1  pm for 
optical and I nm for electron microscopes). The best results are obtained for 
solid samples with a narrow distribution of particles and shape close to 
spherical. The sample observed in the microscope must be representative of the 
original material. Therefore, several samples should be examined. 
3.5 Other methods 
This group includes methods, that are relatively seldom used in surface area 
estimations or are limited to special cases (refs. 86,126,144-146), such a s  
( 1 )  weighing of saturated vapour adsorbed on a solid, (2) thermodesorption 
methods, (3) determining the surface area by measurement of the wetting heat 
(absolute Harkins-Jura method), (4) gravimetric and volumetric methods, (5) 
methods 
based 
on 
liquid 
or 
gas 
permeability 
and 
displacement, 
(6) 
radioisotopic methods, (7) methods of surface potential measurement of pure 
metal thin films, ( 8 )  methods based on the measurement of metal dissolution 
rate, (9) methods based on the hysteresis of adsorption isotherms, (10) 
methods for one-dimensional roughness (profile) determination (profilometer, 
stereoscan, etc.), 
( 1 1 )  
optical techniques affected by surface roughness 
(scattering or diffuse reflectance of light). (19) measurements based on NMR 
spin-lattice relaxation. 
4. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
1 1 .  
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
Pure Appl. Chem. 58, 437 (1986). 
Quantities, Units and Symbols in Physical Chemistry, Blackwell, Oxford (1987) 
Pure Appl. Chem. 31, 579 (1972); 46, 71 (1976). 
Pure Appl. Chem. 37. 499 (1974). 
Pure Appl. Chem. 58, 967 (1986). 
B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature, Freeman, San Francisco (1982). 
C. R. Adams, H. A. Benesi. R. M. Curtis and R. G. Meisenheimer, J. Catal. 1 ,  336 (1962). 
D. C. Graharne. J. Am. Chem. SOC. 79, 701 (1957). 
V. I. Melik-Gaikasian, V. V. Voronchikhina and E. A. Zakharova, Elektrokhimiya 12, 1420 
(1968). 
J. Broadhead. G. J. Hills and D. R. Kinnibrugh, J. Appl. Electrochem. 1 ,  147 (1971). 
E. M. L. Valeriote and R. G. Barradas, Chem. lnstr. 1. 153 (1968). 
G. H. Nancollas and C. A. Vincent, Electrochim. Acta 10, 97 (1965). 
G. S. Smith, Trans. Fareday SOC. 47, 63 (1951). 
R. G. Barradas and F. M. Kimnerle. Can. J. Chem. 45, (1967). 
M. Carla, G. Papeschi and R. Guidelli, J. Electroanal. Chem. 127. 267 (1981). 
J. Campbell, J. Phys. D 3, 1499 (1970). 
J. W. Perrarn, J. B. Hayter and R. J. Hunter, J. Electroanal. Chem. 42, 291 (1973). 
R. R. Salem, Zh. Fiz. Khim. 50, 2667 (1976). 
V. S. Boitzov, 1. V. Osipov, E. V. Stenina, N. V. Fedorovich and B. B. Damaskin. 
Elektrokhimiya 13, 1588 (1977). 
D. M. Mohilner, J. C. Kreuser, H. Nakadornari and P. R. Mohilner, J. Electrochem. SOC. 
123. 359 (1976). 
M. Breiter, J. Electroanal. Chem. 81, 275 (1977). 

732 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
22 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 
73. 
74. 
75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 
I .  M. Novoselkii, N. I .  Konevskikh. L. Ya. Egorov and E. P. Sidorov, Elektrokhimiye 7, 
893 (1971). 
E. Robert, Oberf1.-Surf. 22, 261 (1981). 
T. Ohmori. J. Electroanel. Chem. 157. 159 (1983). 
R. Parsons and F. R. G. Zobel, J. Electroanel. Chem. 9, 333 (1965). 
G. Valette and A. Hamelin. J. Electroanal. Chem. 45. 301 (1973). 
D. 
1 .  
Leikis. K. V. Rybalka and E. S. Sevastiyanov in Adsorbtziys i Dvonoi 
Elektricheskii Sloi v Elektrokhimiyi, M. "Nauka" (1972). p. 5. 
A. N. Frumkin, Potenzialny Nulevogo Zariada, M. "Nsuka" (1979), p. 122. 
W. Schmickler and D. Henderson, Progr. Surf. Sci. 22, 323 (1986). 
L. Blum, D. Henderson and R. Parsons, J. Electroanal. Chem. 161, 389 (1984). 
I. A. Bagotskaya, B. B. Damaskin and M. D. Levi, J. Electroanal. Chem. 115, 189 (1980). 
G. Valette, J. Electroanal. Chem. 138 37 (1982); 224, 285 (1987). 
P. Siviglia, A. Daghetti and S. Trasatti. Coll. Surf. 7, 15 (1983). 
S. Ardizzone and S. Trasatti, J. Electroenal. Chem. 251. 409 (1988). 
F. G. Will and C. A. Knorr, 2. Elektrochem. 64, 258 (1960). 
A. N. Frumkin in P. Delahay and C. W. Tobias (Eds.), Advances in Electrochemistry and 
Eletrochemicel Engineering, Vol. 3, Wiley-Interscience. New York. 1963, p. 287. 
S. Gilrnan. J. Phys. Chem. 67. 78 (1963); J. Electroanel. Chem. 7. 382 (1964). 
S. Gilman, J. Phys. Chem. 71. 4339 (1967). 
R. Woods, J. Electroenal. Chem. 49, 217 (1974). 
D. V. Sokolskii, B. Yu. Nogerbekov, N. N. Gudeleva and R. G. Mustafina, Elektrokhimiya 
22, 1185 (1986). 
A. G. Pshenichnikov, Mat. Chem. Phys. 22, 121 (1989). 
S. Motoo and N. Furuya, J. Electroanal. Chem. 167, 309 (1984). 
M. Hayes and A. 7. Kuhn, Appl. Surf. Sci. 6. 1 (1980). 
T. Biegler, D. A. J. Rand and R. Woods, J. Electroanel. Chem. 29, 269 (1971). 
J. Bett. K. Kinoshita, K. Routsis and P. Stonehart. J. Catal. 29, 160 (1973). 
G. G. Barna, S. N. Frank and T. H. Teherani, J. Electrochem. SOC. 129, 746 (1982). 
T. Kessler, A. M. Castro Lura. W. E. Triaca and A. J. Arvia, J. Appl. Electrochem. 16, 
693 (1986). 
M. R. Tarasewich. K. A. Radushkina and R. Kh. Burstein. Elektrokhimiya 3, 455 (1967). 
B. Love, K. Seto and J. Lipkowski. J. Electroanal. Chem. 199, 219 (1986). 
D. Armand and J. Claviliver, J. Electroanal. Chem. 263, 109 (1989). 
M. Breiter. K. Hoffmann and C. Knorr, Z. Elektrochem. 61, 1168 (1957). 
A, A. Michri, A. G. Pshchenichnikov and R. Kh. Burshtein, Elektrokhimiya 8, 364 (1972). 
R. K. Burshtein, Elektrokhimiya 3, 349 (1967). 
H. Angerstein-Kozlowska, B. E. Conway, A. Hamelin and L. Stoicoviciu. Electrochim. Act8 
31, 1051 (1986). 
S. B. Brumner and A. C. Makrides. J. Electrochem. SOC. 
111, 1122 (1964). 
V. A. Vicente and S. Bruckenstein, J. Electroanel. Chem. 82, 187 (1977). 
A. Vashkyalis and 0. Demontaite. Elektrokhimiya 14. 1213 (1978). 
H. Siegenthaler and K. Jiittner. J. Electroanel. Chem. 163. 327 (1984). 
M. A. Quiroz. Y. Meas. E. Lamy-Pitara and J. Barbier, J. Electroenal. Chem. 157. 165 
(1983). 
T. D. Gladisheva, B. I .  Podlovchenko and Z. A. Zikrina. Elektrokhimiya 23, 1446 (1987). 
B. I. Podlovchenko and E. A. Kolyadko, J. Electroanel. Chem. 224, 225 (1987) 
A. T. Hubbard et a l . ,  J. Electroanal. Chem. 168, 43 (1984). 
C. L. Scortichini and C. N. Reilley, J. Eletroanal. Chem. 139, 233 (1982). 
C. L. Scortichini, F. E. Woodward and C. N. Reilley, J. Electroanal. Chem. 139, 265 
( 1982). 
P. C. Andricacos and P. N. Ross, J. Electroanal. Chem. 167. 301 (1984). 
G. Singh, M.H. Miles and S. Srinivasan in A.D. Franklin (Ed.), Electrocatalysis on Non- 
metallic Surfaces, NBS Spec. Publ. N. 455 (1976) p. 289. 
J. O'M. Bockris and T. Otagawa, J. Electrochem. SOC. 131, 290 (1984). 
L. D. Burke and 0. J. Murphy, J. Electroanal. Chem. 96, 19 (1979). 
B. V. Tilak, C. G. Rader and S. K. Rangarajan, J. Electrochem. SOC. 
124, 1879 (1977). 
K. Micka and I .  Rouser, Electrochim. Acta 32, 1387 (1987). 
R. Boggio, A. Carugati and S. Trasatti, J. Appl. Electrochem. 17, 828 (1987). 
A. Daghetti, G. Lodi and S. Trasatti. Mat. Chem. Phys. 8, 1 (1983). 
R. K. Schofield. Nature 160, 480 (1974). 
H. J. Van de Hull and J. Lyklema, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 23, 500 (1967). 
J. Lyklema and H. J. Van den Hull, Proc. Int. Symp. IUPAC, Surface Area Determination, 
Butterworths, London, 1970, p. 341. 
J. Lyklema in J. O'M. Bockris, D. A. J. Rand and B. J. Welch (Eds.), Trends in 
Electrochemistry, Plenum, New York, 1977. p. 159. 
H. J. Van den Hull, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 86, 173 (1982). 
M. C. H. Mouat. Coll. Surf. 24, 51 (1987). 
A. Kozawa, J. Electrochem. SOC. 106. 552 (1959). 
A. Kozawa, J. lnorg. Nucl. Chem. 21, 315 (1961). 
A. Kozawa, S. C. Paterniti and T. A. Reilly in R. S. Alwitt (Ed.). Oxide-Electrolyte 
Interfaces, The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, N.J.. 1973, p. 72. 
A. Kozawa and T. Takai in T. Takamurs and A. Kozawa (Eds.), Surface Electrochemistry, 

Real surface area measurements in electrochemistry 
733 
83. 
84. 
85. 
86. 
87. 
88. 
89. 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 
95. 
96. 
97. 
98. 
99. 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 
114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 
118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 
126. 
127. 
128. 
129. 
130. 
131. 
132. 
133. 
134. 
135. 
136. 
137. 
138. 
Jpn. SOC. Sci. Press. Tokyo, 1978. p. 56. 
T. Arikado, C. lwakura and H. Tamura, Electrochim. Acta 22, 513 (1977). 
C. H. Giles, A. P. D‘Silva and A. S. 
Tuvedi in Proc. lnt. Symp. “Surface Area 
determination”. Butterworths, London, 1969, p. 317. 
C. H. Giles and A. P. D’Silva. Trans. Faraday SOC. 65. 1943,2516 (1969). 
A. W. Adamson. Physical Chemistry of Surfeces, 4th Ed., J. Wiley and Sons, New York- 
London, 1982. 
A. KellomYki, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 105. 270 (1985). 
R. Brina and A. De Battisti, J. Cbem. Educ. 64, 175 (1987).. 
P. N. Ross. K. Kinoshita, A. J. Scarpellino and P. Stonehart, J. Electroanal. Chem. 59. 
177 (1975). 
K. Kinoshita and P. N. Ross, J. Electroanel. Chem. 78, 313 (1977). 
J. F. Rodriguez, T. Mebrahtu and M. P. Soriaga, J. Electroanel. Chem. 233, 283 (1987). 
G. N. Salaita, L. Laguren-Davidson, F. Lu, N. Walton, E. Wellner, D. A. Stern, N. 
Batina, D. G. Frank, C.-H. Lin, C. S. Benton and A. T. Hubbard, J. Electroanel. Chem. 
245, 253 (1988). 
R. S. Hanscn, Y. Fu and F. E. Bartell. J. Phys. Cbem. 53, 769 (1949). 
T. Gu, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 85. 601 (1982). 
J. C1. Puippe, Oberf1.-Surf. 26, nr. 6 (1985). 
P. J. Lingane. Anel. Chem. 36. 1723 (1964). 
L. Meites, Polarographic Techniques, 2nd Ed., Wiley, New York, 1965. 
J. E. B. Randles, Trans. Faraday SOC. 44, 327 (1948). 
A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem. 33, 11 (1961). 
R. J. Lutz, A. Menawat and J. I .  Peterson, AIChE J. 28. 1027 (1982). 
S. Brunauer, P. H. Ermnett and E. Teller, J. Am. Chem. SOC. 60. 309 (1938). 
D. Dollimore, P. Spooner and A. Turner, Surf. Technol. 4, 121 (1976). 
P. T. John, R. K. Aggarwal and K. V. Chetty, J. Sci. lnd. Res. 36. 415 (1977). 
N. E. Buyanova, R. V. Zagrafskaya, A. P. Karnaukhov, and A. S. Shepelina, 
Kinet. 
Katal. 24, 1187 (1983). 
Ma. M. Martin, J. M. D. Tascon, J. L. Garcia Fierro. J. A. Pajares and L. 
Gonzalez 
Tejuca, J. Catsl. 71, 201 (1981). 
S. J. Rotheberg et al.. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 116, 541 (1987). 
M. A. F. Pyman and A. M. Posner, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 66. 85 (1978). 
A. Nag, B. Sadhukhan and D. K. Chattoraj, Coll. Surf. 23, 83 (1987). 
S. Lowell, J. Shields, G. Charalambous and J. Manzione, J. Colloid lnterface Sci. 86, 
191 (1982). 
R. Kh. Burshtein, V. S. Vilinskaya, N. G. Bulavina and V. Ya. Shepelev, Elektrokhimiya 
13, 1550 (1977). 
Y. L. Sandler. J. Electrochem. Sac. 121, 764 (1974). 
A. P. Karnaukhov, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 103. 311 (1985). 
J. L. Stickney, S. D. Rosasco, D. Song, M. P. Soriaga and A. T. Hubbard. Surf. Sci. 
130, 326 (1983). 
J. L. Lemaitre, P. G. Menon and F. Delannay in F. Delannay (Ed.), Charecterizetion of 
Heterogeneous Catalysts, Dekker, New York, 1984. 
J. R. Anderson, Structure of Metallic Catalysts, Academic Press, London, 1975. 
W. Fischer and P. Wissmann, Appl. Surf. Sci. 11/12, 109 (1982). 
A. Renouprez in D. H. Everett and R. H. Ottewill (Eds.), Surface Area Determination, 
Butterworths, London, 1970, p. 361. 
B. E. Warren and B.L. Averbach. J. Appl. Phys. 21, 595 (1950). 
P. Schemer, Gttinger Nachr. 2, 98 (1918). 
R. J. Farrauto, AlChE Symp. Ser. 70, 9 (1974). 
B. Moraweck, Ph. de Montgolfier and A. J. Renouprez. J. Appl. Cryst. 10, 191 (1977). 
V. D. Allred, S. R. Buxtonb and J. P. McBride, J. Phys. Cbem. 61, 117 (1957). 
W. S. Brey Jr. and B. H. Davis, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 70, 10 (1979). 
A. M. Skundin. Elektrokhimiya 20, 713 (1984). 
L. Hernh, J. Morales and J. L. Tirado, J. Colloid lnterface Sci. 115, 109 (1987). 
T. A. Dorling and R. L. Moss, J. Catal. 7, 378 (1967). 
S. J. Gregs and K. S. W. Sing, Adsorption, Surface Area and Porosity, Acad. Press. 
Ins., London-N.Y., 1982. 
H. L. Ritter and L. C. Drake, lnd. Eng. Chem. 17, 782 (1945). 
Yu. M. Volfkovich, V. S. Bagobky, V. E. Sosenkin and E. I .  Shcolnikov, Elektrokhimiya 
16, 1620 (1980). 
B. H. Davis, Appl. Catal. 10, 185 (1984). 
A. Lane, N. Shah and Wm. C. Conner, J. Colloid lnterface Sci. 109. 235 (1986). 
Wm. C. Conner, A. M. Lane and A. J. Hoffman, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 100, 185 (1984). 
P. Lustenberger, H. Rohrer, R. Cristoph and H. Siegenthaler. J. Electroanal. Chem. 243, 
225 (1988). 
K. Kinoshita and P. Stonehart in J. O’M. Bockris and B. E. Conway (Eds.),Modern Aspects 
of Electrochemistry, Vol. 12, Plenum, New York. 1977, p. 183. 
D. W. Butler, Micron 4, 410 (1973). 
D. E. Fornwalt and K. Kinoshita, Micron 4, 99 (1973). 
G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, Sci. Am. 40 (August 1985). 
J. A. Golovchenko, Science 232. 48 (1986). 

734 
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
139. 
140. 
141. 
142. 
143. 
144. 
145. 
146. 
J. A. Garcia, A. M. Bard. R. Miranda, H. Rohrer, Ch. Gerber, R. Garcia Canth and J. L. 
Pena, Metrol. 21, 135 (1985). 
L. Vazques. J. Gomez. A. M. Baro, N. Garcia, M. L. Marcos, J. Velasco Gonzales, J. M. 
Vara, A. J. Arvia, J. Press. A. Garcia and M. Aguilar, J. h e r .  Chem. SOC. 109, 1730 
(1987). 
H.-L. Liu, F.-R. F. Fan, C. W. Lin et al. J. h e r .  Chem. SOC. 108, 3838 (1986). 
R. Miranda e t  el., Appl. Phys. Lett. 47, 367 (1985). 
L. Vasquez et el., J. Am. Chem. SOC. 109, 1730 (1987). 
J. M. 
Thomas and W. J. Thomas, Introduction to the Principles of Heterogeneous 
Catalysis, Acad. Press, London-New York, 1967. 
A. J. Salkind in E. Yeager and A. J. Salkind. Techniques of Electrochemistry, Vol. 1 ,  
J. Wiley and Sons, New York-London, 1972. 
C. L. Glaves. P. J. Davis and D. M. Smith, Powder Technol. 54, 261 (1988). 
