 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
King’s Research Portal 
DOI:
10.1038/nature13419
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication record in King's Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Laganowsky, A., Reading, E., Allison, T. M., Ulmschneider, M. B., Degiacomi, M. T., Baldwin, A. J., & Robinson,
C. V. (2014). Membrane proteins bind lipids selectively to modulate their structure and function. Nature, 510,
172-175. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13419
Citing this paper
Please note that where the full-text provided on King's Research Portal is the Author Accepted Manuscript or Post-Print version this may
differ from the final Published version. If citing, it is advised that you check and use the publisher's definitive version for pagination,
volume/issue, and date of publication details. And where the final published version is provided on the Research Portal, if citing you are
again advised to check the publisher's website for any subsequent corrections.
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognize and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
•Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the Research Portal for the purpose of private study or research.
•You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
•You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the Research Portal
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact librarypure@kcl.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate your claim.
Download date: 05. Jan. 2026

Membrane proteins bind lipids selectively to modulate their 
structure and function
Arthur Laganowsky#1,*, Eamonn Reading#1, Timothy M. Allison1, Martin B. Ulmschneider2, 
Matteo T. Degiacomi1, Andrew J. Baldwin1, and Carol V. Robinson1,*
1Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 5QY, UK 
2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Previous studies have established that the folding, structure and function of membrane proteins are 
influenced by their lipid environments1-7 and that lipids can bind to specific sites, for example in 
potassium channels8. Fundamental questions remain however regarding the extent of membrane 
protein selectivity toward lipids. Here we report a mass spectrometry (MS) approach designed to 
determine the selectivity of lipid binding to membrane protein complexes. We investigate the 
mechanosensitive channel of large conductance (MscL), aquaporin Z (AqpZ), and the ammonia 
channel (AmtB) using ion mobility MS (IM-MS), which reports gas-phase collision cross sections. 
We demonstrate that folded conformations of membrane protein complexes can exist in the gas-
phase. By resolving lipid-bound states we then rank bound lipids based on their ability to resist gas 
phase unfolding and thereby stabilize membrane protein structure. Results show that lipids bind 
non-selectively and with high avidity to MscL, all imparting comparable stability, the highest-
ranking lipid however is phosphatidylinositol phosphate, in line with its proposed functional role 
in mechanosensation9. AqpZ is also stabilized by many lipids with cardiolipin imparting the most 
significant resistance to unfolding. Subsequently, through functional assays, we discover that 
cardiolipin modulates AqpZ function. Analogous experiments identify AmtB as being highly 
selective for phosphatidylglycerol prompting us to obtain an X-ray structure in this lipid 
membrane-like environment. The 2.3Å resolution structure, when compared with others obtained 
without lipid bound, reveals distinct conformational changes that reposition AmtB residues to 
interact with the lipid bilayer. Overall our results demonstrate that resistance to unfolding 
correlates with specific lipid-binding events enabling distinction of lipids that merely bind from 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.L. (art.laganowsky@chem.ox.ac.uk) or C.V.R. 
(carol.robinson@chem.ox.ac.uk).
Author Contributions: A.L., E.R., and C.V.R. designed the research. A.L. and E.R. performed the experiments. T.A. assisted A.L. 
and E.R. in protein expression and purification. M.B.U. and M.T.D. carried out molecular dynamics. M.T.D. A.J.B. and A.L. 
performed post molecular dynamics analyses. A.L., E.R. T.A. and A.J.B developed IM-MS analysis software. A.L. and E.R. analyzed 
the data. A.L., E.R., and C.V.R. wrote the paper with input from the other authors.
Atomic coordinates and structure factors for the crystal structure have been deposited with the Protein Data Bank under accession 
code 4NH2. Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2014 June 5; 510(7503): 172–175. doi:10.1038/nature13419.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

those that modulate membrane protein structure and/or function. We anticipate that these findings 
will be influential not only for defining the selectivity of membrane proteins toward lipids but also 
for understanding the role of lipids in modulating function or drug binding.
Three membrane protein complexes were selected to give a range of topologies, oligomeric 
states and anticipated selectivity towards lipids: (i) the pentameric MscL from 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis with two transmembrane helices (TMH) per subunit and an 
intimate relationship with lipids10,11; (ii) the tetrameric water efflux channel AqpZ from 
Escherichia coli (E. coli) with six TMH for which associated lipid or detergent molecules 
have been revealed in crystal structures and in related homologues12,13; and (iii) the trimeric 
AmtB from E. coli, with eleven TMH involved in the transport of ammonia, for which no 
lipid binding has been observed to date in crystal structures14.
Our first objective for studying membrane protein lipid interactions by MS was to maintain 
the native state of these multimeric assemblies in the gas-phase, devoid of detergent from 
the micelles required for their introduction15, such that stabilization by lipid binding could 
be deduced (Fig. 1a). This had not been possible previously since the conditions needed to 
disrupt the micelle perturbed the folded state of membrane protein complexes. We screened 
non-ionic detergents16 and employed ion mobility MS (IM-MS) (Supplementary Video 1), a 
technique that measures the rotationally averaged collision cross sections (CCS) of protein 
complexes in the gas-phase17. We found that in detergents commonly used for structural 
studies (n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM), octyl glucose neopentyl glycol (OGNG) and n-
nonyl-β-D-glucopyranoside (NG)) the CCS of all charge states were significantly greater 
when emerged from the micelle than those calculated for the crystal structure, indicative of 
substantial gas-phase unfolding (Extended Data Figure 1). Interestingly for tetraethylene 
glycol monooctyl ether (C8E4) lower average charge states were observed with CCS in 
agreement with those calculated for the crystal structures, thus providing optimal conditions 
for MS of intact membrane protein complexes.
To assess individual lipid binding events we prepared a series of synthetic and natural lipid 
solutions and added these to protein complexes in C8E4 (Extended Data Figure 2). MscL 
was interrogated first, revealing well-resolved mass spectral peaks corresponding to 
populations of MscL in complex with one to five lipids (Fig. 1b and Extended Data Figure 
3). Unlike other biophysical approaches, which report an average of all species in solution, 
whether bound or unbound, discrete lipid-bound states can be resolved and interrogated 
individually, allowing us to obtain CCS for individual lipid-binding events and to assess 
their effects on stability. Obtaining the native state of these lipid-bound complexes enabled 
us to explore molecular dynamic simulations combined with filtering using CCS 
measurements18 to locate probable lipid-binding sites (Extended Data Figure 4-5 and 
Supplementary Discussion). We then applied collision-induced unfolding, analogous to that 
used previously for studying ligand binding to soluble complexes19. An increase in CCS, 
from the trend line calculated for the native state, is observed with increasing collision 
voltage and is assigned to highly extended conformers (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Video 2). 
All species, apo and one to five phospholipid-bound forms, are measured within the same 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

experiment enabling a direct comparison, and show less unfolding of native pentameric 
states as a function of lipid binding.
To extract quantitative values for the effects of lipid binding we applied an equilibrium 
unfolding model, used extensively in solution studies involving chemical denaturation20,21. 
Plotting CCS against collision voltage reveals unfolding trajectories from the native state, 
through intermediates, to extended forms. Importantly the oligomeric state is maintained 
throughout the unfolding experiment (Extended Data Figure 6 and Fig. 1c). We identified 
four distinct intermediate states in the unfolding trajectories and by comparing the apo form 
with lipid-bound states we calculated the stabilization imparted at the transitions by each 
lipid (see Methods). The stabilization computed for bound lipids allows us to compare and 
rank seven different lipids, as well as synthetic phosphatidylcholine (PC) lipids with chain 
lengths varying from C14 to C22. Despite differences in these lipid structures, we found that 
all stabilized MscL to a similar degree, consistent with a previous fluorescence study with 
engineered Trp residues22 (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Figure 3b-c). We also found that 
MscL avidly bound phosphatidylinositol phosphate (PI), greater than all other lipids 
investigated, conferring a large linear increase in stability upon binding multiple PI 
molecules.
We applied a similar procedure to AqpZ, revealing well-resolved lipid binding and a CCS in 
agreement with that of the crystal structure of AqpZ (Fig. 2a, and Extended Data Figure 7). 
Monitoring unfolding trajectories for lipid-bound states of AqpZ showed similar transition 
points between the different states that were largely independent of the bound lipid. This 
implies that the lipids investigated had similar effects on resistance to unfolding (Fig. 2b and 
Supplementary Video 3). As successive lipids are added, from one to three, stabilization is 
increased via regular increments consistent with a linear, cumulative effect. The only 
exception to this is cardiolipin (CDL), where binding resulted in a substantial increase in 
protein stability compared to all other lipids. Intrigued by this observation we performed 
functional assays23 of the channel reconstituted into liposomes of varying lipid composition. 
Water permeability assays of AqpZ reconstituted in a total polar lipid extract from a CDL-
deficient E. coli strain24 (BKT22) showed a dramatic reduction in water transport compared 
to the channel reconstituted in wild-type E. coli polar lipid preparations (EPL) (Fig. 2c and 
Extended Data Figure 8). Moreover, reconstituting AqpZ in a lipid preparation from strain 
BKT22 expressing cardiolipin synthase genes24, restores CDL to near wild-type levels 
(mole percentage of 6.6 versus 9.1), and results in water transport activity comparable to in 
EPL (Fig. 2c). These results clearly demonstrate CDL modulates the function of AqpZ.
Analogous IM-MS experiments carried out on AmtB show that resistance to gas-phase 
unfolding following binding of anionic lipids, phosphatidic acid (PA) and 
phosphatidylserine (PS), is not correlated with significant stabilization of the channel (Fig. 
3). Zwitterionic lipids, PC and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), confer only moderate 
stabilization. By contrast, addition of CDL or phosphatidylglycerol (PG) results in dramatic 
increases in stabilization with cumulative binding of PG increasing protein stability linearly 
(Fig. 3b, Extended Data Figure 7 and Supplementary Video 4). These results therefore 
reveal a defined selectivity for PG-like head groups.
Laganowsky et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

To understand the origin of this observed selectivity we crystallized AmtB in the presence of 
PG. A screen produced X-ray-grade crystals and led to structure determination at 2.3 Å 
resolution (Extended Data Table 1). The structure of AmtB is composed of three protein 
subunits, each comprising 11 TMH14, with two trimers located in the asymmetric unit (Fig. 
4). We resolved eight PG molecules in the electron density on the periplasmic side of AmtB 
(Extended Data Figure 9), a potential ninth PG molecule having ambiguous electron density. 
Two of the PG molecules are located in similar positions at the subunit interface, with 
headgroups not in contact with the protein (Fig. 4b). The overall structure is similar to the 20 
previously reported in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) determined from detergent-only 
environments. Major differences arise from a distinct conformational change in a loop, 
residues 70-81, forming a specific lipid-binding site (Fig. 4c, Supplementary Video 5, and 
Supplementary Discussion). PG forms hydrogen bonds to N72 and E70 and a water bridge 
to N79. F75 flips downward to interact with a lipid tail of PG. In addition, several residues 
are repositioned to interact with the phospholipid bilayer. L81 and I78 shift into the 
hydrophobic environment of the lipid bilayer. Significantly, W80 moves almost 4 Å (Cα to 
Cα), its sidechain rotated 160° compared to other structures. This rotation relocates the W80 
sidechain from a protein environment into one that is ideally positioned to interact with 
headgroups of phospholipids, consistent with their alignment along the lipid bilayer 
interface (Extended Data Figure 9d)25. Furthermore, mutation of N72 and N79 to alanine 
(AmtBN72A/N79A), engineered to abolish the specific lipid-binding site, results in the loss of 
PG induced gas-phase stability (Fig. 3b), consistent with our IM-MS approach identifying 
specific lipid binding events.
By resolving individual lipid-bound states of membrane protein complexes within the mass 
spectrometer, and interrogating their stability through gas-phase unfolding, we obtained 
quantitative values to rank lipid-binding interactions. MscL binds lipids non-selectively, 
without regard to particular headgroup or chain length, and binding of any lipid imparts 
comparable stability, in accord with the ability of the channel to bind and respond 
promiscuously to lipid composition11,26. The most significant cumulative effects on stability 
were observed upon binding of PI, proposed as the functional lipid in the Mycobacterium 
membrane involved in MscL mechanosensitivity9. Similarly, AqpZ was found to be non-
selective for a number of lipids suggesting comparable binding modes, in line with the two-
dimensional crystals of Aqp013,27. The only exception to this non-selective lipid binding is 
CDL, which significantly stabilizes AqpZ and directly modulates function, as suggested in a 
previous in vivo study28. Interestingly, CDL levels in E. coli depend on growth conditions, a 
higher abundance of CDL being present in the stationary phase24, implying AqpZ function 
is fine-tuned through modulation of CDL levels. In contrast to the other two systems our 
finding that AmtB responds only weakly to the majority of lipids is consistent with its 
extensive transmembrane structure and inherent stability devoid of the lipid bilayer29. 
However, its unexpectedly high selectivity for PG led to the first crystal structure of AmtB 
in complex with lipid, allowing effects on stability to be rationalized and further validated 
by mutation of residues forming the specific lipid-binding site.
By investigating a diverse set of membrane proteins and their lipid-binding properties we 
have extended many seminal studies1-8 by demonstrating different degrees of selectivity in 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

lipid binding with AmtB>AqpZ>MscL. Despite these differences in selectivity, in all cases 
the most stabilizing lipids have a direct influence on the structure and function of the 
membrane proteins studied, as proposed for PI binding to MscL9 and demonstrated for CDL 
and PG binding to AqpZ and AmtB respectively. As membrane proteins are intimately 
embedded in the bilayer, the relative lipid abundances as well as differences in selectivity 
can enforce the recruitment of a local lipid environment30 thus providing an elegant means 
for fine-tuning membrane protein structure and function.
Methods
Plasmid construction
Two expression plasmids were constructed by subcloning the multiple cloning site region 
from XbaI (New England Biolabs) and BlpI (New England Biolabs) of pET23b (Novagen) 
into the backbone pET15b (Novagen). The resulting engineered vector was linearized by 
NdeI (New England Biolabs) and XhoI (New England Biolabs), gel purified (QIAquick Gel 
Extraction Kit, Qiagen), and used in subsequent Infusion cloning reactions (Clonetech) to 
generate a TEV protease cleavable C-terminal fusion to superfolder GFP (subcloned from 
Gandhi et al. 201231) followed by a 6x His-tag or a TEV protease cleavable N-terminal 
fusion to maltose binding protein (MBP) preceded by a secretion signal peptide (pelB) and 
10x His-tag subcloned from Hilf et al. 200832. The resulting N- and C-terminal fusion 
vectors were linearized with NheI and XhoI or NdeI and NheI, gel purified, and used in 
subsequent Infusion cloning reactions. AmtB (residues 26-428), AqpZ and MscL genes were 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with Phusion high-fidelity DNA polymerase 
(New England Biolabs) from prepared E. coli BL21 (DE3) genomic DNA (Qiagen) or 
template plasmid DNA with primers designed for an Infusion cloning reaction using the 
manufacturer’s online tool. The PCR products were purified by agarose gel electrophoresis 
and extracted using the QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen). The PCR products and 
linearized vectors (described above) were used in Infusion cloning reactions (Clonetech) to 
generate MBP-AmtB, AqpZ-GFP and MscL-GFP. MBP-AmtBN72A/N79A was achieved by 
two-rounds of site-directed mutagenesis using a QuikChange Lightning Multi Site-Directed 
Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. AqpZ 
harboring a TEV protease cleavable N-terminal 6x His-tag (NHis-AqpZ) was constructed 
through an infusion cloning reaction of AqpZ and a custom pRSFDuet-1 vector (Novagen), 
N-terminal coding sequence between NcoI and BamHI was replaced with the following 
nucleotide sequence ccatgggcagcagccatcaccatcatcaccacgagaacctgtacttccagggtggatcc, 
linearized with BamHI and XhoI. All constructs were verified by DNA sequencing.
Generation of E. coli BL21(DE3) ΔmscL::KanR strain
Homologous recombination mediated chromosomal disruption of mscL was performed using 
the Gene Doctoring method33. Briefly, 900 base pairs flanking the 5′ and 3′ ends of the 
mscL gene were subcloned into the pDOC-K plasmid resulting in these regions flanking a 
kanamycin resistance (KanR) cassette. This plasmid and the recombineering plasmid, 
pACBSCE, were transformed into E. coli BL21 (DE3) Gold (Agilent). Homologous 
recombination was carried out by induction of λ–Red recombinase system and SceI 
endonuclease with arabinose. Recombinants harboring gene disruption with KanR were 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

selected on kanamycin and sucrose, and verified by colony PCR. Calcium chloride 
competent cells were made as described by Drew et al.34.
Membrane protein expression
MBP-AmtB and AqpZ-GFP plasmids were transformed into E. coli BL21 (DE3) Gold 
(Agilent). MBPAmtBN72A/N79A and NHis-AqpZ were transformed into E. coli 
OverExpress™ C43 (DE3) (Lucigen). MscL-GFP was transformed into E. coli BL21(DE3) 
ΔmscL::KanR (described above). Several colonies were inoculated into 50 mL LB Miller (5 
g yeast extract, 10 g peptone from casein, and 10 g sodium chloride per liter) and grown 
overnight at 37 °C. One liter of LB in 2 L shaker flasks was inoculated with 7 mL of 
overnight culture and grown at 37 °C until the culture reached an OD600 between 0.6-0.8. 
Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added to the culture at a final 
concentration of 0.5 mM and grown for 3 hours at 37 °C. Cells were harvested by 
centrifugation at 5,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Cell pellets were resuspended in phosphate-
buffered saline, pelleted by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C and stored at 
−80 °C.
Purification of membranes
Membranes were purified as described by Newby et al.35 with minor modifications. Cell 
pellets were thawed and resuspended at 20 mL per liter of culture in Buffer A (300 mM 
sodium chloride, and 20 mM 2-amino-2-hydroxymethyl-propane-1,3-diol (Tris), pH 7.4 at 
room temperature) supplemented with a complete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche) and 5 
mM beta-mercaptoethanol (BME). Cell suspension was passed several times through an 
M-110 PS microfluidizer (Microfluidics) at 19,000 psi. Insoluble material was pelleted by 
centrifugation at 20,000 g for 25 minutes at 4 °C. Membranes were pelleted by 
centrifugation at 100,000 g for 2 hours at 4 °C. Membranes were resuspended in ice-cold 
Buffer B (100 mM sodium chloride, 20% glycerol, 5 mM BME, and 20 mM Tris, pH 7.4 at 
room temperature), homogenized using a Potter-Elvehjem Teflon pestle and glass tube. For 
MscLGFP, glycerol was omitted from Buffer B. Resuspended membranes were used either 
directly or flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C.
AmtB-GFP detergent screen
A membrane protein detergent screen on AmtB-GFP was performed as previously 
described16 with minor modifications. Briefly, AmtB-GFP was extracted from purified 
membranes (described above) with 1-2% (w/v) of the detergent of interest in Buffer B and 
incubated for one to three hours at room temperature or overnight at 4 °C with gentle 
agitation. Insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 25 minutes at 4 
°C. The clarified supernatant was loaded onto small Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen) drip columns 
(Bio-spin Chromatography columns, Bio-Rad) and washed with several column volumes of 
Buffer C (200 mM sodium chloride, 20 mM imidazole, 5 mM BME, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0 at 
room temperature) supplemented with two times the critical micelle concentration (CMC) of 
the detergent of interest. AmtB-GFP was eluted with two column volumes of Buffer D (100 
mM sodium chloride, 250 mM imidazole, 5 mM BME, 2x CMC detergent of interest, and 
50 mM Tris, pH 8.0 at room temperature). Eluted protein was concentrated using a 100 kDa 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Molecular Weight Cutoff (MWCO) concentrator and buffer exchanged into MS Buffer (2x 
CMC detergent of interest and 200 mM ammonium acetate, pH 8.0 with ammonium 
hydroxide) using a centrifugal buffer exchange device (Micro Bio-Spin 6, Bio-Rad).
Purification of membrane proteins
MBP-AmtB, MBP-AmtBN72A/N79A and AqpZ-GFP were extracted from purified 
membranes in Buffer B supplemented with 200 mM OG and incubated with gentle agitation 
overnight at 4 °C. MscL was extracted from purified membranes with glycerol-free Buffer B 
supplemented with 1% OGNG. Extracted membrane proteins were clarified by 
centrifugation at 20,000 g for 25 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatant was filtered before loading 
onto a 5 mL HisTrap-HP column (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) equilibrated in Buffer E 
(200 mM sodium chloride, 10% glycerol, 20 mM imidazole, 0.025% DDM, and 50 mM 
Tris, pH 7.4 at room temperature). After the clarified supernatant was loaded, the column 
was initially washed with 40-50 mL of DDM-free Buffer E supplemented with 1% OG for 
MBP-AmtB and AqpZ-GFP, and 0.5% OGNG for MscL-GFP. Membrane proteins were 
then exchanged into several column volumes of Buffer E until a steady baseline was 
reached. Membrane protein fusions were eluted with a linear gradient to 100% in two 
column volumes of Buffer F (100 mM sodium chloride, 10% glycerol, 500 mM imidazole, 
0.025% DDM, and 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 at room temperature). Peak fractions were pooled, 
supplemented with 5 mM BME and His-tagged TEV protease36,37, and dialyzed against 
Buffer G (150 mM sodium chloride, 10% glycerol, 20 mM imidazole, 0.025% DDM, and 50 
mM Tris, pH 7.4 at room temperature) overnight at 4 °C. After overnight incubation, 
samples were filtered and passed back over a 5 mL HisTrap-HP column equilibrated in 
Buffer E. Flow through containing the untagged membrane protein was collected and 
concentrated using a 100 kDa MWCO concentrator. Notably, tag-removed membrane 
proteins with fusions to the C-terminus contained additional protein sequence 
ASGENLYFQ, or GAS for N-terminally tagged proteins, resulting from the TEV protease 
recognition sequence and cloning restriction site. Concentrated protein was either used 
immediately or flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. Protein concentration 
was measured using Biomate UV detector with the following calculated extinction 
coefficients38 of 1.57, 1.484, and 0.265 g/L•cm−1 for AmtB, AqpZ, and MscL, respectively.
NHis-AqpZ was purified as previously described39. Briefly, extracted and clarified 
membrane proteins were loaded onto a 5 mL HisTrap-HP column (GE Healthcare, 
Piscataway, NJ) equilibrated in buffer (200 mM sodium chloride, 10% glycerol, 20 mM 
imidazole, 1% OG, and 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 at room temperature). NHis-AqpZ was eluted 
with a linear gradient to 100% elution buffer (100 mM sodium chloride, 10% glycerol, 500 
mM imidazole, 1% OG, and 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 at room temperature) over two column 
volumes. Peak fractions containing NHis-AqpZ were concentrated prior to imidazole 
removal using two 5 mL HiTrap Desalting columns (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) in 
tandem. Peak fractions were pooled and NHis-AqpZ was concentrated using a 50 kDa 
MWCO concentrator.
Laganowsky et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Preparation of membrane proteins for native mass spectrometry
Either flash frozen samples thawed on ice or fresh samples were detergent exchanged by gel 
filtration chromatography. Membrane protein samples were injected onto a Superdex 200 
GL 10/300 (GE Healthcare) column equilibrated in Buffer H (130 mM sodium chloride, 
10% glycerol, and 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 at room temperature) supplemented with either 0.5% 
of C8E4, 0.4% of NG, 0.116% OGNG, or 0.025% of DDM. Peak fractions containing the 
detergent-exchanged membrane protein complex were concentrated. A 50 kDa MWCO 
concentrator was used to concentrate samples in the detergent C8E4 and 100 kDa MWCO 
concentrator used on membrane protein complexes in all other detergents. Concentrated 
proteins were either used directly or flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C. 
Notably, we found no observable difference in mass spectra quality after a single freeze-
thaw of membrane proteins throughout our purification regime. Purified membrane proteins 
were buffer exchanged into MS Buffer (two times the CMC of detergent of interest and 200 
mM ammonium acetate, pH 7.2-8.0 with ammonium hydroxide) using a centrifugal buffer 
exchange device (Micro Bio-Spin 6, Bio-Rad) as previously described16. Membrane 
proteins detergent exchanged into MS Buffer supplemented with C8E4 or OGNG could be 
flash frozen without compromising mass spectra quality unlike MS Buffer supplemented 
with NG or DDM.
Preparation and titration of phospholipids
Phospholipids were purchased from Avanti (Avanti Polar Lipids Inc., Alabama, USA) and 
prepared at stock concentrations of 10 mg/ml in 200 mM ammonium acetate pH 8.0 as 
previously described16. The membrane protein complex to phospholipid to detergent ratio 
(P:L:D) was optimized for each membrane protein complex to achieve consistency of 
nanoelectrospray and resolved mass spectral peaks of bound phospholipid throughout the 
gas-phase unfolding series (Extended Data Figure 2b). Phospholipid preparations were 
added to buffer exchanged membrane protein complexes followed by equilibration at room 
temperature for 10-30 minutes before MS analysis. Notably by MS we did not observe a 
significant increase in bound phospholipid with longer incubation times.
Mass spectrometry
Mass spectrometer settings were initially set to values for membrane proteins as previously 
described16 for a modified Q-TOF 2 mass spectrometer (Micromass, Manchester, UK) with 
a Z-spray source40. Typical instrument values were 5-7 μbar for source pressure, 1.5-1.8 kV 
for capillary voltage, 150-190 V for cone voltage, 1-10 V for extraction voltage, 180-200 V 
for collision voltage, argon for collisional gas, and 0.2-0.3 MPa argon gas pressure.
Ion mobility mass spectrometry
Ion mobility measurements were performed on a Synapt G2 (where noted) or on a modified 
Synapt G1 HDMS instrument with the travelling-wave ion mobility cell replaced by an 18-
cm drift cell with radial RF ion confinement and a linear voltage gradient to direct ions 
along the axis of transmission to the time-of-flight (TOF) mass analyzer41. The ion mobility 
mass spectrometer was typically set to a source pressure of 5-7 mBar, capillary voltage of 
1.4-1.7 kV, capillary nanoflow of 0.03-0.2 mBar and argon as collision gas with flow rate 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

set to 5-8 mL/min (~6.6-6.7 e−2 mBar). Collision voltage ranged from 50-240 V with 
measurements taken at 5 V and 2 V steps for monitoring gas-phase unfolding of membrane 
protein complexes. The sample and extraction cone, and trap bias voltages, quadrupole 
profile, and collision (trap) gas pressure were optimized for maximal ion intensity of the 
target membrane protein complex. Helium was the drift cell gas and was set to a pressure of 
~1.6-1.8 Torr (40 ml/min flow rate). Pusher time, pulse width and TDC inhibit were set to 
180, 7 and 7 μs, respectively. The ion guide/source (300 ms−1, 10 V), trap (300 ms−1, 0.2 V) 
and transfer (100 ms−1, 10 V) travelling wave velocities and wave heights were kept 
constant. The mobility release time was set at 200 μs with a trap voltage of 30 V and extract 
voltage of 10 V. Pressure and temperature of the ion mobility cell was measured directly.
Ion drift time (td) was determined as previously described41. Briefly, td was determined by 
subtracting the non-drift time component (to) from the ion arrival time (ta)
to was determined by extrapolation from linear plots of ta versus V−1 over ten different 
voltage potentials (Extended Data Figure 1d). Ion drift time was converted to a rotationally 
averaged ion-neutral collision cross section (CCS) (Ω) using the Mason-Schamp equation42
where z is the charge on the ion, μ the reduced mass of the ion-neutral in the drift chamber, 
N is the drift gas number density, kb is the Boltzmann constant, e is the charge on the 
electron, V is the potential voltage across the drift cell, p is the pressure of the drift cell, T is 
the thermodynamic temperature of the drift cell, L is the length of the drift tube, To is 
standard temperature, and po is standard pressure.
Travelling wave ion mobility measurements (TW-IMS) were performed on a commercially 
available Synapt G2 (Waters). Source pressure set to 5-7 mBar, capillary voltage of 1.4-1.7 
kV, capillary nanoflow of 0.03-0.2 mBar and argon as collision (trap) gas at flow rate of 8.0 
ml/min. Collision voltage ranged from 50-200 V with measurements taken at 5 V step 
intervals for monitoring gas-phase unfolding of membrane complexes. The sample and 
extraction cone and trap bias voltages, quadrupole profile, and collision gas pressure were 
optimized for maximal ion intensity of the target membrane protein complex. Helium was 
the IMS entrance cell gas set to a flow rate of 180 ml/min and the drift cell gas was nitrogen 
set to flow rate of 90 ml/min. The EDC delay coefficient was 1.57 μs. The trap wave 
velocity and wave height were 300 ms−1 and 8.0 V, respectively. The IMS wave velocity 
and wave height were 300 ms−1 and 30.0 V, respectively. The transfer wave velocity and 
wave height were 100 ms−1 and 2.0 V, respectively. The mobility release time was set at 
200 μs with a trap voltage of 30 V and extract voltage of 10 V. Gas-phase unfolding profiles 
are largely similar to those collected on a drift cell instrument (Extended Data Figure 6d).
Laganowsky et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Collision cross section calculations
The Projection Approximation (PA) calculation within a modified version of 
MOBCAL18,43,44 used to calculate the ΩPA from respective crystal structure coordinates. 
CCS values were corrected ΩCorr’ by the correction factor of 1.14 and missing residues 
between the protein construct (MExp) and crystal structure (MPDB)45,46
This correction has been shown to give values that correlate with known values to ±3%41,47.
Gas-phase unfolding data analysis and modeling
Mass spectra and ion mobility data were analyzed using in-house software written in the 
Python programming language with a graphical user interface constructed using wxPython 
(manuscript in preparation). Briefly, MS-only data collected on a Q-TOF 2 instrument was 
smoothed with MassLynx software prior to being imported and linearized at a step size of 
one in m/z. Theoretical mass spectra were predicted following equations described in 
Stengel et al.48. Mass, average charge state, width of charge state distribution, resolution, 
and concentration were fitted to experimental data with least squares regression of the 
pseudo-χ2 function48.
Ion mobility data were imported using a custom script provided by Waters at an m/z 
resolution of four in drift data and one in mass spectra for fitting. Mass spectra were 
smoothed and theoretical mass spectra were fitted as described above. A standardized 
integration window was employed for extracting arrival time distributions (ATD) using a 
resolution (R = m/z ÷ Δm/z) of 1000 and a height cut-off of 25% for the modeled Gaussian 
to the respective m/z peak. To generate gas-phase unfolding plots, ATDs were extracted for 
the given m/z peak using the standardized integration window followed by normalization. To 
convert to a CCS axis, arrival time was directly converted to CCS using equations above. 
This procedure generates gas-phase unfolding data and are plotted using Matplotlib49. All 
ion mobility mass spectra are shown in linear scale.
To a first order approximation, gas-phase unfolding of protein complexes, like unfolding in 
solution, will be linearly dependent (m) on collision voltage (CV)
where ΔG is free energy of unfolding and ΔG0 is the free energy of the system at zero 
collision voltage in the gas-phase. Using this assumption, two, three, four, and five state 
linear equilibrium unfolding models were used to model the abundance of native and non-
native species. Notably, two new free parameters are introduced for each new species. Two, 
three, four and five state unfolding models were fitted to the data, and an F-test was used to 
decide if the fitting quality is sufficiently improved as to justify the inclusion of additional 
fitting parameters. The most abundance charge state of the three membrane protein 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

complexes agreed with a four state unfolding model. For example, in the case of three 
unfolding species we used the following thermodynamic denaturing unfolding model20.
Expansion of ΔGN↔I1 gives the following,
where F is a mole fraction. The sum of mole fractions of native (FN), and non-native species 
(Fl1 and Fl2) is equal to 1.
We can generalize this taking into account the entire relationships one can obtain the 
fraction of native and non-native given K1 and K2
The respective ΔG° and m parameters were solved numerically. In the two species case one 
can obtain a closed form solution, however, it is both efficient and general to solve 
numerically.
An irreversible kinetic unfolding model as an alternative for modeling gas-phase unfolding 
data was also explored. The irreversible unfolding model defines the degree of unfolding as 
being related to time. By changing the potential across the drift cell, the time ions spend in 
the ion mobility drift cell post collision-induced unfolding can be altered over several orders 
of magnitude. The relative abundances of unfolded intermediates species as a function of 
drift time was monitored for a membrane protein complex. There was no significant change 
in relative abundances over a four-fold increase in time (Extended Data Figure 6e-f) 
demonstrating that the unfolding mechanism does not agree with an irreversible kinetic 
model for the unfolding model and no further unfolding occurs post collision cell. Data are 
in excellent agreement however with a reversible model as described above.
Ion mobility intensities were extracted for native and unfolded CCS species at various 
collision voltages. With the assumption that signal intensity is approximately proportional to 
species concentration, the data can be converted to a molar fraction to generate two 
dimensional (2D) data, which can be fitted to an equilibrium unfolding model. Minimized 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

2D parameters were used as a seed for three dimensional (3D) fitting of gas-phase unfolding 
data.
From the unfolding curve, and parameters m, ΔG°, CCSμ (mean of CCS species), CCSσ 
(standard deviation of CCS species), the 3D data can be fit. First, a CCS range was selected 
for each native and unfolded species in the unfolding plot. These CCS ranges provided the 
initial parameters used to model various CCS species identified by inspection. Next, to make 
the calculations more efficient the gas-phase unfolding data were trimmed to a minimum 
and maximum value derived by either subtraction or addition of 10% times the native and 
last unfolding CCS species, respectively. Trimming resulted in gas-phase unfolding 
containing on average around 900 data points. The equilibrium unfolding model described 
above was seeded with the parameters from the minimized 2D data and the molar fraction of 
species was normalized to match the normalization of experimental data. The fitting surface 
was rugged and required a sophisticated minimization procedure to maximize the chance of 
finding global minimum. First the 3D model was minimized using quasi-Newton method of 
Broyden, Fletcher, Goldfarb, and Shanno (BFGS) available in Scipy50. This provided the 
boundaries for bio-inspired algorithms; all parameters were set to boundaries of ±25% with 
the exception of the CCS species peak centers which were set to ±5%. The 3D model was 
minimized using the modified differential algorithm (de_1220) available in PyGMO51,52 
using the following parameters: population of 20; 12 evolutions; 250 generations; and 8 
islands. Other algorithms, such as particle swarm and bee colony were screened however the 
modified differential algorithm produced similar or higher R2 values in considerably less 
computation time.
The resulting minimized 3D model enabled quantification of unfolding transitions and 
stabilization. An unfolding transition occurs when a species with a determined CCS 
transitions to another CCS species, for example see Extended Data Figure 6c. The transition 
midpoint, CV50 is determined by
Where CVi is the value at which 50% of a specific transition state i is depleted. This metric 
was found to be particularly useful for this application as it removes correlations between 
ΔG° and m inherent in the fitting procedure. The stabilization of a protein due to the 
presence of additional phospholipids was quantified according to:
This comparative approach takes into account to first order any variability in transition 
collision voltages between repeated measurements for a given protein.
To compare between various proteins and different unfolding states, as well as to average 
out any systematic and/or inherent variability in droplet formation, the average stabilization 
was calculated for the bound ligand by,
Laganowsky et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

where ζ is the number of transitions, i is a specific transition, and z is the charge state. 
Averages and standard error of the means was calculated for three repeated measurements. 
Statistical significance between means were determined by a one-way ANOVA test (N=3) 
followed by post-hoc Tukey analysis. A Shapiro-Wilk test (at the 0.05 level) was used to 
infer the data was drawn from a normally distributed population. A Brown-Forsythe test (at 
the 0.05 level) was performed to infer homogeneity of variance prior to means comparison. 
All statistical tests were performed using OriginPro 8.5.1.
Molecular dynamics preparation and simulation
Crystal structures for the Ammonia Channel AmtB (1U7G)14, Aquaporin Z (1RC2)12 and 
MscL (2OAR)10 were obtained from the Protein Data Bank and prepared. Molecular 
simulations were performed using GROMACS 4.5 (www.gromacs.org)53, with the OPLS 
all-atom protein force field54, OPLS united-atom lipid parameters for palmitoyloleoyl-
phosphocholine (POPC)55 and the TIP3P water model56. Initial configurations were created 
using hippo beta (www.biowerkzeug.com).
Electrostatic interactions were computed using the particle mesh Ewald (PME) method57, 
and a cutoff of 10 Å was used for van der Waals interactions. Bonds involving hydrogen 
atoms were restrained using LINCS58. Simulations were run with a 2 fs integration time step 
and neighbor lists were updated every five steps. All simulations are performed in an NPT 
ensemble, without additional applied surface tension. Solvent (water, ions), lipids, and the 
protein were each coupled separately to a heat bath at a temperature of 30 °C with time 
constant τT = 0.1 ps using weak temperature coupling59. Atmospheric pressure of 1 bar was 
maintained using weak semi-isotropic pressure coupling with compressibility κz = κxy = 
4.6·10−5 bar−1 and time constant τP = 1 ps60. A complete list of simulations is given in 
Extended Data Figure 4b.
Each protein phospholipid pair generated by MD was treated as a candidate model. For 
example, ~105,000 such models were generated for AqpZ and filtered by comparison of 
calculated and experimental CCS values. More specifically, within each MD snapshot there 
are ~80 lipids that could be in accord with the CCS measurements for one lipid bound to 
AqpZ. After filtering by agreement with CCS, an ensemble of protein phospholipid 
complexes consistent with our data was identified. As the MD is used to provide a source of 
potential lipid associated structures, the results are largely invariant to the choice of force 
field and lipid molecule.
Identifying lipid binding sites from MD simulations and CCS measurements
The object is to determine which MD frames are in best agreement with the experimental 
CCS data. For every simulated system, one frame was extracted every 0.2 ns generating 
1,000 pdb files for a 500 ns simulation time. For each extracted frame, all lipids within 6 Å 
of the protein were identified. All possible combinations of these two lipids and protein were 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

selected. For example for AqpZ and one lipid typically yielded 80 extracted combinations 
per frame (Extended Data Figure 4c). The CCS value of each combination per frame (f) was 
calculated using a modified version of MOBCAL18,43,44. A ratio (Rf,calc) was determined 
using the calculated CCS values for each of the +1 lipid and the +2 lipid-bound states
where CCSprotein+lipid is CCS of protein plus number of lipid(s) (l) and CCSprotein is CCS of 
protein. Using a ratio avoided any potential issues associated with taking the difference of 
uncorrected CCS values determined experimentally. These measurements enable the 
calculation of three chi-squared (χ2) values for a given combination of two lipids and protein
where Rf,exp and σ are the average and standard deviation of the experimental CCS ratio for 
data with one or two lipid molecules bound from three repeated measurements, and Rf,exp is 
the CCS ratio derived from theoretical calculations. The overall chi-squared values were 
calculated from:
where 
 is the chi-squared calculated for two lipids bound, and 
 and 
 are the chi-
squared values for each individual lipid molecule with the protein. In the case where only 
the +1 lipid CCS data is analyzed, neglecting the +2 lipid data, only one χ2 value contributed 
towards the sum. The probability (Pf) that a given protein phospholipid pair with protein 
matches the data is given by the following Bayesian probability:
where 
 is the minimum chi-squared value obtained across the entire simulation, whose 
corresponding Pf is equal to 1, representing the most probable structure. It follows that all 
candidate lipid pair and protein combinations with a Pf value greater than 0.785 will be one 
half standard deviation from the most probable structure. The ensemble of structures 
identified with Pf >= 0.785 can be considered the most probable arrangement of lipids and 
protein found to be consistent with the experimental data. This ensemble of structures was 
projected onto the surface of the protein to identify the most probable locations of contact 
between the protein and the lipid.
Laganowsky et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Total Polar Lipid Extracts from cardiolipin deficient E.coli strain, BKT22
The cardiolipin deficient E. coli strain24, BKT22 (ΔclsA, ΔclsB, ΔclsC, ΔymdB::KanR) and 
calcium chloride competent BKT22 cells were transformed with pBAD-YC (plasmid 
containing clsC and ymdB genes24), referred herein as BKT22-YC, and grown overnight in 
LB media. Overnight cultures were diluted to an OD600 of 0.03 in LB media with the 
exception that arabinose was added to a final concentration of 0.2% for BKT22-YC to 
induce expression of cardiolipin genes, clsC and ymdB. The strains were grown for six 
hours to stationary phase (OD600 ~2.0). Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3,500 g at 
4°C for 10 min. Cell pellets were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline followed by 
centrifugation.
Lipids were extracted using the Folch method61. Briefly, cells were resuspended in 20mL of 
2:1 (v/v) chloroform:methanol per gram of cells and agitated on a stir plate for 20 min. The 
mixture was then clarified using filter paper and washed with 0.2 volume of water. The 
extract was briefly vortexed before centrifugation at 800 × g to separate phases. The upper 
aqueous phase was removed and the interface was washed with 1:1 (v/v) methanol:water 
without disturbing the lower organic phase. The lower organic phase was recovered and 
evaporated under a stream of nitrogen. The dried total lipid extract was then resuspended in 
diethyl ether to extract polar lipids and evaporated under nitrogen then under vacuum 
overnight.
Thin Layer Chromatography
HPTLC Silica gel 60 aluminum plates (Merck Millipore) were pre-developed with 1:1 (v/v) 
chloroform:methanol and left to air-dry overnight. The plates were then impregnated with an 
adsorbent modifier (1:1 (v/v) 1.2% boric acid in absolute ethanol-water) followed by 
activation at 100°C for one hour62. Samples were spotted and plates developed in 65:25:5 
(v/v) chloroform:methanol:acetic acid. After air-drying for 30 min, plates were sprayed with 
10% sulphuric acid in ethanol and charred at 200 °C63. Molar percent (mol %) of lipid 
species was determined from the intensity of lipid species using ImageJ 1.47v software64.
Proteoliposome/liposome preparation
E. coli total polar lipid extract (acetone/ether preparation; Avanti Polar Lipids) was 
dissolved at 20 mg/ml in 2:1 (v/v) chloroform:methanol to obtain a clear solution. Solvent 
was evaporated under a stream of nitrogen gas then under vacuum overnight. E. coli total 
polar lipid (EPL), BKT22 and BKT22-YC extracts were hydrated in 2 mM BME to a final 
concentration of 50 mg/ml and left to incubate for 1 hr at room temperature with constant 
agitation. These were then split into aliquots and frozen. Lipids were always handled under a 
nitrogen atmosphere.
Liposomes and proteoliposomes were prepared following previously established 
protocols23,39. Briefly, lipid stocks were diluted into borosilicate tubes to a final 
concentration of 45 mg/ml in 100 mM MOPS–Na pH 7.5 and pulsed in a bath sonicator until 
a clear suspension was obtained. A reconstitution mixture (400 μl) was prepared in a 
borosilicate tube at room temperature by sequentially adding 100 mM Mops–Na (pH 7.5), 
1.25 % (wt/vol) OG, purified NHis-AqpZ for proteoliposomes (final concentration 100 μg/
Laganowsky et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

ml), and 10 mg/ml sonicated lipids. After incubation for 1 h at room temperature the mixture 
was diluted 25 fold into 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5. The liposomes were harvested by 
centrifugation 140,000 g for one hour and resuspended to a final volume of 1.5 ml in 20 mM 
HEPES pH 7.5. Liposomes and proteoliposomes were stored on ice prior to measurement. 
EPL, BKT22 and BKT22-YC liposomes/proteoliposomes had an average diameter of 140, 
149, and 160 nm determined from dynamic light scattering (Viscotek 802).
AqpZ water permeability assay
Liposome shrinkage was induced by rapidly mixing 1:1 (v/v) proteoliposomes/liposomes 
with osmolyte buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 570 mM sucrose; a 285 milliosmolarity 
gradient) using a stopped-flow apparatus (Applied Photophysics SX20). Water transport/
permeability was monitored by measuring the light scattering (λ = 600 nm) of the 
preparation upon mixing at 8 °C. An increase in signal reflects liposome shrinkage. Light 
scattering (L) data from repeated measurements (N=5) were fit to a single exponential rise 
equation to obtain the rate of water transport (kwat) using OriginPro 8.5.1.
where t is time in msec, A is a constant, kwat is rate of water transport, and Lo is the 
maximum light scattering (typically one for normalized data).
AmtB crystallization and structure determination
AmtB was purified as described for native mass spectrometry experiments with one minor 
modification. AmtB was detergent exchanged into Buffer H containing 0.5% C8E4 using a 
Superdex 200 10/300 gel filtration column (GE Healthcare). Peak fractions of AmtB from 
gel filtration were pooled and concentrated to ~15 mg/mL using a 50 kDa MWCO 
concentrator (Millipore). A ten-fold molar excess of phosphotidylglycerol was added to 
AmtB prior to crystallization. Crystals of AmtB were grown at 20 °C in hanging drop plates 
with crystallization solution 15% PEG 4000, 0.8M potassium formate, and 0.1 M sodium 
acetate pH 4.6. Hexagonal plate crystals appeared after one month.
Single crystals were mounted with CrystalCap HT Cryoloops (Hampton Research, Aliso 
Viejo, CA) before flash frozen. Data were collected at Diamond Light Source beam line I04. 
Diffraction data collected at a wavelength of 0.97949Å were processed with XDS65 in 
apparent space group P622. Cell content analysis suggested two molecules in the 
asymmetric cell and attempts to obtain phases from molecular replacement using 
PHASER66 with pdb 1U7G resulted in placement of only one molecule with a missing layer 
of protein molecules. Twinning was suspected and the data were processed into lower 
symmetry space groups until molecular replacement could correctly place all protein 
molecules in the asymmetric cell, which turned out to be space group C2221. Data were 
submitted to the UCLA twin detection server67 for twinning analysis that indicated partial 
twinning with <|L|> = 0.463 (untwinned=0.5, perfectly twinned =0.375) and <L2> = 0.291 
(untwinned=0.333, perfectly twinned =0.200). Despite the presence of twinning, initial 
phases were found by molecular replacement using PHASER with pdb 1U7G placing six 
molecules in the asymmetric unit cell, and followed automated model building using 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

PHENIX68 and manual model building using COOT69. All model refinement was done with 
REFMAC70 in twin mode. Omit maps were generated first by deleting coordinates of the 
ligand prior to refinement. Refinement with twinning applied resulted in a 10% drop in both 
Rwork and Rfree, consistent with twinning. Ramachandran plot of the refined structure gave 
96% in favoured regions and 0.4% outliers. Figures were generated with PyMOL71.
Extended Data
Laganowsky et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 1. Maintaining intact native membrane protein complexes in the mass 
spectrometer
a-b, Gas-phase unfolding plots (left, 5 V steps) and mass spectra (right) of detergent 
stripped AqpZ and AmtB ions (charge inset) from different non-ionic detergent solutions; 
C8E4 (pink), NG (green), OGNG (purple) and DDM (orange). Membrane protein complexes 
from NG, OGNG and DDM possessed CCS values substantially larger than those calculated 
from crystal structures. c, Complete removal of C8E4 at low collision voltages reveals CCS 
values consistent with those calculated from their respective crystal structures. d, Reported 
are measured masses, standard deviations, and empirical T0 values used for direct CCS 
calculation of membrane proteins studied.
Laganowsky et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 2. Phospholipid abbreviations and optimization of phospholipid binding 
experiments
a, Phospholipid abbreviations and headgroup structures. b, Protein to phospholipid to 
detergent ratios (P:L:D) for each membrane protein, number of resolvable phospholipids 
bound with their masses. Conditions were optimized empirically to maintain nanospray, 
sufficient mass spectral quality, and phospholipid binding. Masses for one lipid bound to the 
protein complex were measured using MassLynx V4.1 software (Waters).
Laganowsky et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 3. Phospholipid binding to MscL reveals an insignificant impact on 
protein gas-phase stabilization independent of lipid alkyl chain length
a, Representative mass and ion mobility spectra of MscL bound to various phospholipids 
species (inset top right). b, Representative mass and ion mobility spectra of MscL bound to 
phospholipids of varying alkyl chain length. c, Cumulative stabilization of MscL is seen for 
one (blue) to two (red) bound lipid molecules. Reported are the mean ± SEM (N = 3).
Laganowsky et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 4. Summary of statistics for molecular dynamics (MD) simulations 
followed by CCS filtering
a, Representative filtering procedure of AqpZ in a PC bilayer from the MD (top). For each 
frame, lipids are extracted within 6 Å of the protein (bottom left) then filtered by the 
experimental CCS of AqpZ bound to a single PC molecule (bottom right), see Methods. b, 
Summary of statistics. c, Ratios of phospholipid bound to apo CCS values for membrane 
protein complexes. Reported are the mean and standard deviation (N = 3). d, MD filtered by 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

CCS resulted in similar patches of PC molecules across different time points within the 
simulation indicating the systems were equilibrated.
Extended Data Figure 5. MD simulations filtered by CCS reveals probable one (1x) and two (2x) 
phospholipid binding sites
a, For each candidate structure, protein and 1x or 2x PC molecule(s), the ratio of their 
calculated CCS values was determined (CCS Ratio). This procedure generated a large 
number of candidate structures (grey bars) that were filtered using our CCS measurements 
(cyan line). The structures in grey that intercept this curve are essentially the ones selected 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

as our most probable ensemble. b, The intersection between the simulated lipid complexes 
and the experimental data is then projected onto the surface of the protein to identify the 
most probable binding sites. Probable lipid locations for MscL resembled an annular belt, 
with no specific patches of lipids likely stemming from the relatively cylindrical geometry 
of this complex. By contrast for AqpZ and AmtB the most probable location of the lipid 
molecules were localized to the interfacial regions between protein subunits, as well as other 
probable locations on individual monomers. c, X-ray derived PG (blue spheres with white 
tails) located at the subunit interfaces agrees with the predicted PC binding site.
Laganowsky et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 6. Modeling and quantification of gas-phase unfolding pathways
a, Representative ion mobility mass spectra are collected over a range of collision voltages. 
b, Ion arrival time is converted to CCS before generating unfolding plots. c, Model fitting 
process from 2D to 3D data (See Methods). d, Both a Synapt2 modified with a linear drift 
cell (DT-IMS) and the commercially available travelling wave SynaptG2 (TW-IMS) 
produce qualitatively similar unfolding data. e, A contour plot representing the variance of 
CCS of two gas-phase unfolding species as a function of ion mobility drift cell potential. f, 
Stacked plots of arrival time distributions for two gas-phase unfolding species as a function 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

of drift cell potential. The lifetime of unfolding protein complexes in the drift tube ranges 
from 4 to 15 ms depending on the drift cell potential. No additional unfolding post activation 
occurs implying that the unfolding mechanism is not consistent with an irreversible 
unfolding model. Such a mechanism would predict time dependence on the population of 
unfolded species. By contrast the unfolding mechanism is well described by the reversible 
unfolding mechanism (see Methods).
Extended Data Figure 7. AqpZ, AmtB and AmtBN72A/N79A bound to various phospholipid 
species
Laganowsky et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

a, Representative mass and ion mobility spectra of AqpZ bound to phospholipids. b, 
Representative mass and ion mobility spectra of AmtB bound to phospholipids and 
AmtBN72A/N79A bound to PG.
Extended Data Figure 8. Summary of water permeability assays and analysis of lipid extracts
a, HPTLC analysis of total polar lipid extract from wild-type E. coli (EPL), cardiolipin-
deficient strain (BKT22), or BKT22 cells expressing ClsC and YmdB (BKT22-YC) to 
restore cardiolipin. Lipids were quantified by densiotometry. b, Reported are the rate 
constants (kwat) and standard error of replicates (N = 5) for empty liposomes (−) and AqpZ 
proteoliposomes (+) reconstituted in differing E. coli lipid compositions.
Laganowsky et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Extended Data Figure 9. Structural analysis of AmtB bound to PG
a, Crystal packing with Six AmtB (multicolored) and eight PG (orange) molecules located 
in the asymmetric unit cell and symmetry related molecules shown in grey and light orange, 
respectively. b, Fo-Fc and 2Fo-Fc electron density maps after refinement without lipid and 
near-lipid water molecule (if present) contoured at 2.0 and 1.0 sigma, respectively. c, 
Comparison of AmtB bound to PG (green chain, this work) aligned with the AmtB structure 
(maroon chain, pdb 1U7G). d, Structure overlay of AmtB-GlnK complex bound to 
octylglucoside (purple chain, pdb 2NS1) aligned with AmtB bound to PG reveals a distinct 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

conformational change. The lipid-water interface (grey plane) was determined from 
coordinates of phosphate atoms from bound PG.
Extended Data Table 1
Summary of X-ray data collection and refinement 
statistics.
AmtB bound to PG
Data collection
Space group
C2221
Cell dimensions
 a, b, c (Å)
116.2, 201.2, 232.5
 α, β, γ (°)
90, 90, 90
Resolution (Å)
40-2.3 (2.4-2.3)*
Rmerge (%)
12.4 (120.4)
I / σI
13.7 (2.5)
Completeness (%)
99.9 (99.5)
Redundancy
11.0 (6.9)
Refinement
Resolution (Å)
38.7-2.3 (2.36-2.3)
No. reflections
119,766
Rwork / Rfree
20.2 / 23.45§
No. atoms
 Protein
15,856
 Ligand/ion
293
 Water
111
B-factors
 Protein
45.3
 Ligand/ion
64.7
 Water
29.5
R.m.s. deviations
 Bond lengths (Å)
0.016
 Bond angles (°)
1.71
aValues in parentheses are for highest-resolution shell.
bRfree calculated using 5% of the data.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jon Hobman and David Lee for generously providing gene doctoring plasmids, Ziqiang Guan and Chijun 
Li for kindly providing E. coli strains and plasmids containing cardiolipin genes. We also thank David Staunton and 
Nicholas Housden for training on the stopped-flow apparatus, Todd Mize, Justin Benesch, Michael McDonough, 
Troy Walton and Doug Rees for useful discussions. We also gratefully acknowledge Edward Lowe and Susan Lea 
for organizing synchrotron proposals and Diamond Light Source beam line I04 and staff, the Medical Research 
Council (MRC), BBSRC and ERC advanced grant (IMPRESS) for funding. Arthur Laganowsky is a Nicholas Kurti 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Junior Research Fellow of Brasenose College, Andrew Baldwin is a BBSRC David Phillip’s Fellow, and Carol V. 
Robinson is a Royal Society Professor.
References
1. Singer SJ, Nicolson GL. The fluid mosaic model of the structure of cell membranes. Science. 1972; 
175:720–731. [PubMed: 4333397] 
2. Cantor RS. The influence of membrane lateral pressures on simple geometric models of protein 
conformational equilibria. Chem Phys Lipids. 1999; 101:45–56. [PubMed: 10810924] 
3. Hunte C, Richers S. Lipids and membrane protein structures. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2008; 18:406–
411. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2008.03.008. [PubMed: 18495472] 
4. Lee AG. Biological membranes: the importance of molecular detail. Trends Biochem Sci. 2011; 
36:493–500. doi:10.1016/j.tibs.2011.06.007. [PubMed: 21855348] 
5. Sanders CR, Mittendorf KF. Tolerance to changes in membrane lipid composition as a selected trait 
of membrane proteins. Biochemistry. 2011; 50:7858–7867. doi:10.1021/bi2011527. [PubMed: 
21848311] 
6. Contreras FX, Ernst AM, Wieland F, Brugger B. Specificity of intramembrane protein-lipid 
interactions. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2011; 3 doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a004705. 
7. Whitelegge JP. Integral membrane proteins and bilayer proteomics. Anal Chem. 2013; 85:2558–
2568. doi:10.1021/ac303064a. [PubMed: 23301778] 
8. Long SB, Tao X, Campbell EB, MacKinnon R. Atomic structure of a voltage-dependent K+ channel 
in a lipid membrane-like environment. Nature. 2007; 450:376–382. doi:10.1038/nature06265. 
[PubMed: 18004376] 
9. Zhong D, Blount P. Phosphatidylinositol Is Crucial for the Mechanosensitivity of Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis MscL. Biochemistry. 2013; 52:5415–5420. doi:10.1021/bi400790j. [PubMed: 
23875651] 
10. Chang G, Spencer RH, Lee AT, Barclay MT, Rees DC. Structure of the MscL homolog from 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis: a gated mechanosensitive ion channel. Science. 1998; 282:2220–
2226. [PubMed: 9856938] 
11. Haswell ES, Phillips R, Rees DC. Mechanosensitive channels: what can they do and how do they 
do it? Structure. 2011; 19:1356–1369. doi:10.1016/j.str.2011.09.005. [PubMed: 22000509] 
12. Savage DF, Egea PF, Robles-Colmenares Y, O’Connell JD 3rd, Stroud RM. Architecture and 
selectivity in aquaporins: 2.5 a X-ray structure of aquaporin Z. PLoS Biol. 2003; 1:E72. doi:
10.1371/journal.pbio.0000072. [PubMed: 14691544] 
13. Gonen T, et al. Lipid-protein interactions in double-layered two-dimensional AQP0 crystals. 
Nature. 2005; 438:633–638. doi:10.1038/nature04321. [PubMed: 16319884] 
14. Khademi S, et al. Mechanism of ammonia transport by Amt/MEP/Rh: structure of AmtB at 1.35 A. 
Science. 2004; 305:1587–1594. doi:10.1126/science.1101952. [PubMed: 15361618] 
15. Barrera NP, Di Bartolo N, Booth PJ, Robinson CV. Micelles protect membrane complexes from 
solution to vacuum. Science. 2008; 321:243–246. doi:10.1126/science.1159292. [PubMed: 
18556516] 
16. Laganowsky A, Reading E, Hopper JT, Robinson CV. Mass spectrometry of intact membrane 
protein complexes. Nat Protoc. 2013; 8:639–651. doi:10.1038/nprot.2013.024. [PubMed: 
23471109] 
17. Ruotolo BT, et al. Evidence for macromolecular protein rings in the absence of bulk water. 
Science. 2005; 310:1658–1661. doi:10.1126/science.1120177. [PubMed: 16293722] 
18. Baldwin AJ, et al. The polydispersity of alphaB-crystallin is rationalized by an interconverting 
polyhedral architecture. Structure. 2011; 19:1855–1863. doi:10.1016/j.str.2011.09.015. [PubMed: 
22153508] 
19. Hyung SJ, Robinson CV, Ruotolo BT. Gas-phase unfolding and disassembly reveals stability 
differences in ligand-bound multiprotein complexes. Chem Biol. 2009; 16:382–390. doi:10.1016/
j.chembiol.2009.02.008. [PubMed: 19389624] 
20. Pace CN. Determination and analysis of urea and guanidine hydrochloride denaturation curves. 
Methods Enzymol. 1986; 131:266–280. [PubMed: 3773761] 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

21. Hong, H.; Joh, NH.; Bowie, JU.; Tamm, LK. Methods Enzymol. Holt, Jo M.; Johnson, Michael L.; 
Gary, K. Ackers, editors. Vol. Vol. Volume 455. Academic Press; 2009. p. 213-236.
22. Powl AM, East JM, Lee AG. Lipid-protein interactions studied by introduction of a tryptophan 
residue: the mechanosensitive channel MscL. Biochemistry. 2003; 42:14306–14317. doi:10.1021/
bi034995k. [PubMed: 14640699] 
23. Borgnia MJ, Kozono D, Calamita G, Maloney PC, Agre P. Functional reconstitution and 
characterization of AqpZ, the E. coli water channel protein. J Mol Biol. 1999; 291:1169–1179. 
doi:10.1006/jmbi.1999.3032. [PubMed: 10518952] 
24. Tan BK, et al. Discovery of a cardiolipin synthase utilizing phosphatidylethanolamine and 
phosphatidylglycerol as substrates. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:16504–16509. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212797109. [PubMed: 22988102] 
25. Yau WM, Wimley WC, Gawrisch K, White SH. The preference of tryptophan for membrane 
interfaces. Biochemistry. 1998; 37:14713–14718. doi:10.1021/bi980809c. [PubMed: 9778346] 
26. Iscla I, Blount P. Sensing and responding to membrane tension: the bacterial MscL channel as a 
model system. Biophys J. 2012; 103:169–174. doi:10.1016/j.bpj.2012.06.021. [PubMed: 
22853893] 
27. Hite RK, Li Z, Walz T. Principles of membrane protein interactions with annular lipids deduced 
from aquaporin-0 2D crystals. EMBO J. 2010; 29:1652–1658. doi:10.1038/emboj.2010.68. 
[PubMed: 20389283] 
28. Romantsov T, Battle AR, Hendel JL, Martinac B, Wood JM. Protein localization in Escherichia 
coli cells: comparison of the cytoplasmic membrane proteins ProP, LacY, ProW, AqpZ, MscS, and 
MscL. J Bacteriol. 2010; 192:912–924. doi:10.1128/jb.00967-09. [PubMed: 20008071] 
29. Blakey D, et al. Purification of the Escherichia coli ammonium transporter AmtB reveals a trimeric 
stoichiometry. Biochem J. 2002; 364:527–535. doi:10.1042/bj20011761. [PubMed: 12023896] 
30. Engelman DM. Membranes are more mosaic than fluid. Nature. 2005; 438:578–580. doi:10.1038/
nature04394. [PubMed: 16319876] 
31. Gandhi CS, Walton TA, Rees DC. OCAM: a new tool for studying the oligomeric diversity of 
MscL channels. Protein Sci. 2011; 20:313–326. doi:10.1002/pro.562. [PubMed: 21280123] 
32. Hilf RJ, Dutzler R. X-ray structure of a prokaryotic pentameric ligand-gated ion channel. Nature. 
2008; 452:375–379. doi:10.1038/nature06717. [PubMed: 18322461] 
33. Lee D, et al. Gene doctoring: a method for recombineering in laboratory and pathogenic 
Escherichia coli strains. BMC Microbiology. 2009; 9:252. [PubMed: 20003185] 
34. Drew D, Lerch M, Kunji E, Slotboom DJ, de Gier JW. Optimization of membrane protein 
overexpression and purification using GFP fusions. Nat Methods. 2006; 3:303–313. doi:10.1038/
nmeth0406-303. [PubMed: 16554836] 
35. Newby ZE, et al. A general protocol for the crystallization of membrane proteins for X-ray 
structural investigation. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4:619–637. doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.27. [PubMed: 
19360018] 
36. Laganowsky A, et al. Crystal structures of truncated alphaA and alphaB crystallins reveal 
structural mechanisms of polydispersity important for eye lens function. Protein Sci. 2010; 
19:1031–1043. doi:10.1002/pro.380. [PubMed: 20440841] 
37. Laganowsky A, et al. Atomic View of a Toxic Amyloid Small Oligomer. Science. 2012; 
335:1228–1231. doi:10.1126/science.1213151. [PubMed: 22403391] 
38. Gasteiger E,HC, Gattiker A, Duvaud S, Wilkins MR, Appel RD, Bairoch A. Protein Identification 
and Analysis Tools on the ExPASy Server. 2005:571–607.
39. Savage DF, O’Connell JD 3rd, Miercke LJ, Finer-Moore J, Stroud RM. Structural context shapes 
the aquaporin selectivity filter. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010; 107:17164–17169. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1009864107. [PubMed: 20855585] 
40. Sobott F, Hernandez H, McCammon MG, Tito MA, Robinson CV. A tandem mass spectrometer 
for improved transmission and analysis of large macromolecular assemblies. Anal Chem. 2002; 
74:1402–1407. [PubMed: 11922310] 
41. Bush MF, et al. Collision cross sections of proteins and their complexes: a calibration framework 
and database for gas-phase structural biology. Anal Chem. 2010; 82:9557–9565. doi:10.1021/
ac1022953. [PubMed: 20979392] 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

42. Mason EA, Schamp HW. MOBILITY OF GASEOUS IONS IN WEAK ELECTRIC FIELDS. 
Annals of Physics. 1958; 4:233–270. doi:10.1016/0003-4916(58)90049-6. 
43. Shvartsburg AA, Jarrold MF. An exact hard-spheres scattering model for the mobilities of 
polyatomic ions. Chemical Physics Letters. 1996; 261:86–91. doi:10.1016/0009-2614(96)00941-4. 
44. Mesleh MF, Hunter JM, Shvartsburg AA, Schatz GC, Jarrold MF. Structural Information from Ion 
Mobility Measurements: Effects of the Long-Range Potential. J Phys Chem. 1996; 100:16082–
16086. doi:10.1021/jp961623v. 
45. Benesch JLP, Ruotolo BT. Mass spectrometry: come of age for structural and dynamical biology. 
Curr Opin Struc Biol. 2011; 21:641–649. doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2011.08.002. 
46. Hall Z, Politis A, Robinson CV. Structural Modeling of Heteromeric Protein Complexes from 
Disassembly Pathways and Ion Mobility-Mass Spectrometry. Structure. 2012; 20:1596–1609. doi:
10.1016/j.str.2012.07.001. [PubMed: 22841294] 
47. Ruotolo BT, Benesch JL, Sandercock AM, Hyung SJ, Robinson CV. Ion mobility-mass 
spectrometry analysis of large protein complexes. Nat Protoc. 2008; 3:1139–1152. doi:10.1038/
nprot.2008.78. [PubMed: 18600219] 
48. Stengel F, et al. Dissecting heterogeneous molecular chaperone complexes using a mass spectrum 
deconvolution approach. Chem Biol. 2012; 19:599–607. doi:10.1016/j.chembiol.2012.04.007. 
[PubMed: 22633411] 
49. Hunter JD. Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment. Computing In Science & Engineering. 2007; 
9:90–95.
50. Jones, E.; Oliphant, T.; Peterson, P., et al. Scipy: Open source scientific tools for Python. 2001. 
http://www.scipy.org
51. Izzo D, Ruciński M, Biscani F. The Generalized Island Model. Parallel Architectures and 
Bioinspired Algorithms. 2012:151–169.
52. Izzo, D. PYGMO AND PYKEP: OPEN SOURCE TOOLS FOR MASSIVELY PARALLEL 
OPTIMIZATION IN ASTRODYNAMICS (THE CASE OF INTERPLANETARY 
TRAJECTORY OPTIMIZATION). Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
Astrodynamics Tools and Techniques, ICATT; 2012. 
53. Berendsen HJC, van der Spoel D, van Drunen R. GROMACS: A message-passing parallel 
molecular dynamics implementation. Computer Physics Communications. 1995; 91:43–56. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0010-4655(95)00042-E. 
54. Jorgensen WL, Maxwell DS, Tirado-Rives J. Development and Testing of the OPLS All-Atom 
Force Field on Conformational Energetics and Properties of Organic Liquids. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society. 1996; 118:11225–11236. doi:10.1021/ja9621760. 
55. Ulmschneider JP, Ulmschneider MB. Sampling efficiency in explicit and implicit membrane 
environments studied by peptide folding simulations. Proteins. 2009; 75:586–597. doi:10.1002/
prot.22270. [PubMed: 19003985] 
56. Jorgensen WL, Chandrasekhar J, Madura JD, Impey RW, Klein ML. Comparison of simple 
potential functions for simulating liquid water. The Journal of Chemical Physics. 1983; 79:926–
935. http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.445869. 
57. Darden T, York D, Pedersen L. Particle mesh Ewald: An N log(N) method for Ewald sums in large 
systems. The Journal of Chemical Physics. 1993; 98:10089–10092. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1063/1.464397. 
58. Hess B, Bekker H, Berendsen HJC, Fraaije JGEM. LINCS: A linear constraint solver for molecular 
simulations. Journal of Computational Chemistry. 1997; 18:1463–1472. doi:10.1002/
(sici)1096-987x(199709)18:12<1463::aid-jcc4>3.0.co;2-h. 
59. Bussi G, Donadio D, Parrinello M. Canonical sampling through velocity rescaling. The Journal of 
Chemical Physics. 2007; 126 http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.2408420. 
60. Berendsen HJC, Postma JPM, van Gunsteren WF, DiNola A, Haak JR. Molecular dynamics with 
coupling to an external bath. The Journal of Chemical Physics. 1984; 81:3684–3690. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.448118. 
61. Folch J, Lees M, Sloane Stanley GH. A simple method for the isolation and purification of total 
lipides from animal tissues. J Biol Chem. 1957; 226:497–509. [PubMed: 13428781] 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

62. Fine JB, Sprecher H. Unidimensional thin-layer chromatography of phospholipids on boric acid-
impregnated plates. J Lipid Res. 1982; 23:660–663. [PubMed: 7097131] 
63. Tan BK, et al. Discovery of a cardiolipin synthase utilizing phosphatidylethanolamine and 
phosphatidylglycerol as substrates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2012; 
109:16504–16509. doi:10.1073/pnas.1212797109. 
64. Schneider CA, Rasband WS, Eliceiri KW. NIH Image to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat 
Meth. 2012; 9:671–675.
65. Kabsch W. XDS. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 66:125–132. [PubMed: 20124692] 
66. McCoy AJ, et al. Phaser crystallographic software. J Appl Crystallogr. 2007; 40:658–674. 
[PubMed: 19461840] 
67. Padilla JE, Yeates TO. A statistic for local intensity differences: robustness to anisotropy and 
pseudo-centering and utility for detecting twinning. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2003; 
59:1124–1130. [PubMed: 12832754] 
68. Adams PD, et al. PHENIX: building new software for automated crystallographic structure 
determination. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 2002; 58:1948–1954. [PubMed: 12393927] 
69. Emsley P, Cowtan K. Coot: model-building tools for molecular graphics. Acta Crystallogr D Biol 
Crystallogr. 2004; 60:2126–2132. [PubMed: 15572765] 
70. Murshudov GN, Vagin AA, Dodson EJ. Refinement of macromolecular structures by the 
maximum-likelihood method. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr. 1997; 53:240–255. [PubMed: 
15299926] 
71. Schrodinger, LLC. The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. Version 1.3r12010. 
Laganowsky et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 1. The mechanosensitive channel of large conductance (MscL) resists unfolding in the 
presence of lipids
a, MscL in electrospray droplets, within a lipid-detergent micelle, undergoes desolvation 
and activation. b, Mass spectrum reveals multiple MscL phosphatidylinositol phosphate (PI) 
bound states. Ion mobility (top) of MscL(PI)0-5 with a trend line for native state (dotted). c, 
Plot of collision voltage against CCS for +12 ions of apo (i) and MscL(PI)4 (ii). 
Experimental and modeled unfolding plots with collision voltages at which transitions occur 
and CCS values (horizontal and vertical arrows respectively). R2 values are provided. d, 
Stabilization calculated from parameters defined by fitting MscL (+12) with lipids. Reported 
are average and s.e.m. (N=3) in units of electron volts (eV).
Laganowsky et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 2. AqpZ is stabilized indiscriminately by lipids with the exception of cardiolipin, a lipid 
that stabilizes the channel significantly and modulates its function
a, Mass spectra reveal AqpZ(POPC)0-5 resolved at 60 V with IM-MS arrival times in 
agreement with the CCS calculated from the crystal structure. b, Stabilization of AqpZ (+13) 
bound to lipids, calculated from unfolding parameters. One-way ANOVA (N = 3): **P < 
0.01. c, Water permeability assay for AqpZ reconstituted in total polar lipid extracts from E. 
coli (EPL) (orange), or a cardiolipin-deficient strain24 (BKT22) (green), or BKT22 cells 
expressing ClsC and YmdB to restore cardiolipin (BKT22-YC) (cyan) are compared with 
empty EPL liposomes (pink) (Supplementary Figure 7). Rate constants of water transport 
(kwat) and standard error of replicates (N = 5).
Laganowsky et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 3. Lipid binding to AmtB results in a range of stabilizing effects
a, Ion mobility mass spectra of AmtB(PG)0-4 molecules at 175V with IM-MS unfolding data 
as described in Fig. 1b. Arrival times for the various charge states reveal non-native, trimeric 
structures. b, Stabilization of AmtB (+15) bound to different lipids and AmtBN72A/N79A 
(+15) a mutant form designed to disrupt the specific PG-lipid binding site. Gas-phase 
unfolding reveals that AmtB is weakly stabilized by the majority of lipids but CDL and PG 
confer significant stabilization. AmtBN72A/N79A shows a reduction in stabilization by PG 
compared with the wild-type protein. Results are shown as in Fig. 2b with *P < 0.05.
Laganowsky et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts

Figure 4. Crystal structure of AmtB bound to PG
a, AmtB, in cartoon representation, is viewed from the periplasm and perpendicular to the 
membrane plane. Resolved PG molecules (spheres) are oriented with headgroups on the 
periplasmic side, in the outer leaflet of the inner membrane. b, PG molecules at subunit 
interface are shown with residue labels and hydrophobic residues in contact with lipid tails 
(stick representation). Hydrogen bonds (dashed lines) are formed between phospho 
headgroup and K84, and a water bridge (aqua sphere). c, Conformational change of (yellow 
arrows) residues 70-81, induced by binding PG. Superposition of AmtB structure without 
lipid (PDB 1U7G, purple) bound to PG (green).
Laganowsky et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 December 05.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
