Pure & Appl. Chem., Vo1.51, pp.709-729. 
Pergarnon Press Ltd. 1979. 
Printed in Great Britain. 
©IUPAC 
0033-4545/79/0401-0709 $02.00/0 
T H E 
H 0 P A N 0 I D S 
PALAEOCHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY OF A GROUP OF NATURAL PRODUCTS 
Guy OURISSON, PierreALBRECHT and Michel ROHMER 
Institut de Chimie, Universite Louis Pasteur, 1 rue Blaise Pascal, 
STRASBOURG - France. 
Abstract -
More than 100 individual derivatives of hopane have been 
isolated from sedim~ntary organic matter of most varied origin. 
They are ubiquitous molecular fossils derived from cellular cons-
tituents of micro-organisms. 
Hopanoids are shown tobe widely 
distributed among Bacteria and Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). 
Their function in cells is probably equivalent to that of sterals 
in the eucaryote cell : to act as optimizers of the fluid lipid 
membranes. 
They are even probably phylogenetic precursors of 
sterols. 
In procaryotes containing no hopanoids, other mechanisms 
of fluidity control of biomembranes are probably operating ; they 
imply acyclic di- or tetraterpenes (carotenoids or isomers), the 
molecular fossils of which are also present in sediments. These 
terpenes may in turn be phylogenetic precursors of hopanoids. 
INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of this review is to summarize both present knowledge and current 
hypotheses on a family of triterpenes, the hopanoids. 
A few derivatives of 
the skeleton of hopane had been known for some 20 years, in scattered plants. 
Hopane 
For instance, the Devon-Scott Index (1), which lists some 750 naturally 
occurring triterpenes, mentions only 26 hopanoids sensu stricto and 12 more 
substances with rearranged hopane skeletons. 
Furthermore, these triterpenes 
were known only from a few groups of living organisms : some tropical trees, 
some grasses, some lichens, and several ferns. 
It was therefore a surprise, 
during the last decade, to find hopanoids to be in fact vastly more widely 
distributed, and to be one of the major families of biolipids present on 
Earth. 
They are found in many microörganisms, and constitute the only group 
of triterpenoids to have produced ubiquitous molecular fossils ; furthermore, 
they show many characteristics suggesting that they may have been phylogenetic 
precursors of the sterols. 
709 

710 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
we shall approach hopanoids from the geochemical angle, describing first 
their molecular fossils. 
We shall then review their occurrences in presently 
living organisms and shall give our views on their probable biochemical 
function and on their evolutionary significance. 
PALAEOCHEMISTRY OF THE HOPANOIDS 
Methodology 
The organic matter of sediments, whether dispersed like in clays or concen-
trated like in coals or petroleums, is extremely complex (2). 
Suitable 
analytical procedures (3) and precautions against contamination (4) make it 
possible to separate this mixture by column and thin-layer chromatographies 
in groups of similar polarity (e.g. saturated hydrocarbons, olefins, aromatic 
hydrocarbons, carbonyl derivatives, alcohols, acids, ••. ). 
Inclusion in urea, 
thiourea and molecular sieves can then be used to obtain sub-groups of 
similar molecular cross-sections. 
Each of these sub-groups (Cf. Table 1) 
can then be analyzed by computer-assisted gas chromatography/mass spectrome-
try. 
The mass spectrum of hopane derivatives is indeed very informative 
hopane itself 
in particular into two 
öf 
identical m/e = 191 ; modified hopanoids display the same fragmentation in 
ring C, giving two fragments of different masses. 
Furthermore, the relative 
intensities of the fragrnents due to ringsA + B and to rings D + E can be 
directly correlated with the cis or trans nature of the D/E ring junction (5). 
It is thus possible to deduce, from the main fragmentations, a plausible 
structure and stereochemistry for the substance corresponding to a given 
peak of the gas chromatogram. 
Synthesis, usually from closely related 
precursors, but sometimes total, enables one to submit the hypothetical 
structures to test, in particular by comparison of mass spectra and co-injec-
tion on highly selective columns. 
In some cases, it has been possible to 
obtain more direct evidence, by nmr (6,7) or X-ray crystallography (7,8) ; 
it is this last method which has initially provided compelling evidence for 
the presence of hopane derivatives in geolipids (8). 
RESULTS 
We reproduce 
below 
four examples of distributions observed, selected from 
many hundreds established in Strasbourg 
the hydrocarbons of a Lorraine coal 
and of an Aquitaine crude oil, those of a polluted coastal mud (showing the 
immense help provided by the computer, in the form of the. fragmentegram 
m/e 191, which is a "hopanogram"), and the acids of the Messel shale. 
In 

c:: 
VI 
s 
c+ 
-s 
"' 
I 
VI 
0 <: 
::I 
c.. 
n 
n 
n 
0 
~ 
<: 
3 
::I 
n 
::::; 
-s 
0 3 
"' 
c+ 
0 
<0 
-s 
"' 
"0 
::::; 
'< 
VI 
~. 
0 
N 
-f 
r-
n 
c+ 
::::; 
~. 
::I 
"' 
'< 
CD -s 
n 
::::; 
-s 
0 
3 
"' 
c+ 
0 
<0 
-s 
"' 
"0 
~ 
~Oppm 
0 
Desulfuration (Cu) 
TLC Ag+ 
cc 
TLC 
A Sieve 
?ppm 
of branched 
+ cyclic alcohols of 
same polarity as 
4_4-dlMe sterols 
lOppm 
TLC 
or CC 
5ppm) 
stero_l_s I 
l..a,.o+u 1~n-.f:.,'::,'YI 
urea 
r-sterol I 
adduc-
tion 
of branched 
+ cyclic alcohols of 
same polarity as 
L~a.-f1e ste:rols 
Jppm 
BF3/NeOH 
TLC 
urea 
I 
adduction 
Other methyl 
esters of free 
I 
ac1ds 
1 ~Oppm 
I 
1.:<' 
"0 
~. 
n 
"' 
~ 
VI 
H 
CD 
::r 
~ "0 
ltl 
;o 
"' 
CD 
-s 
::r 
...., 
"' 
0 
.... 
~ 
"' 
~ 
~ 0 
::1 
::I 
0 .... 
"0 
p.. 
-s 
"' 
0 n 
CD c.. 
<: 
-s 
CD 
.... 

712 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
n-Alk anes 
~. 11.1JJt lAU _LA -
~ 
A 
74 
59 
I II ~ n 
26 
i 
viJI 
29 31 
28 30 
26 28 
'~fJ t t 1 
60 
Total hydrocarbons from a 
Lorraine coal (275.106 yrs) 
Branched and cyclic alkanes from 
an Aquitaine crude oil 
Branched and cyclic alkanes from 
a coastal mud (Le Havre). The upper 
traae is the total ion aurrent, the 
Zower one the fragmentagram 191. 
Total acids (as methyl esters) 
from the Messel shale (50.106yrs) 
NUMBERS REFER TO THE FORMULAS OF 
THE TABLES 
(1 to 78). 

The hopanoids 
each case, the identification of the peaks indicated is established beyend 
any doubt, including stereochemistry, which is related to maturation. 
713 
Every sample of sedimentary organia matter studied so far aontains at least 
some members of the hopane family. 
This includes the widest variety of 
samples, comprising as well young muds, lake or sea sediments, petroleums, 
lignites, shales or coals, etc. 
Ages range from a few to 5 x 108 yrs. 
Contents vary from just detectable traces to nearly 50 % of the whole extract. 
Usually, the hopanoids are a very complex mixture, with little predominance 
of any substance ; but in one case, that of an Australian lignite, 
one 
c32 hopanoid acid forms some 90 % of the total acidic fraction, and represents 
some 0.05 % of the total rock ! 
Structures are extremely varied. 
The 
Tables summarize those known to-
day : hydrocarbons of various classes, aldehydes and ketones, alcohols or 
acids. 
Even though some classes have not been examined (e.g. amines, sulfur 
derivatives, heterocycles), more than one hundred hopanoids have already been 
identified in sediments. 
This is in sharp centrast to the very limited 
nurober and 
the restricted distribution of molecular fossils of other series 
of triterpenes. 
Thus, only one other substance of this complexity appears 
to present a similar generality of distribution : it is an aromatic hydro-
carbon, most probably derived from ß-amyrin by loss of ring A. 
Nothing is 
? 
~-Amyrin 
known yet of its origin (9). 
The structures of sedimentary hopanoids, once known, led to the traditional 
problern of palaeontology : the reconstruction, from fossils, of the organisms 
(in this case, of the molecules) of origin . 
It is evident that such complex 
substances must have originated from very similar molecules, and that these 
in turn can provide information on the living organisms which had contained 
them. 
A complex structure contains more information than a simple one because 
it is so much less "probable". 
It cannot just have "happened". 
Furthermore, 
redundancy (like here, with the variety of closely related structures of isola-
ted substance~ increases the weight of the evidence - but, in this case, 
the exquisite structural variations also provide information on the nature of 
the reactions having taken place in geological conditions, during diagenesis. 
Hopanoids with 30 or fewer carbon atoms could of course easily be interpreted 
(10), in broad terms, as the products of the diagenesis of c30 hopanoids, for 
instance of dipZoptene 1 known in several organisms living to-day. 
It is 
easy to accept that diagenesis can transform c30 hopanoids into hopane itself, 

714 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
or into a partially aromatized c26 hydrocarbon. 
However, the structure of the 
c32 acid already mentioned is obviously a much more important piece of infor-
mation, either for the knowledge of the diagenetic mechanisms (can they also 
lead to the formation of new c-c bonds ?) or for the definitidn of the orga-
nisms having produced the precursors of the molecular fossils observed. 
In fact, many sediments contain extended hopanoids. ranging up to but not 
higher than c36 (11). 
Of the supplementary carbon atoms, one to five at 
most are present as one g-alkyl group attached to the side-chain (which 
leads to the frequent presence of two diastereemers at C-22) • 
The other 
supplementary carbon atom is in the ring system (and is rarely present) • 
At the time of these observations, no living organism was known, containing 
additional carbon atoms on any pentacyclic triterpene derivative ; this might 
have meant that these extended hopanoids were metabolites of extinct orga-
nisms. 
However, their presence even in relatively young sediments gave more 
weight to another hypothesis : that we were in fact dealing with fossils 
related to metabolites of present-day organisms, but not yet known. 
This 
would have been the same situation that had occurred with "living fossils" 
such as the Crossopterigian fish Latimeria ahalumneae, closely related to 
well-known Devonian 
fossils, but found only some thirty years ago not to be 
extinct. 
Our moleaular aoelaaanths (12) are obviously derived from substances 
related to the "bacteriohopanetetrol" isolated, iust at the right time, from 
OH 
OH 
--~ 
-~ 
Bacteriohopanetetrol 
OH OH 
-0A 
OH OH 

The hopanoids 
715 
Aaetobaater xytinum, and for which two hypothetical structures had been 
suggested (13). 
Our proof of the correct structure for the fossil bacterio-
hopane (11) led us to conclude that the correct structure for the tetrol 
must be the one indicated, despite the authors' preference for the one in 
brackets ; this hypothesis was proved by a direct correlation (14). 
Bacteriohopane derivatives have so far been isolated only either from sedi-
ments, or from micro-organisms, where they are very frequent (12,13,15,16). 
This is a convincing argurnent in favour of the microbiological origin of at 
least part of the organic matter of all sediments. 
An additional argurnent comes from the isolation of hopane derivatives carry-
ing an additional nuclear methyl group, first from micro-organisms (17), and 
-~ 
.1
cHpH 
Acetobader xylinum 
Baltic sea 
sediment 
soon thereafter from a Baltic Sea sediment (18). 
PRESENT DISTRIBUTION OF HOPANOIDS 
Hopanoids, in contemporary organisms, form two distinct groups. 
The earliest ones to have been found were, like all other naturally occurring 
pentacyclic triterpenes, oxygenated at C-3. 
They are 3ß-alcohols or 3-keto-
nes, localized in resins or genins of saponins, and found only in a few 
families of higher plants (1) · 
We shall only mention two typical structures, that of hydroxyhopanone, and 
that of the much more heavily oxygenated genin of a saponin, spergulagenin A. 
The first one is a constituent of resins, and therefore, like the secend one, 
a secretion product. 
They are obviously products of cyclization of squalene 
OH 
0 
Hydroxyhopanone 
Spergulagenin - A 
epoxide to hopane-3ß,22-diol, and of further oxidations. 
Their scattered 
distribution, as well as their usual presence in complex mixtures, point to 
the absence of any specific intracellular role. 

716 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
The second group of hopanoids in present living organisms are devoid of the 
3ß-hydroxyl or 3-oxo group characteristic of all the other groups of triter-
penoids. 
These 3-deoxyhopanoids 
are found in two large taxonomic groups of 
living organisms : ferns or allied plants, and micro-organisms. 
Ferns, or -at least the order of Filicales, constitute a large store of hopane 
derivatives, and of rearranged structures (19). 
Some mosses and lichens also 
have been reported to contain hopanoids. 
Fern triterpenes include mostly 
hydrocarbons, and in particular the remarkable series ranging from diploptene 
to filicene, comprising all the intermediate stages of the complete back-bone 
Diploptene 
Wallichiene 
Fernenes 
Filicene 
rearrangement of diploptene. 
To these, are to be added oxygenated derivati-
ves, e.g. diplopterol or its isomer neriifoliol, or davallic acid. 
Leuco-
tylin is, like several other liehen constituents, more heavily oxygenated. 
Diplopterol 
I 
I 
OH 
Neriifoliol 
Davallic acid 
Leucotylin 
The function of these substances is not defined. 
We consider most of them, 
excluding diplopterol and neriifoliol, as secretion products, i.e. products 
of the cell metabolism not directly used by the cell for its internal 
workings. 
This point will be discussed later. 
The hopanoids of microorganisms form, by contrast, a very homogeneaus group, 
of obvious cellular importance. 
They comprise, beside diplopterol and its 
isomer tetrahymanol, a variety of bacteriohopane derivatives, all with a 
strongly dissymetric structure from the point of view of lyophilicity. 
The 

The hopanoids 
717 
Diplopterol 
Tetrahymanol 
/ CH 2- CH 2-CHOH-CHOH-CHOH-CH 20H 
/ CHz- CHOH-CHOH-CHOH-CHOH-CH 20H 
".. CH 2 CHOH-CH2 CO-cHOH-CH 20H 
. 
: 
etc ... 
(CH 3) 
lipophilic ring system may or may not bear one 1 or two 1 double bonds1 and/or 
one additional methyl group ; the hydrophilic side-chain contains up to 5 
hydroxyl groups on an n-cs chain. 
Their distribution is by far not yet delineated. 
The Table summarizes some 
of our data. 
It shows that 1 in several groups of bacteria1 the presence of 
hopanoids is constant 1 in amounts sufficient to enable them to play a struc-
tural role. 
In other well segregated groups1 they are constantly absent. 
The taxonomic significance of many other data is not yet clear 1 and will be 
reserved for another discussion. 
In only two organisms, hopanoids are found simultaneously with sterols 
in 
the protozoon1 Tetrahymena pyriformis {but there1 diplopterol and tetrahyma-
nol are found only when it iR grown on a sterol-free diet {20)) 1 andin 
MethyLoaoaaus aapsuLatus {but there 1 no 
sterols proper but 4a-methyl sterols 
are present {21)). 
POSSIBLE FUNCTION OF HOPANOIDS 
We have proposed that hopanoids of the amphiphilic type found in prokaryotes 
play a structural role in the cells. 
They have molecular dimensions similar 
to those of sterols1 and a similar lyophilic dissymetry. 
They should there-
fore be able to replace sterols in their structural role of inserts into the 
phospholipid part of biomembranes(l6)I. This is what appears to have been 
demonstrated with tetrahymanol ; in the sterol-free form of Tetrahymena 
pyriformisl tetrahymanol is localized in the membrane 1 which adjusts slightly 
the composition of its ~-acyl chains {by increasing unsaturation) to accomo-
date the newl bulkier inserts {22). 
For other hopanoids1 no direct evidence 
is available yet1 and experiments with model biomembranes 1 possessing 
u-acyl lipids adjusted to fit better around the hopane Skeleton (i.e. bran-
ched-chain acyl lipids) 1 have not been reported. 
I see Note at the end of the manuscript. 

718 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
Distribution of Hopanoids in Procaryotes (16, 29) 
Cyanobacteri a 
Purple sulfur bacteria 
Green sul fur bacteri a 
Purple non sulfur bacteria 
~1ethyl otrophs 
Other bacteri a 
Hopanoids not detected 
Synechococcus sp. 
Spil'U Zina sp. 
Chromatiwn sp. '/:( 
Amoebobaater sp.it 
Thioaapsa sp. f:l 
·{;{ 
ChZorobiwn (2•strains) 
ThiobaaiZZus (2 strains) 
Pseudomon2s fZuorescens 
Ps. aeruginosa 
Ps. stutzeri 
Ps. ma Ztophi Zia 
Ps. diminuta 
Xanthomonas campestris 
Rhizobium. Zupini 
Ag1•obacter>ium tumefaciens 
CauZobaater crescentus 
MoraxeZZa (2 strains) 
Escherichia co Z i 
Proteus vuZgaris 
Baai Uus subtiZis + 
Sporosareina Zutea + 
Clostridium paraputrifiaum -;7 + 
Streptoaoaaus faeaaZis i:i:+ 
Micrococcus Zuteus + 
Miaromonospora sp .+ 
Actineplanes brasiZien.sis -t 
Hopanoi ds present 
Anabaena sp. 
Nostoa sp. (2 strains) 
Syneahoaystis sp. (? strains) 
6 s t ra ins of Rhodopseudomonas 0 
RhodospiriZ Zwn (). 
Rhodomiarobiwn (). 
7 strains of MethyZoaoaaus 
Me thy Zomonas 
MethyZoaystis 
MethyZosinus 
Hyphomiarobium sp. 
Nitrosomona.s europaea 
Pseudomonas cepacia 
Azotobacter vinetandii 
Aaetobaater ( 12 strains, covering 9 
speci es) 
BaaiZZus acidocaZdarius+ 
Streptomyces chartreusi + 
Archaebacteria 
DesuZfovibrio desuZfuricans 1:r 
Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicu.'711:r 
HaZobacteriwn autirubrum 
SuZfolobus acidocaldar>ius 
Thermoplasma acidophilum 
Notes: 
a) Hopanoi ds present compri se di p l optene, di p 1 optero 1 and bacteri 0 -
hopane-polyols ( the latter usually preponderant). 
b) The strains studied by us are all defined by a proper collection number 
available on request, and will be 1·eported in a later publication, 
tagether >Ii th the quantitative data. 
+ Gram-positive bacteria; the others are Gram-negative (Methanobaote~ium variable) 
-;7 Grown anaerobically; the others are grown aerobically 

The hopanoids 
"PRIMITIVENESS" OF THE HOPANOIDS, POTENTIAL PHYLOGENETIC PRECURSORS 
OF STEROLS 
719 
The hopanoids share in cornmon with sterols to be biogenetically derived from 
the c30 acyclic triterpene precursor, squalene. 
Whereas squalene is directly 
cyclized to tetrahymanol (23) or fern hydrocarbons (24), it is first oxidized 
to its epoxide, and this is the substrate which gives sterols via lanosterol 
products 
Squalene 
1 
Squalene epoxide 
H 
Cholesterol 
Cycloartenol 
(in fungi and vertebrates) or via cycloartenol (in green plants) (25) • 
The 
cyclization of squalene into hopane derivatives is more "primitive" by a 
nurober of criteria. 
1- It leads to the amphiphilic products, diplopterol or tetrahymanol, by an 
anaerobic reaction, a hydration of the substrate. 
Thus, the OH group of the 
products derives from water, whereas, in cholesterol, it comes from air, and 
therefore has become available only after the onset of photosynthesis, 
if one accepts that the primitive atmosphere was oxygen-free (27). 
2- The squalene-hopanoid cyclization is "simple", in that it is not 
accompa-
nied by the extensive rearrangement necessary for sterol biosynthesis. 
3- This cyclization is also "simple", in that it entails folding the squalene 
skeleton into an all-prechair conformation, whereas, for sterols, the confor-
mation of squalene must part.ially approximate the more energetic boat form. 
4- An enzymatic system cyclizing squalene to diplopterol in Aaetobaater ranaens 
has been found to display little substrate specificity : it accepts as well 
squalene itself, as both its R- and s-epoxides (which give the 3ß- and 3~-

720 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
Squalene 
H 
hydroxy derivatives of diplopterol) 
All these primitive characteristics may imply that cyclization of squalene 
to functionally active amphiphilic molecules may have occurred already at a 
pre-aerobiotic stage of biochemical evolution. 
Furthermore, it takes little molecular evolution to orient squalene towards 
sterols rather than triterpenes : the existence of a specific squalene oxidase, 
and a slight modification of the squalene cyclase to a specific squalene 
oxidocyclase , leading to the appropriate isomeric triterpene skeleton, that 
of lanosterol ; and finally a few oxidative degradation steps, removing the 
methyl groups. 
By 
sheer luck, it appears that one of the micro-organisms 
we have investigated illustrates beautifully how these evolutionary steps 
might have happened : a cell-free system derived from Methytoaoaaus aapsutatus 
cyclizes squalene to diploptene 
but squalene (R,S)-epoxide to a mixture of 
3ß- and 3a-lanosterols and of 3ß- and 3a-hydroxydiploptenes ; the further 
oxidative steps to a 4a-methyl sterol are not carried out in vitro 
(29). 
In 
Squalene 
this case, obviously, there are two distinct cycl'ases. 
The one operating on 
squalene has "become '' specific to this substrate and does not operate on 
squalene epoxide (co~trary to the case of Aaetobaater mentioned above). 

The hopanoids 
721 
The other one operates on squalene epoxide but, unlike squalene oxidocyclases 
of higher organisms, also affects squalene (29). 
However, whereas the squalene 
oxidocyclases of higher organisms are specific for the cyclization of the 
3S-epoxide only, the squalene oxidocyclase of MethyZococcus has "not yet 
become" stereospecific, and cyclizes both the R- and S-epoxides. 
One can 
envision an evolutionary mechanism with, for example, the following sequence 
a- one enzyme, aspecific, acting on the only available substrate, say squa-
lene. 
b- one enzyme, becoming specific to that substrate. 
c- several isoenzymes, specific to the same substrate. 
d- one of these isoenzymes becoming operative to squalene epoxide, once this 
new substrate becomes available (by a stereospecific epoxidation) but not 
yet stereospecific towards R or S epoxides ; the other isoenzymes, acting 
on squalene only, subsist. 
e- the initial isoenzyme(s), specific to squalene, becoming obsolete once 
the function played by their products (e.g. tetrahymanol, diplopterol, etc.) 
is better carried out by sterols, formed by a completely stereospecific 
enzyme. 
Acetobacter would be at step a, MethyZococcus at step d, and plants, fungi 
or vertebrates at step e. 
In MethyZococcus, the specificity of products 
observed furthermore implies compartments in the cell. 
Let us finally remark that the gross nature of the active groups of the 
various cyclases implied is similar. 
The figure shows two schematic repre-
DIPLOPTEROL 
TETRAHYMANOL 
.... a 
LANOSTEROL 

722 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
sentations of the requirements for the production of a hopane, and of a lano-
sterol derivative. 
The sarne acidic and nucleophilic + basic groups are 
0 
found, at distances differing by a few A only (30) . 
SUBSTITUTES OF HOPANOIDS AND OF STEROLS 
Not every rnicroorganisrn contains hopanoids. 
Many groups are devoid both of 
thern and of sterols. 
Their function, if irnportant for the life of a cell, 
rnust in these cases be fulfilled by other constituents. In fact, little is 
known of the structures of biornernbranes of rnost taxonornic groups of rnicro-orga-
nisrns, and in rnany cases there issirnply no reason to assurne that they conforrn 
to the usual rnodel accepted for the eukaryotic rnernbranes, and extended above 
for the hopanoid-containing ones. 
It appears however that, at least in sorne cases, one can discern that related 
rnechanisrns rnay be at play to stabilize a double-layer rnernbrane forrned of 
0 
arnphiphilic partners, with a aa. 15 A long hydrocarbon chain. 
Mechanisrns 
A to E are either docurnented 
or at least plausible. 
Mechanisrn A is the 
classical one, with rigid arnphiphilic inserts (sterols or hopanoids), about 
0 
15 A long1 oriented parallel to the lipidic chains and increasing the rigidi-
ty of the fluid lipid rnatrix with which they interact. 
Mechanisrn Bor C would 
0 
be a variant, with rigid arnphiphilic inserts about 30 A long, i.e. able to 
span cornpletely across the double-layer. 
They could possess either one, or 
two hydrophilic terminal groups, and are probably exernplified by the rnany 
c40-c50 carotenoids found in bacteria, and carrying, about 30 carbons apart, 
two hydroxylic groups 
or two glucosides - or, at one end only, one such 
group. 
Sorne typical structures are shown next page; rnany others are known. 
E 
unn 
r== NON RIGID 
uulu 
o-
RIGID INSERT 
0 
""QNON RIGID SPANNER 
RIGID INSERT 
RIGID INSERT 
RIGID SPANNER 
The localisation of carotenoids in bacterial rnernbranes has been proved in one 
case (31) and it has been shown that, in one case, they can indeed stabilize 
the rnernbranes (32)x. However, in other cases, the production of carotenoids 
is too large for thern to be only structural elernents of the rnernbranes, or 
their structures are not suitable for such a role. 
Also, it is not at all 
certain that their orientation in the rnernbranes is that irnplied by the 
drawings -
and this applies also to rnechanisrn E, which would necessitate a 
x see Note at the end of the rnanuscript. 

The hopanoids 
723 
rigid carotenoid hydroaarbon to be oriented parallel to the lipid chains. 
Mechanism D appears at first sight to be a variant of mechanism C : a chain 
of about 30 C would span across the membrane, linked at each end to a hydro-
philic head group. 
However, in this case, the chain would not be rigid, and 
its effect on the double-layer would come from its being kept taut by the 
necessary inclusion of both head-groups in the aqueous phase. 
One such case 
appears to be present in the lipids of extreme thermo-acidophilic m~cro-orga­
nisms, the Thermoplasma,considered as part of a group of primitive bacteria, 
the archaebacteria. 
These ~ontain, on the one hand glyceryl ethers of 
dihydrodiphytol (33) and of its unsaturated derivatives (32), and on the other 
hand the remarkable very large ring ethers shown (35) formed from a dimer of 
dihydrophytol,the structure of which we accept here as formed by w,w'-dimeri-
0 
Gluc/ 
HO 
C 40 Tetraether 
Corynexanthin 
OH 
OH 
Luthein 
zation (in the reverse sense to carotenoids). 
This remarkable combination 
of partners having the same cross-section,and lengths in the exact ratio 1:2, 
represents probably rather ideally mechanism D. 
It is not only potentially 
operative in micro-organisms as extreme as that in which it has been studied. 
We have in fact obtained independent evidence for the presence of ethers of 
a c40 diol (or alcohol) of skeleton identical with that of ThermopZasma, by 
isolating the corresponding hydrocarbon from the insoluble organic matter 
(the "kerogen") of a lacustrine eocene shale (Messel, Germany). 
The proce-
dure followed happened to have been identical to that later used fo.r the 
bacterial lipids, so that a complete identification of the hydrocarbons from 
the fossil source and from presently living micro-organisms was possible (36) 
In the case of the Messel shale, geology excludes any episodes of extreme 
acidity, high temperature or high salinity, typical of the ecological niches 
of many present-day archaebacteria, but methanogenic bacteria, also part of 
this primitive group, may well have played a role in the diagenesis of the 
shale. 
PHYLOGENETIC DERIVATION OF HOPANOIDS 
It appears that, in organisms presumed to be the most primitive known to-day, 
the lipid part of membranes is of type D, with partners deriving both from 
the biosynthesis of acyclic diterpenes, followed by 
a) reduction -
and, for 
P.A.A.C. 51.4-D 

724 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
the c40 partners, b) dimerization by a mechanism which we still fail to 
understand. 
This is probably the most primitive type of stabilized bio-mem-
brane, in view of its biosynthetic homogeneity. 
The dimerization of the c20 precursor of dihydrophytol, geranyl-geraniol, can 
also occur by the a,a'-ends, to yield phytoene, the ~recursor of all 
carotenoids, which can ther~fore be considered as variants of the w,wLdimer 
of mechanism D. 
The precise sequence of steps operating to dimerize geranyl-geraniol into 
OR 
2 X 
w 
w 
OR 
-
C40 carotenoids 
I 
aa 
c30 carotenoids 
/ 
2 X 
-
~ 
Triterpenes 
Squalene 
phytoene is identical to that leading from farnesol, a required inter-
mediate of the biosynthesis of geranyl-geraniol, to squalene. 
In bacteria, 
c30 carotenoids derived from squalene are known ; they simply represent 
products of the same mechanism operating on a simpler substrate than for 
the usual c40 carotenoids (37). 
We thus see that carotenoids may have preceded, in the biochemical evolution, 
the substances derived from squalene, and in particular the hopanoids, and 
later the sterols. 
We realize of course that such a hypothetical scheme, based on the available 
scant and scattered data, can be put to test in many ways - if not directly 
in the sense of a reconstruction .of biochemical evolution. 
We propose it 
here, with all the limitations it still has, in the hope that it will provide 
a frame-work for later work 
by others and by ourselves. 

The hopanoids 
725 
One point remains to be briefly discussed : the presence of 3-deoxyhopanoids 
in ferns and a few "lower" plants. 
Provisionally! 
we entertain the (testa-
ble) hypothesis that th~y may originate in some of the organelies of the 
cells, ma,Ybe 
in the Chloropla-sts. 
If this were to be confirmed, it would 
be in perfect agreement with the theory of the "capture", which assumes that 
Chloroplasts were initially free-living cyanobacteria, captured by a larger 
amoeboid pre-eucaryotic cell and having become obligatory symbionts (38) • 
In the case of ferns, this would then imply that, contrary to other green 
plants and to Tetrahymena, production of hopanoids is not repressed by the 
sterols produced by other parts of the cell. 
This is only one example of 
experimental work suggested to test some of the hypotheses presented here. 
Acknowledgements :We acknowledge very helpful discussions about a very 
preliminary form of the ideas presented here, with Professor Konrad Bloch 
and with Professor Roger Y. Stanier. 
Subsequent extension has owed much to 
many individuals, especially in discussions following oral presentations of 
our progressively more comprehensive hypothetical scheme. 
Our work on Organic Geochemistry has been generously supported by the ELF 
company, the Compagnie Fran~aise des Petroles, the Institut Fran~ais du 
Petrole; this, and our work in microbial biochemistry,form part of our 
activities supported by the Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, and 
by grants from Hoffmann-La Roche (Basle), Roure-Bertrand (Grasse) and Rhone-
Poulenc (Paris) • 
Cet article est dedie au Professeur Edgar ~EDERER, a l'occasion de 
son soixante-dixieme anniversaire, en temoignage de sincere admiration 
et de fidele reconnaissance pour la confiance qu'il a temoignee, et 
communiquee, a l'un de nous (G.O.) au debut de la carriere de celui-ci. 
Note added after the first submission of this paper to the Scientific 
Editor 
We have become aware of the paper by Nes (39), which also proposes that 
sterols may be replaced, in some Procaryotes, by sterol-like molecules such as 
Tetrahymanol. 
However, we feel this is the only convergence between Nes' 
views and ours. 
One of us (G.O.) has attended a lecture by D~ Nes on this 
subject and, aware of the dangers linked 
with cryptomnesia, acknowledges that 
this lecture may have led to his initial latent interest in the evolution of 
biomembranes. 
Manuscript typed by Denise Voegel; drawings by Marie-Claire Demezy. 

726 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
H 0 P A N 0 I D S 
isolated from sediments : 
TABLE I : HYDROCARBONS 
@ ~-:., ~--( ~-.l~ ~--~ ~--.r-' f?···~ 
1 
! 
.a 
~ 
i 
' 
§. 
1. 
~---~ Ji··r ~---~ ~1 ~ ~ 
1 
t 
10 
.11 
12 
13 
~~~~~-.( 
1! 
15 
!§ 
17 
~11 
~*~~~~ 
~ 
20 
gJ 
22 
23 
24 
Refs. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 18. 

The hopanoids 
727 
H 0 P A N 0 I D S 
isolated from sediments 
TABLE II : OXYGENATED DERIVATIVES 
<fto n. ,...-.. 
D .. ~CHO 
'-Cf ·1 
CHO '\!_J 
I 
H 
.H 
R·CO,H ~-(COaH -<t?·lcoaH .<tf·jco,H -<t?··r---co,H 
g 
H 
a 
&o 
~ 
.L1._ ~ 
LJ&.._:/'-/ C01H 
~ 
T ~co,H "\!_j T -
i1 
~ 
D-.. ~COH 
'\1! 
I 
t 
1I 
Refs. 2, 5, 18. · 
Tables I and II: 
C-22 diastereemers (R, or S, or both in matured sediments) for substances 
4-8, 10, 13-17, 21-25, 30-34, 41-47, 49-53, 55-56, 59-64, 67-70, 73-78. 

728 
GUY OURISSON, PIERRE ALBRECHT and MICHEL ROHMER 
REFERENCES 
1. T.K. DEVON and A.I. SCOTT, Handbock of Naturally Occurring Compounds, 
Vol. II : Terpenes, Academic Press, New York (1972). 
2. ~· a) G. EGLINTON and M.T.J. MURPHY, Eds., Organic Geochemistry 
Methods and Results, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg (1969). 
b) Advances in Organic Geochemistry : a series of yearly monographs, 
various publishers. 
3. ~· P. ALBRECHT and G. OURISSON, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., lQ, 209 
(1971). 
4. P. ALBRECHT and G. OURISSON, Tetrahedron, ~~' 2880 (1972). 
5. A. VAN DORSSELAER, P. ALBRECHT and G. OURISSON, Bull. Soc. Chim. France, 
165 (1976). 
A. VAN DORSSELAER, Dr. Sc. Thesis, Universite Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg 
(1975). 
6. In the case of hop-17(21)-ene, isolated from the Messel shale. 
A. ENSMINGER, Dr. Sc. Thesis, Universite Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg 
(1977). 
7. W. SEIFERT, J.M. MOLDOWAN, G.W. SMITH and E.V. WHITEHEAD, Nature, 
~,fJ,, 
436 (1978). 
8. I.R. HILLS and E.V. WHITEHEAD, ibid., ~~~' 977 (1966). 
9. C. SPYCKERELLE, A.C. GREINER, P. ALBRECHT and G. OURISSON, J. Chem. 
Research, (S), 330 ; (M), 3746 (1977). 
10. P. ARPINO, P. ALBRECHT and G. OURISSON, in Advances in Organic Geochemis-
try, 1971, p. 173, Pergarnon Press, Oxford (1972). 
11. A. VAN DORSSELAER, P. 
~LBRECHT and G. OURISSON, Bull. Soc. Chim. France, 
165 (1977). 
12. ANON. (alias G. OURISSON), Images de la Chimie, 1977, Ed.du CNRS, Paris, 
45 (1978). 
13. a) H.J. FORSTER, K. BIEMANN, W.G. HAIGH, N.H. TATTRIE and J.R. COLVIN, 
Biochem. J., 1~~, 133 (1973). 
b) T.A. LANGWORTHY and W.R. MAYBERRY, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, ~~1• 570 
(1976) . 
14. M. ROHMER and G. OURISSON, Tetrahedron Letters, 3633 (1976). 
15. Id., ibid., 3641 (1976). 
16. M. ROHMER, P. BOUVIER and G. OURISSON, Proc. Nat.Acad.Sc.USA, in the press. 
17. M. ROHMER and G. OURISSON, Tetrahedron Lett., 3637 (1976). 
18. M. DASTILLUNG, Dr. Sc. Thesis, Universite Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg (1976). 
19. G. BERTI and F. BOTTARI, Progress in Phytochemistry, 1• 589 (1969). 
20. R.L. CONNER, J.R. LANDREY, C.H. BARNS and F.B. MALLORY, J. Protozool., 
1~· 600 (1968). 

The hopanoids 
21. a) C.W. BmRD, C.M. LYNCH, F.J. PIRT, W.W. REID, C.J.W. BROOKS and 
B.S. MIDDLEDITCH, Nature,~~~' 473 (1971). 
b) Structures defined by P. BOUVIER, M. ROHMER, P. BENVENISTE and 
G. OURISSON, Biochern. J., ~~~' 267 (1976) • 
22. K.A. FERGUSON, F.M. DAVIS, R.L. CONNER, J.R. LANDREY and F.B. MALLORY, 
J. Biol. Chern., ~~~' 6998 (1975). 
23. J.M. ZANDER, J.B. GREIG and E. CASPI, ibid., ~~~' 1247 (1970) • 
24. D.H.R. BARTON and G.P. llOSS, Chern. Corn., 261 (1966) • 
729 
25. L.J. GOAD, in T.w. GOODWIN, Ed., Natural Substances Formed Biologically 
frorn Mevalenie Acid, p. 45, Acadernic Press, London (1971) • 
26. K. BLOCH, in A. KORNBERG, B.L. HORECKER, L. CORNUDELLA and J. ORO, Eds., 
Reflections on Biochernistry, p. 143, Pergarnon Press, Oxford (1976) • 
27. Photodissociation rnay have led to pre-biotic forrnation of rnolecular oxygen. 
For a recent discussion, see K.M.TOWE, Nature, 411, 657 (1978). 
28. C.ANDING, M.ROHMER and G.OURISSON, J.Amer.Chern.Soc., ~~' 1274 (1976). 
29. P. BOUVIER, Dr. Sc. Thesis, Universit~ Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg (1978). 
30. R. ANTON, Dr. Sc. Thesis, Universit~ Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg (1974). 
31. a) S.C. KUSHWAHA, M. KATESand W.G. MARTIN, Can. J. Biochern., 1~§, 751 
(1975). 
b) M. ANVAR, T. HASAN KHAN, J. PREBBLE and P.F. ZAGALSKY, Nature, ~~~' 
538 (1977). 
32. L. HUANG and A. HAN, Biochirn. Biophys. Acta, 4~~, 361 (1974). 
33. M. KATES, in Ether Lipids, Chernistry and Biology, F.S. SNYDER, Ed., p.351, 
Acadernic Press, New York (1972). 
34. M. DE ROSA, S. DE ROSA, and A. GAMBACORTA, Phytochernistry, ~~' 1995 (1976). 
35. a) M. DE ROSA, s. DE R'JSA, A. GAMBACORTA, L. 
fHNALE and J. BU'LOCK, 
ibid., 1.§, 1961 (1977). 
b) T.A. LANGWORTHY and W.R. MAYBERRY, Soc. Gen. Microbiol. Proc., J, 165 
( 1976). 
36. W. MICHAELISand P. ALBRECHT, unpublished results. 
37. The dirnerization of geranyl-geraniol to phytoene and that of farnesol to 
squalene involve a sirnilar cyclopropane-alcohol. 
However, this is open-
ed with concornitant dehydration in the first case, and reduction in the 
second. The precursor of bacterial c30 carotenoids appears not to be 
known. 
It would be of considerable interest to define whther it is 
squalene or 12(13)-dehydrosqualene. 
38. A.F.w. SCHIMPER, Bot. z., ~!· 105 (1883). 
Fora recent discussion, see 
M.A. RAGAN and D.J. CHAPMAN, A Biochernical Phylogeny of the Protists, 
Acadernic Press, New York (1978). 
39. W.R. NES, Lioids, j, 596 (1974). 
