PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
Department of Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science. 
Rehovot, Israel 
ABSTRACT 
Fo1Iowing a brief historical review of so1id-state photochemistry current 
research is discussed under four para1Ie1 headings: first, analysis of the topo-
chemical postulate according to which the course of the solid-state reaction 
and the stereochemistry of the photodimer (if any) can be predicted from the 
configuration and nearest-neighbour geometry of dosest monomer molecules 
in the crystal lattice; secondly, the study of the locus of the reaction, that is the 
dependence of the course ofthe reaction or (dimerization, cis-+ trans isomeriza-
tion) on crystal texture (dislocation, grain and phase boundaries): thirdly, a 
better understanding of the packing principles of organic molecules in their 
crystal structure to enable us to construct photoreactive (or lightstable) crystal 
structures of any given monomer as weil as mixed crystals of potentia1Iy co-
dimerizable monomers for synthetic purposes or energy-transfer studies. 
Several approaches to this problern of 'crystal engineering' based on general-
izations of packing modes of primary amides and of dichlorophenyl derivatives 
are outlined, and their application to a systematic photochemistry of the solid 
state discussed. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Thermal reactions of organic compounds in the solid state are nearly as 
old as organic chemistry itself. Light-induced reactions such as the photo-
dimerization of solid cinnamic acids, the reversible photochromy of the 
anils of salicylaldehyde, fulgides, tetrachloronaphthoquinone, and other 
solid-state reactions were already being studied towards the end of the last 
and the beginning of this century, by Marckwald 1, Ciamician and Silber2 , 
Stobbe\ de Jong4 , Senier5, to mention but a few. By the end of the nineteen-
twenties this phase of solid-state chemistry, which I would call the heroic 
era, had come to an end 6 , mainly because physical methods for the description 
of the solid state were as yet unable to provide insight into the molecular 
structure of organic solids. Thus, optical crystallography of organic com-
pounds, by then a weil established discipline which had passed through an 
intensive descriptive phase, had not progressed beyond the recognition of 
structural types in organic chemistry 7 • Treatment of the phenomena of 
polymorphism and phase transformation had not yet moved from the 
thermodynamic to the molecular stage. Solid-state chemists and crystal-
lographers of the mid-twenties shared the belief that the phenomena which 
they were investigating, surely depended upon molecular packing arrange-
ment; some expressed the hope that the novel technique of x-ray structure 
analysis would provide new impetus to their work. 
647 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
Certain general concepts had nevertheless been formulated already: thus, 
de Jong postulated in 19234 that the two known crystal modifications of 
trans-cinnamic acid comprised identical molecules arranged ditierently 
in space, and the stereo-structure of the two photoproducts, ct-truxillic and 
ß-truxinic acids, was directly related to the packing geometry ofthe monomer 
units in the two crystal structures from which the dimers were derived. 
In assessing the more recent history of research on solid-state photo-
chemistry one can, I believe, discern at least four concurrent and connected 
phases; the first has seen the experimental correlation of crystal structure on 
the one band with photo-activity (or -stability) and product structure on the 
other8• 9. We may call this the phase ofthe topochemical principle. 
The second phase now actively investigated is concerned with the limits 
oftbis topochemical correlation ofphysical structureand chemical behaviour, 
particularly in the simple equation of physical structure with the crystal 
lattice as seen by the normal method of x-ray structure analysis. The effect 
of crystal texture, e.g. disclocations 10- 12, is the major trend of this phase. 
We may call this the phase ofthe locus ofthe solid-state reaction. The present 
status of these two phases of solid-state research has provided the basis for 
the broad generalization that sophisticated solid-state techniques can define 
the initial state of the photochemical reaction, i.e. the conformation of the 
photoreactant in its ground state as weil as the structure of the rigid matrix 
surrounding the reactant. 
The third and fourth phases are in their infancy; in my view they must aim 
at the systematic development of solid-state photochemistry as a synthetic 
tool and as a methodology for the study of the mechanisms of photochemical 
reactions. To this end organic solid-state chemistry must be placed on a 
firmer basis. In an earlier review8 we emphasized the point that the rule of 
homology which has been essential to the development of solution chemistry 
does not hold in solid-state chemistry: 'the reactions of homologaus com-
pounds, R'(CH2)nR", RHal, R -meta]+ are not necessarily identical for all 
values of n, or for Cl, Br etc., or for Na+, K + etc. Since solid-state reactions 
are controlled by the molecular packing arrangement which is sensitive to n, 
to the size of the substituent, to the coordination requirements of the cation 
( to mention but a few factors affecting the structure of organic crystals),-
generalizations based on one or two representatives of a homologaus series 
can be highly misleading.' 
The systematic development of our subject will be difficult ifnot impossible 
until we understand the intermolecular forces responsible for the stability 
of the crystalline Iattice of organic compounds; a theory of the organic 
solid state is a requirement for the eventual control of molecular packing 
arrangement. Once such a theory exists we shall, in the present context of 
synthetic and mechanistic photochemistry, be able to 'engineer' crystal 
structures having intermolecular contact geometry appropriate for chemical 
reaction, much as, in other contexts, we shall construct organic conductors, 
catalysts, etc. In short, any rational development ofthe physics and chemistry 
of the solid state must be based upon a theory of molecular packing; since 
the molecules studied are complex, the theory will most likely be empirical 
for some time yet. Rules are now becoming available 13 - 16 in what I would 
regard as phase three, the phase of crystal engineering. 
648 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
Given the observation that double bonds separated by a translation axis of 
4 A can undergo cyclodimerization one might want to construct crystal 
structures in which this 4 A axis is predictably achieved for as large a dass 
of unsaturated compounds as possible. A technique which could impose this 
ß-type packing ( or any other specified packing arrangement) by means of a 
simple chemical modification without affecting the photochemical process 
would besuch a desirable goal. It would stimulate phase four, the phase of 
systematic solid-state photochemistry. 
Once the solid-state ehernist has the tools with which to control molecular 
packing arrangements he will be able to follow new lines of experimentation 
which so far have been largely denied to him. He will construct two-
component single-phase systems of definable structure such as substitutional 
solid solutions; thus, experiments on energy transfer in the undisturbed 
crystal structure, so far confined to transfer between normal and deuterated 
molecules, the classical example of the use of solid solutions in photochemical 
work 17, will be extended, both for mechanistic and synthetic purposes, to 
molecules of greater variation. In this manner experiments on solid-state 
sensitization will become possible once a structured solid solution of monomer 
and sensitizer can be obtained. On the synthetic side mixed dimers of 
predictable stereochemistry will become accessible. Other lines of work are 
conceivable, and some of them will be discussed below. 
Having tried to place solid-state photochemical research into a somewhat 
personal perspective I should now like to review very briefly phase one, 
discuss at some length phase two, and present current work in phases 
three and four. 
II. THE TOPOCHEMICAL ARGUMENT 
The classes of photodimerizable compounds to which the topochemical 
rules apply, have been summarized in a paper submitted to the Solvay 
meeting on the Photo-excited Organic Moleeule in 1967 and published in 
condensed form8 ; there is no need to quote this material in detail. More 
recent and unpublished material will be referred to below. 
The very high yield of C4-dimer (up to 90 per cent) from ct,ß-unsaturated 
carbonyl compounds, and its equally high sterical purity, particularly as 
compared with solution reactions, strongly argue for effective lattice control 
over the dimerization reaction. lts all-or-none-nature, i.e. photoreactivity or 
light-stability, is further evidence. Finally, dependence of reactivity and of the 
stereostructure of the product on the structure of each of the polymorphic 
crystalline phases of a given monomer is proof positive for the inter-
relationship of crystal structure and reaction course. 
The topochemical rules state that the stereochemistry of the dimer (I or m) 
is determined by the contact geometry [antiparallel (i.e. related by a crystal-
lographic centre of symmetry) or parallel (i.e. related by a translation axis)] 
of nearest-neighbour double bonds, provided that the centre-to-centre 
distance d of these double bonds is of the order of 4 A (experimentally 
observed Iimits 4.2 > d > 3.5 A)t 
·i· The Iimit of 4.2 Aisset by the absence of experimental data in the range 4.2 to 4.7 A, and 
is nottobe construed necessarily as an upper limit of dimerizability. At 4. 7 A and above reaction 
does not take place. 
649 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
The structure of the cyclodimers correlates very well with the contact 
geometry of nearest-neighbour monomer molecules in the reactive crystal 
structures of trans-configurated Ar. CH: CH. COR systems where Ar = C6H 5 
and substituted phenyl, 2-furyl, 2-thienyl, pyridyl and R = OH,OMe,OAr, 
NH 2 , NHR, Ar18 - 20 and of ß-unsaturated lactones (coumarins)2 \ lactams 
(e.g. pyrimidines)22, and p-quinones23. The photobehaviour of fumaric acid 
derivatives24• 25 including fumaronitrile follows the topochemical rules, as do 
the symmetrically and unsymmetrically substituted 1,4-butadiene derivatives 
trans,trans- and cis,cis-muconic acids (including derivatives of the former) 26, 
sorbic acid ·and sorbamide27 (see below). 
There is evidence from the solid-state chemistry of p-quinones that the 
formation of oxetanes follows the topochemical requirement of proper 
parallel alignment of )c~c< and >c=O bonds23• More recently, 
substituted trans-stilbenes28 and trans,trans-1,4-diphenylbuta-1,3-dienes2 9 
have been shown to undergo topochemically controlled dimerization 
indicating that the carbonyl-function is not an essential feature of C4-
cyclodimerization in the solid state. 
ex-type 
I-dimer 
+ 
trans-isomer 
ß-type 
trans-isomer 
Scheme 1. The solid-state photochemistry of cis-cinnamic acids 
There is limited evidence that close centrosymmetric contact of cis-
cinnamic acids can give the I-dimer, and very much strenger evidence that 
close translational packing of cis-cinnamic acids does not yield the all-cis-
cyclobutane of symmetry m: in both packing types the cis-acids undergo 
650 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
isomerization to the trans-cinnamic acid30 (Scheme 1). Topochemical 
dimerization of cis-configurated double bonds is observed in non-aromatic 
systems such as cis,cis-muconic acid. 
In summary, planar or near-planar monomers having appropriate packing 
geometry give the anticipated cyclobutane with retention of configuration 
of monomer geometry. Non-planar molecules (e.g. cis-cinnamic acids, 
ß-chloro-, bromo- and methyl-trans-cinnamic acids) undergo in the main 
trans,cis isomerization. The photochemistry of anthracene derivatives, that is 
cyclization to dianthracenes, is discussed below. 
We now ask how precisely the n-electron system oftwo double bonds must 
be aligned for reaction to occur. Several lines of approach to this question 
have been followed: In the methyl ester of m-bromo-cinnamic acid31 the 
contact geometry of the double bonds of adjacent molecules is unusual 
(Figure 1): the centre-to-centre distance of )c= c<groups in glide-plane 
related molecules is short (3.93 A); however, the double bonds are not 
parallel. Afterirradiation over long periods during which substituted methyl 
cinnamates packing in the ß-type have been completely dimerized, the 
material is essentially unchanged 3 2• 
Another demonstration of this point is provided by the photostability of 
the cx,m-diphenyl-all-trans-polyenes. As an example we show the packing 
arrangement of the octatetraene33 in Figure 2. The molecules, occupying 
centres of symmetry and being glide-plane related in space group Pbca, are 
not parallel: distances between carbon atoms such as C(7) · · · C(7) are short 
(3.7 A), but the separation of centres of double bonds is greater than 4.8 A 
throughout the crystal structure. Photareaction does not occur; instead the 
material and its homologues in closely related crystal structures fluoresce 
very strongly. The observation29 that diphenylbutadienes in the 4 A packing 
arrangement yield photodimers, eliminates the possible argument that these 
polyenes are intrinsically incapable of dimerization in the solid state. 
The specificity of molecular contact geometry required for dimerization 
in the rigid phase is weil demonstrated by the photobehaviour of cis-cinnamic 
acids. We have earlier reported30 that the photoreaction of cis-cinnamic 
acids leads to trans-acids and the topochemical photoproducts of the latter, 
and concluded that this process takes place in the sequence of events in 
equation 1 
{ cis} ~ { cis,trans} ~ { cis} + { trans} 
~ 
(1) 
photoproducts of the crystal forms of trans-acids 
that is, the trans-isomer is formed in solid solution within the cis-lattice 
from which it separates in a thermally controlled recrystallization step into 
its own lattice. There was no evidence of cross-dimers from a molecule each 
of cis- and trans-cinnarhic acid, although the latter was clearly located in the 
immediate neighbourhood of the former. To check this point two systems 
were investigated in quantitative detail 34, see Schemes 1 and 2 overleaf. 
(1) is partially converted to the cis-isomer (2) which is light-stable in its own 
crystal structure, and partially dimerized to centrosymmetric cyclobutane (3). 
651 

.G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
1 4 t 
~ 
1 
4 
c sinp 
-2-
Figure 1. Methyl-m-bromocinnamate. Packing arrangement seen along [100] 
alt- Irans -1,8- Oiphenyloctatetraene 
(W.Drenth and E.H. Wiebenga) 
0 1 2 .a 
L-L....J 
A centred at 0. 0. 0 
B 
1. 0. 0 
c 
~~.~ 
0 
0.1h.1J2 
E 
~.~.0 
Figure 2. Packing diagram seen normal to molecular plane of molecule A at (x, y, z) 
652 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
~CO,H ( r==\ 
)'H soolid 
solution po,H) 
~---
--!!!.... \_I-\_ 
+ ~ n --< 
--#-- mixeddimer 
CH 3 
CH 3 
CH 3 
2 
l 
recrystallization 
Ph 
Ho,cQco,H 
Ph 
~o,H+ 
CH 3 
o-<H 
CH 3 
solid-lightstable 
3 
solid 
Scheme 2. The solid-state photochemistry of ß-methyl-trans-cinnamic acid 
solid 
solid soJution 
CO,H 
h• 
( j'=\ )'H 
) 
CO H
qJ - ~ 
+~CO,H HO,C4 ' 
OMe 
OMe 
OMe 
1% mixed dimer 
4 
\ 
qJ'H 
OMe 
solid 
7 
5 
1 
as diester 
I Hgßr/hv 
I 
recrystallization 
Ar 
~C0
2H 
"'~ 
+ ~ 
_h_v_ H0 2~ 
C0 2H 
QMe 
Ar 
. 
topochemical 
solid 
dimer 
6 
Scheme 3: The solid-state photochemistry of o-methoxy-cis-cinnamic acid 
653 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
VPC analysis of the esterified (diazomethane) reaction mixture shows 
the presence of the three components (1), (2) and (3) and essentially negligible 
amounts of another product, possibly a second dimer (Scheme 2). Similarly 
the cis-acid (4) is converted to the trans-isomer (5) which we know to be 
capable of dimerization to the centrosymmetric cyclobutane (6). Again, 
VPC analysis of the esterified reaction mixture shows the three components 
(4), (5) and (6), and a trace (less than one per cent) of a second dimer. The last 
was tentatively identified on the basis of retention time as (7) prepared 
independently from the ex-dimer (6) by epimerization with mercuric bromide 
and light3 5 (Scheme 3.) 
~ 10 
(1) 
u 
L.. 
(1) 
0. 
..: 
(1) 
E 
0 
5 
0 
+5 -180 
5 
10 
15 
trans-isomer. per cent 
Figure 3. o-Methoxy-cis-cinnamic acid. Product 'distribution at various temperatures 
Thus in both systems solid solutions are formed during the course of 
continuous irradiation, containing both cis- and trans-isomers in what must 
be obviously close juxtaposition. In spite of the presence within the solid 
matrix of the two isomeric species, cross-dimerization between trans- and 
cis-acids takes place to only negligible extent. This picture has been further 
clarified by Mr Ron's study ofthe system (4) at various temperatures (Figure 3). 
Photareaction of the cis-acid (4) at room temperature produces mainly dimer 
(6) whose yield increases with exposure time while the amount of trans-isomer 
remains constant at about four or five per cent. At lowtemperatures (between 
-80° and -180°C) trans-isomer accumulates and relatively little dimer is 
formed. That this low-temperature effect is not due to a slow-down of the 
dimerization process could be established in independent experiments 
demonstrating negligible temperature dependence of the photoreaction of 
the trans-acid. Instead, it is caused by the absence of recrystallization of the 
654 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
solution of trans- in the lattice of cis-acid: samples such as represented by 
points 1 and 2 in Figure 3 which had been irradiated at - 80° and - 180°C 
respectively, were warmed in the dark, to + 60°C for a period of 20 h, then 
re-cooled to -80° and -180°C, re-irradiated foranother short period, and 
analysed to the composition shown in points 1' and 2'. This line of experi-
mentation strongly suggests that the thermally activated step is the re-
crystallization of the solution of photoproduct in the lattice of the starting 
materials, whose activation energy must be of the order of magnitude of the 
heat of sublimation of the monomer crystal, i.e. in the neighbourhood of 
20 to 30 kcaljmole, characteristic of organic crystals. If this interpretation is 
accepted then the low-temperature accumulation of trans-monomers strongly 
supports the topochemical argument that dimerization is very precisely 
controlled by the alignment of nearest-neighbours, even in the ground state. 
There is no doubt that the example quoted here of the absence of cross-
dimerization in a solid solution of product in monomers is an extreme case: 
in systems such as the pyrimidines 'errors' in dimerization arise after 
(varying) degrees of conversion to the topochemical product. 
The phenomenon of photo-crosslinking of polyvinyl cinnamates, recently 
reviewed by Williams36 should be mentioned at this stage; while u.v. 
irradiation produces diminution ofthe absorbance in the region characteristic 
of the cinnamate group there is very little evidence that the products are 
cyclobutanes: Sonntag and Srinivasan37 claim to have demonstrated the 
presence of et-truxillic acid among the hydrolysis products of irradiated 
poly(vinylcinnamates). On the other band, the e.s.r. spectrum38 of the 
polymer irradiated with 240-250 nm at 77oK indicates that at least two 
radical species are present, one of crosslinked cinnamoyl radicals, the other 
belanging to radicals on the main chain; unfortunately the exciting wave-
length chosen is rather short, it being known that at this wavelength diphenyl-
cyclobutanes are split; experiments at Ionger wavelengths, say near 300 nm, 
would be desirable. Although the literature speaks of cyclobutanes formed by 
the crosslinking process of cinnamate-containing polymers the evidence for 
intra- or inter-strand cyclodimerization is of very limited value; until more 
reliable data for cyclobutane become available the problern of cyclo-
dimerization of not necessarily parallel cinnamoyl residues must be left in 
abeyance. 
Summarizing this discussion of the topochemical rules as they apply to 
the photodimerization of et,ß-unsaturated acids we conclude that the exact 
parallel alignment, within a regular crystal lattice, of double bonds is an 
essential pre-requisite for cyclodimerization. 
111. THE LOCUS OF THE REACTION 
A meaningful discussion of the mechanism of reactions in the solid state 
requires the precise definition of the locus of the chemical event. On the one 
hand, x-ray structure analysis, which has provided the basis for the topo-
chemical arguments, describes the crystalline species as an idealized time-
and space-averaged three-dimensional repeat pattern: on the other hand we 
know that the real solid has surfaces, grain boundaries, dislocations 
adsorbed molecules, substitutional and other impurities (e.g. occluded 
655 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
solvent), and other defects which arenot readily or not all detectable by x-ray 
diffraction techniques. 
Since molecules sited at surfaces or dislocations are likely to have a higher 
chemical potential than molecules in the bulk phase the assumption is 
justified that thermal reactions will take place at the discontinuities; again, 
those photochemical reactions in which energy is transported through the 
bulk phase composed of suitably overlapped 1t-systems, are more likely to 
occur at these sites than in the bulk because these irregularities can serve as 
traps in the exciton-propagation mechanism. lt is not obvious a priori 
whether reaction at ·these particular sites is subject to the topochemical 
rules though, as we have seen, the topochemical approach adequately 
described the photochemistry of cx,ß-unsaturated acids etc. On the other 
band, evidence has been accumulating8• 10 that the photobehaviour of 
anthracene, 9-cyanoanthracene and 9-anthraldehyde could not be reconciled 
with the crystal structure of the monomers, and Craig and Sarti-Fantoni10 
suggested that 'reaction occurs at defects or surfaces or zones already 
disordered by dimerization'. 
A systematic chemical and crystallographic study in our Labaratory by 
Drs E. Heller39 and J. C. J. Bart has shown that the substituted anthracenes 
fall into at least three packing types corresponding to our cx,ß;y-classification: 
in the y-types [e.g. 9-methoxyanthracene40, Figure 4; 1-cyanoanthracene; 
1-chloroanthracene] the molecular planes are not parallel and the distances 
between the meso-atoms of neighbouring molecules greater than 5 A. As 
expected these compounds are Iightstahle in the crystalline phase though 
they photodimerize in solution. 
In the ex-type anthracene units are packed pairwise across centres of 
symmetry suchthat the C(9) · · · C(10') distances are short (3.6 Ä)40 (Figure 5). 
With the exception of 9-nitroanthracene monosubstituted anthracenes 
crystallizing in the ct-type, whether substituted at position 9(R =Cl, Br, Me, 
C0 2Me) or elsewhere [1-chloroanthracene (second modification)] produce 
the topochemically expected 1-dimer in high yield. 
· 
The anthracene derivatives which crystallize in the ß-type fall into three 
classes (Scheme 4): first, 1,5-dichloroanthracene and the 2,4-dichlorophenyl 
ester of 1-anthroic acid which dimerize to the (topochemical) head-to-head 
dimers; secondly, a Iightstahle group [R = Br, C0 2Me (both second 
modifications); C02H] and, third, a group yielding the I-dimer [R =Cl 
(second modification); CHO; CN (Figure 6)]. Thus, of these three groups 
only the one substituted elsewhere than at the meso-position gives the head-
to-head m-dimer expected on geometrical grounds, whilst the 9-substituted 
derivatives either do not react or give the non-topochemical head-to-tail 
dimer. 
N ow it is known that all 9-substituted monomers, even on photodimeriza-
tion in solution, yield only the head-to-tail dimers and do not produce the 
head-to-head dimers; the conclusion has been drawn that 9,9'-substituted 
head-to-head dimers cannot be formed, at least under photochemical 
conditions. If we accept this conclusion then the behaviour of the Iightstahle 
anthracenes in the ß-type is in effect topochemically normal since the head-
to-head product is presumably unstable. The formation of the centro-
symmetric dimers from parallel monomer molecules in the ß-packing mode 
656 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
A 
c' 
0 
1 
2 .& 
L-..l....-J 
Figure 4. 9-Methoxyanthracene. Packing diagram seennormal to molecular plane of molecule A 
at (x, y, z) 
0 
1 
2 .8, 
~ 
Figure 5. 9-Methylanthracene. Packing diagram seennormal to molecular plane of molecule A 
at (x, y, z) 
657 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
hv 
ß-type 
1-(2,4-dichlorophenoxycarbonyl) hv 
d 
h d d" 
1,5-dichloro 
-
Hea -to- ea 
tmer 
space 
group 
P2 12121 
9-Cl 
J 
P2 12121 
9-CHO 
P2 12121 
9-CN 
hv 
-
Head-to-tail dimer 
P212121 
1,10-dichloro ] 
P2tfa 
9-Br 
P2tfa 
9-C02Me 
PI 
9-C02H 
hv 
-
Lightstahle 
ex-type 
1-Cl 
isomor-
9-Cl 
phous 
9-Br 
9-Me 
~ Head-to-tail dimer 
9-C02Me 
9-CONH2 
Scheme 4. Photodimerization of anthracenes 
must be due to an abnormality of their crystal structures, such as the presence 
of dislocations which permit dimerization; such dislocations are, by 
implication, absent in the Iightstahle subclass. These photoactive dislocations 
have indeed been demonstrated in anthracene crystals, which were held 
responsible by Thomas and Williams11 for the 'topochemically forbidden' 
dimerization of solid anthracene, as weil as in 9-cyanoanthracene41 . 
In summary: light stability in the solid state of monomers which can 
photodimerize in solution; the existence of two crystal forms of the same 
monomer which are lightstable and dimerizable respectively; the formation 
of the topochemically expected dimers from centrosymmetrically close-
packed anthracenes and from translationally close-packed anthracenes 
substituted elsewhere than in the 9-position, argue for topochemically 
controlled reactions between nearest neighbours. The formation ofT-dimers 
from some but not all 9-substituted monomers packing in the ß-type must 
mean that the particular dislocations present in the photo-active forms 
bring about contact of monomer molecules of the correct geometry for 
photodimerization tobe possible; equally, whatever the disclocations present 
658 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
in the photostable ß-type, they are apparently not of suitable structure to 
cause the close antiparallel packing of monomer units which would permit 
formation ofthe head-to-tail dimer.lt follows that the molecular environment 
at a particular dislocation may, but need not, be favourable to dimerization 
and, conversely, that the formation of 'topochemically forbidden' dimers is 
an indication of a dislocation type which brings monomers into correct 
geometrical juxtaposition for dimerization. 
9- Cyaneanthracene (A.Rabaud and J. Clastre) 
a' 
A 
c' 
b' 
0 
1 
2 .&. 
L-...J__j 
Figure 6. Packing diagram seen normal to molecular plane of molecule A at (x, y, z): Moleeule B 
at (x, y, 1 + z) 
An alternative explanation according to which non-topochemical dimeri-
zation occurs at sites of high molecular mobility not requiring correct 
molecular alignment prior to reaction is ruled out by our results on the 
photo-chemical behaviour of 1,5-dichloroanthracene (ß-type) and 1-chloro-
anthracene (et- and y-types): irradiation of solutions of these two monomers 
yielded the theoretical number of dimers (two and four, respectively); the 
Jight-active solids gave each the one topochemical dimer. Thus, while these 
monomer molecules can take up, in the dissolved phase~ all mutual orienta-
tions, to produce all possible dimers, they arenot free to move in their crystal 
structures: solid-state dimers are only formed from correctly pre-aligned and 
sufficiently close nearest neighbours. 
Therefore, even in systems at first sight not obeying the topochemical 
rules cyclodimerization in fact takes place between correctly aligned 
monomer units at sufficiently short distances, such alignment being provided, 
if not by the bulk of the crystallattice, then by dislocations of appropriate 
geometry. 
659 

8 
hv 
G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
ex-dimer 
symmetry I 
9 
+ 
Scheme 5. Photoproducts of acenaphthylene 
ß-dimer 
symmetry m 
10 
When we undertook a detailed study of the photochemistry of solid 
acenaphthylene (8) (Scheme 5) much information on the reaction to the two 
dimers (9) and (10) was already available. A recent study42 had claimed the 
formation of the I -dimer (9) with essentially zero 'energy of activation' and 
of the rn-dimer (10) with AE* .-40 kcaljmole. The solid-state radiation 
chemistry of acenaphthylene had-been investigated by Chapiro and Lozach43 
who observed similar kinetics of dimerization and pointed out that 
acenaphthylene was the first hydrocarbon t.o undergo radiochemically-
induced cyclodimerization. The solution photochemistry bad also been 
studied in detail by several groups44• 
The mechanism of solution dimerization is now pictured as proceeding 
to the cis-isomer from a 1t-complex probably via the singlet excited state; 
the trans-isomer is believed to derive from the triplet excited state sufficiently 
long-lived to permit a normal bimolecular reaction with a ground-state 
monomer molecule. The conclusion that the m-dimer was formed in a solid-
state reaction requiring an activation energy as high as 40 kcaljmole seemed 
to us inherently improbable; indeed, the very complexity of the photo-
chemical system suggested novel features worthy of further investigation. 
Our work can be summarized as follows: photoreaction to the I-dimer takes 
place not in the bulk of the crystalline material but only at disclocations; 
this observation, i.e. the decoration of the dislocation lines by dimer, was the 
first example of such an effect in organic crystals, for the recognition of 
which we are indebted to Professor Thomas 12. Irradiation of acenaphthylene 
films between two quartz plates (rather than with crystals contained in 
vessels with free volume) has shown that formation of the rn-dimer is inhibited, 
even at temperatures greater than 50°, throughout the film except at crystal 
discontinuities such as cracks, hol es, etc. The value of the heat of sublimation 
(AHsubi. = 15.4 kcaljmole, determined here from vapour pressure measure-
ments) is low, compared with, say, acenaphthene (19.7 kcaljmole) and 
naphthaJene (17.4 kcaljmole), and suggests that the gas phase in vessels where 
free volume is appreciable, should be. considered as a possible ·locus of 
660 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
reaction. A simple calculation which assumes that m-dimer arises from 
absorption of a photon by a pre-associated pair in the vapour phase Ieads 
to a value ofa minimum ofthe 'activation energy' of2ilHsubi. = 31 kcaljmole, 
a value which may account for the observed value of 40 kcaljmole for 
'solid state' reaction. 
0 
o=c:;=o 
11 
b 
Figure 7. Packing diagram seen 
normal to molecular plane of mole-
cule A at (x, y, z). Maleie anhydride 
(R. E. Marsh, E. Ubell and H. E. 
Wil:cox) 
Maleie anhydride (11) has been reported45 to photodimerize to (12), in a 
yield of less than nine per cent after exposure for 240 h. The crystal structure 
of the monomer46 shown in Figure 7 has neither parallel nor short contacts 
between --CH CH- groups and appears unsuited to photodimerization. 
Experiments in this Laboratory34 indicate essentially complete inhibition of 
dimer formation at 5°. In view ofthe high vapour pressur'e ofmaleic anhydride 
at room temperature we suggest that the reaction takes place in the vapour 
phase and not in the crystal. 
661 
P.A.C.-27/4----H 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
IV. CRYSTAL ENGINEERING 
Systematic work on the forces controlling molecular packing arrangement 
is leading to the evolution of a general theory of crystal structures. A number 
of attempts 13• 14 are being made to derive unit-ceil dimensions of compounds 
from potential-energy curves accounting for molecular interaction, parti-
cularly of small and medium-sized aromatic systems. A more qualitative 
approach is being followed in our Labaratory by Dr Leiserowitz 15 who has 
considered the packing types of primary amides (including cx,ß-unsaturated 
derivatives) in terms of the geometry of the hydrogen-bonded networks 
0 
/ 
generated by the -C 
groups. From this study resulted the observation 
" 
NH 2 
that the probability of cx,ß-unsaturated amides crystallizing in the (photo-
dimerizable) ex-type was very high, certainly higher than for the corresponding 
acids, and further that their packing arrangements, except for minor 
differences in molecular conformation, were sufficiently similar to suggest 
binary miscibility studies of primary amides. Theseare discussed below. 
A second approach to controlled packing geometry has been found in the 
introduction of a dichlorophenyl group into unsaturated systems 16, which 
brings about crystallization in a unit cell having a shortest axis of --4 A. By 
this method a ]arge number of compounds of the type Ar(CH: CH)~X, where 
Ar = 2,4-, 3,4-, and 2,6-dichlorophenyl; (m = 0, 1): X = CHO, C02H, 
C0 2Me, CN, N0 2, Ph, CO(CH: CH)nPh (n = 0, 1) have been obtained in the 
ß-packing type, and their photoproducts characterized as m-dimers appro-
priate to this packing type. 
As anal ternative technique of forcing, the 4 A structure type cx,ß-unsaturated 
ketones etc. can be co-crystallized with mercuric chloride into molecular 
complexes. The crystal structure of the complex is evidently controlled by the 
packing of mercuric chloride which itself crystallizes in a cell of dimensions 
a = 5.96, b = 12. 74, c = 4.33 A 49. Thus, coumarin47, cinnamaldehyde, 
benzalacetophenone48 and others give crystalline 1: 1 complexes having 4 A 
axes. The topochemically expected formation of the cis,syn-dimer from 
[coumarin. HgC12] has been described 30 ; this totally stereospecific reaction 
is the easiest route to this isomer. 
V. TOWARDS A SYSTEMATIC SOLID-STATE 
PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
In this last section we report recent results on cyclodimerization in the 
solid state, some of which ha ve become possible through the application of 
the packing rules sketched in the previous section, and discuss some possible 
future lines of research. 
(A) The pbotochemistry of 1,3-butadienes 
A survey of the crystallography of trans,trans-muconic acid (13) and its 
derivatives, of cis,cis-muconic acid (16) 26,of crotonic (17) and sorbic acids (18) 
662 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
and derivatives2 7 has shown that many compounds in this series crystallize 
in the ß-type (4 A axis); the structure analyses carried out here and elsewhere 
have shown all these molecules to crystallize in the extended planar s-trans-
conformation in packing arrangements which should be lightactive. The 
photochemistry of these compounds is summarized in Schemes 6 and 7. 
trans,trans-Sorbamide (19) does not crystallize in the ß-type, the molecules 
being close-packed pairwise across centres of symmetry5 0 : its photochemistry 
is summarized in Scheme 7. 
15 
NC ~'cN 
NC ~CN 
_ hv 
hv 
A ]100' 
no Cope rearrangement 
+c~CN 
20 
21 
Scheme 6. Solid-state photoproducts of muconic acid and some derivatives. 
663 

H3C~C02H 
H02C~CH3 
18 
H3C~C0
2
H 
0\ 
~ 
}-
H3C 
HO,C~CO,H 
I 
CH, 
I 
Hö,H 
HO,C .I CH, 
dtester 
H C 1 CONH, 
ö 
H,NOC 1 CH, 
H,~CONH, 
,p- CONH
2 
H~3c 
19 
--NH 20C 
NH,O~CH, 
,p- C'H, 
Ha:3c 
· ~ C02H 
H3C 
~ C0 2H 
J j 
Hö, 
H0 2C 
C02H 
Scheme 7. SoJid-state photoproducts of sorbic acid and sorbamide 
H:Ll'C 
+ 
-? 
H 3C -? 
C02H 
C02H 
Al 
no Cope rearrangement 
p 
~ 
:-< 
CZI 
(') 
::I: :: 8 
~ 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
The following conclusions are of interest: 
(1) The yields of 1,2-divinylcyclobutanes of the configuration required by 
the stereochemistry of the starting material and its packing geometry are high. 
(2) Cyclobutanes having the non-topochemical configuration, if formed at 
all, constitute a negligible fraction of the photoproducts. In particular, 
dimers from the ß-packing types not having symmetry m and thereby 
suggesting rotation around the 1,2-bond after formation ofthe 1,1'-bond and 
prior to ring closure at bond 2,2' are present, if at all, in negligible quantities. 
(3) There is no evidence that trans,trans-cyclo-octadienes are formed or any 
ofits rearrangement products; conceivably, the small amount of(amorphous) 
oligomeric material which accompanies the crystalline photoproducts derives 
from trans,trans-cyclo-octadienes. However, these oligomers can also be 
rationalized as being formed via reactions not passing through the trans,trans-
C8-species. 
(4) Some of the cyclobutanes undergo rearrangement to cis,cis-1,5-cyclo-
octadienes in the solid state. The Cope products have been shown to be 
formed in secondary thermal dark reactions. 
(5) Light stability of dimethyl trans,trans-muconate follows from the 
packing geometry 51 of the diester; a variety of photoproducts has been 
isolated from the (sensitized) solution reaction 52. 
(6) Irradiation in the long wavelength end ofthe absorption (300 < A < 350 
nm) is very effective in bringing alfout reaction. By extrapolation from work 
on ethyl acrylate and diethylfumarate in which the rr* +- n transition has 
been identified53 in the tail-end of the absorption spectrum we may perhaps 
assume a similar transition in the higher homologue of fumaric acid. 
(7) The example of trans,trans-muconodinitrile (15) is interesting from the 
topochemical and mechanistic points of view: the two products (20) and (21) 
are formed in yields which we could not estimate accurately so far, but which 
are comparable. It will be noted that the monomers are geometrically related 
in such a way that the distances between centres of (crystallographically) 
non-equivalent and equivalent double bonds are 3.64 and 3.96 A 
respectively54• Reaction across the former Ieads to the centrosymmetric, and 
across the latter distance to the m-cyclobutane. The question whether both 
dimers are formed from the same state of the excited monomer is interesting 
but unanswered. 
(8) Cyclobutanes are formed not only by 1,1'-2,2' but also by 1,2'-1',2 
interaction, as from muconodinitrile to (21), from trans,trans-styrylacrylamide 
(22) to (23), and from dimethyl hexatrienoate (24) to (25) 55 (Scheme 8). 
The latter pathway distinguishes the solid-state reaction from sensitized 
solution reactions: Hammönd indicates 56 that direct irradiation of liquid 
butadienes gives this type of dimer, but full information on this point is not 
available. 
In summary, the photochemistry of the planar ( or near-planar) cis,cis- and 
trans,trans-butadienes substituted in positions 1 and 4 such that at least one 
substituent is an electron-withdrawing group (C02H, C02Me, CN) Ieads to 
1,2-divinyl substituted cyclobutanes having the topochemically expected 
configuration. The reaction corresponds to [2 + 2} addition; [ 4 + 4] addition 
to trans,trans-cyclo-octadienes is a negligible pathway of the reaction. 
665 

NC ~CN 
(15) 
G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
hv 
(29) 
+ 
NC~ 
NC 
CN 
, 
CN 
(21) 
Ph ~ONH 2 
__!!!_ H,;;~-rCONH, 
~~h 
(22) 
(23) 
M~~ 
~ 
~C02Me 
(24) 
(25) 
Scheme 8. 1,2'-1' ,2-cyclodimerization 
(B) Eight-4:entre dimerizations 
No evidence has been found for 8-centre reaction of 1,3-butadienes in the 
solid state to the bicyclo-octane system rather than to the observed divinyl-
substituted cyclobutanes. On the other band, the cyclization of the cross-
conjugated dienone (26) has been reported57, the product being claimed to 
be (27) on the basis ofits chemical behaviour57• 58. The reaction is likely tobe 
topochemically controlled: (26) does not give the dimer in solution, and the 
solid diethyl ester (28) gives polymeric material rather than dimer: the 
dimerization of the free dicarbocyclic acid (29) to the corresponding tetra-
acid has been described59. The cell dimensions ofthe dimethyl ester (26) were 
measuredhere:a = 15.45,b = 7.92,c = 3.96A,ß = 102.3o:dx = 1.38gjcm3 : 
Z = 2. Space group: A2. Molecular symmetry: 2. The monomer must have 
one or other of the two symmetric conformations (26a, 26b) of which the 
former is moreprobable in view ofthe cell dimensions. The parallel alignment 
of such monomers along the short c axis (ß-type) suggests the configuration of 
the dimer to be (27); this structure differs from that proposed by Corse 
et al. 60 which, for other reasons such as trans-fusion of the two rings at the 
cyclobutane, seems less plausible61 •62. 
The direct formation of the tricyclo[6,2,0,03• 6]decane system in a solid-
state reaction was of sufficient interest to suggest the scan for further examples; 
the generalization that dichloro-substituted phenyl derivatives tend to 
crystallize in 4 A cells, pointed to the bis-(dichlorobenzylidene) acetones as 
likely to come in the ß-type, and indeed several such derivatives have the 
desired crystal structures. Dr B. Green has investigated the derivative (30) 
in some detail and obtained a saturated photodimer to which we ascribe the 
666 

"'C 
0 
0 
R 
,.........R 
::I: 
'o 
0 
R 
R 
0 
..., 
'o 
?' 
~ 
o/ 
ovo 
0 
0 
0 
~ 
(26a) 
trl 
~ 
N 
0 
(26b) 
;l> 
..., 
ö 
0\ 
z 
0\ 
0 
z 
-...) 
CO,)=Q::={O,R 
R = CH3 
(26a) 
..., 
hv 
(27) 
::I: 
--
trl 
R=H 
(29) 
CZl 
C02R 
C02R 
0 
t"" 
0 
8 
CZl 
..., 
;l> 
hv 
..., 
R = C2Hs 
(28) 
--
oligomeric products: no dimer 
trl 
Scheme 9 

0'1 
0'1 
00 
R"-....~R 
-'!?' n ~-
o 
R= Cl-p-
Cl 
R 
• 
• 
R 
_r 
R 
0 
hv 
1_ 
R 
R 
~ 
0 
(32) 
not isolated 
(30) 
Ph: no reaction in the solid state 
L 
_r 
Scheme 9. Eight-centre dimerization to the tricyclo-[6,2,0,03• 6]-decane system 
R~-l 
R~R 
0 
(31) 
9 
~ 
!-' 
cn 
(j 
:I: 
~ 
§ 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
structure (31) on the basis of n.m.r., mass-spectrometric, and u.v. spectral 
data61 • Irradiation of the monomer with light of various short-wavelength 
cut-offs gave either the doubly ring-closed tricyclic system or no product 
at all. Light of > 470 nm was inactive; A > 445 nm gave the fully saturated 
product but no trace of the cinnamoyl derivative (32). There can be little 
doubt that the reaction is monophotonic, that is, (32) in its ground state is 
not an intermediate in the path to the tricyclic compound (Scheme 9). 
Eight-centre photopolymerization in the solid state has been noted by 
Japanese workers63- 65 : they polymerized crystalline p-phenylene diacrylic 
acid (33), its methyl, ethyl and phenyl esters, and amide, as weil as 2,5-
distyrylpyrazine (34) and its analogue (35) though they could not polymerize 
(36) or (37) under ·comparable conditions. The two dimerizable monomers 
(34) and (35) are isomorphaus according to powder photographs and 
different from (36) and (37). The polymers from these dienes were highly 
crystalline; the degree of crystallinity of the diacrylic acid derivatives 
decreased with increasing temperature. Irradiation of the diethylester (33) 
in the melt failed to yield polymer. The spectroscopic (u.v., i.r., n.m.r.) data 
indicate the presence of cyclobutane rings in the polymers. These results 
suggest that the polymerization reaction is topochemically controlled; full 
crystallographic data on these compounds would be interesting for a 
description of the type of motion that these molecules undergo during the 
process of polymerization (Scheme 10). 
( C) The photochemistry of solid solutions 
The analysis of the packing arrangement of primary amides 15 suggested 
miscibility in the solid state of CI,ß-unsaturated amides; indeed, irradiation 
of several pairs of substituted cinnamides co-crystallized from the melt 
produced a nurober of unsymmetrical rt-truxillamides (heterodimers) in 
excellent yield alongside the two homodimers. These chemical results can be 
interpreted in the reverse direction; configuration of the dimers serves as a 
chemical probe for the orientation of monomer units in the substitutional 
solid solution whose detailed structure could not so far be investigated by 
other methods. From solid solutions of mixed monomers crystallizing in the 
CI-type only the symmetrical and unsymmetrical CI-truxillamides were 
isolated; other dimers formed were present in less than five per cent yields. 
Similar experiments on mixed crystals from substituted cinnamic acids 
crystallizing in the CI- andjor ß-arrangements give useful information on the 
structure of substitutional solid solutions in these packing types66. 
The photochemistry of solid solutions has been extended in directions of 
both theoretical and synthetic interest. Thus, crotonamide (12) and crotonic 
acid, which pack in potentially reactive crystal structures (short antiparallel 
and parallel contacts respectively), do not dimerize; on the other band, the 
former could be incorporated into the lattice of cinnamide and of thienyl-
acrylamide; these solid solutions yielded the mixed dimers. The precise 
stereochemistry of the former heterodimer is still uncertain; we tentatively 
propose structure (38) on topochemical grounds. A similar experiment has 
been carried out on the mixed system (39, 40): both compounds crystallize 
in a 4 A cell and yield m-dimers, (39) being much more reactive than (40). 
The mixed crystal gives both (41) and the heterodimer (42) (Scheme 11). 
669 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
R = OH,OEt,OPh,NH2 
34 
_h,_· -crystalline polymer 
35 
36 
do not polymerize 
lj '\N 
37 
N'/ 
Hasegawa et al. 
Scheme 10. Topochemical eft'ects in eight-centre polymerization 
Photoreactions of mixed crystals, consisting of compounds crystallizing in 
4 A cells, from stilbenes-benzalanilines, stilbenes-tolanes and a variety of 
other pairs are under active investigation29• We return below to the 
significance of the mixed-crystal experiments to considerations of energy 
transfer. 
(D) Spectroscopic states and quantum yields 
Much of our work on cyclodimerization having been concerned with 
cx,ß-unsaturated ketones, acids, etc. I shall confine myself to a discussion of 
these systems. There is no evidence for the dimerization of cinnamic acid in 
fluid solution; the only recorded reaction is the establishment of the photo-
stationary equilibrium between the cis- and trans-isomers. Reaction in the 
presence of photosensitizers via the triplet state of the trans-acid reported 
to be in the neighbourhood of 50 kcaljmole67 has not yet been studied. 
670 

0\ 
-.l -
( 
(CH 3CH:CHCONH2 + C6H;t;CH:CHCONH 2) 
) 
\1-type 
~ 
Pb 
H2NCOQ'CONH, 
Pb 
+ 
solid solution 
CN 
) 
Cl ~CN 
~-type __!!!._ 
Ar 
CN 
( -QJCN 
AqN 
Cl 
~ II 
+ 
Cl 
CN 
(39) 
solid solution 
(40) 
(41) 
Scheme 11. Formation of heterodimers from binary solid solutions 
(38) 
Pb 
H,Nco,.Q'coNH, 
CH 3 
probable 
stereochemistry 
Ar 
+ 
AqN 
CN 
(42) 
'"C 
:I: 
0 
'-I 
0 
S2 
~ 
ti1 
~ -
N 
2:i ö z 
z 
'-I 
:I: 
ti1 
!;I) 
0 
1:"" 8 
!;I) 
'-I 
~ 
ti1 

G. M. "J. SCHMIDT 
Krönert68 has reported dimerization of neat ethyl cinnamate to the ethyl 
ester of cx-truxillic acid to the extent of approximately two per cent; his data 
indicate a definite wavelength effect of dimerization versus polymerization. 
The poor yield of photodimer from unsensitized (neat) ethyl cinnamate 
contrasts with the formation of non-volatile, predominantly dimeric products 
from ethyl cinnamate in the presence of sensitizers (p-nitroaniline, 
picramide)69. No attempts were made to separate or characterize the 
'dimers'. The authors observed an isosbestic point at 248 nm in spectra of 
dilute methanolic solutions of ethyl cinnamate irradiated in the 274 nm 
region; this they interpreted as characteristic of the trans ~ 
cis equilibrium. 
On the other band, they state that very little permanent trans ~cis isomeriza-
tion occurred in the sensitized undiluted systems. Whilst the dimerization of 
cinnamic esters proceeds only to an insignificant extent by direct irradiation, 
bis-trans-cinnamimide (43) in 1,2-dimethoxyethane yielded 48 per cent of 
ß-truxinimide (44) and a mixture of trans- and cis-cinnamides by irradiation 
through Pyrex 70 (Scheme 12). 
The very limited evidence so far available suggests that in cinnamic acid 
itself the singlet state is too shortlived for dimerization to occur in the liquid 
phase though dicinnamoyl derivatives such as (43) can dimerize. In the esters 
sensitization probably Ieads to dimers. 
The quantum yield of the photodimerization of cinnamic acid in the solid 
state has been determined by Rennert et al. 71 tobe 0. 7 for light of A. = 302 nm; 
no difference was found in the photosensitivity of the cx- and ß-modifications 
of the monomert. The authors concluded that the photoreaction proceeds 
by the attack of an excited monomer molecule on a ground state molecule, 
as follows: 
M~M* 
M* + M--+ M 2 
The electronic states involved in the photochemical process of cyclo-
dimerization of cinnamic acid and their analogues have been investigated 
here by means ofthe mixed-crystal technique. As mentioned earlier the amides 
of variously substituted cinnamic acids could be pairwise cocrystallized 
from the melt, and the mixture irradiated to give the two homodimers and 
one heterodimer, all three compounds belanging to the cx-truxillamide type. 
Pairs of amides were now chosensuchthat the end-absorption of one of the 
pair feil at Ionger wavelength than that of the second amide (Figure 8). 
Irradiation at wavelengths absorbed by both amides gave the two homo-
dimers and the heterodimer; on the other hand, irradiation, at the long 
wavelength end, by light absorbed by one species only, totally inhibited 
formation of the homodimer of the non~absorbing species: now only the 
homodimer of the longer-wavelength absorbing amide was found tagether 
with the heterodimer. 
i" The authors state that Schmidt's prediction18 that the ex-material should be more photo-
sensitive than the ß was not borne out by their work. No such prediction was made; the 
statement 18 that 'concerning the yield of these dimerization reactions it is clear that the cx- and 
ß-types differ in the theoretical maximum possible conversion into dimer' obviously does not 
refer to quantum but rather to chemical yield. 
672 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID STATE 
C02H 
hv 
cis ~ trans 
solution 
liv 
~C02 Et 
polymer + 2% et-truxil1ate 
(1) 
dimeric materials 
(2) 
solution 
hv 
solution paC, + PhCH: CHCONH 2 
(3) 
(43) 
( 1) H. Krönert. 
(44) 
CO-NH 
48 ~~ 
(2) H. G. Crume, C. C. Natale and D. J. Kelley. 
(3) R. T. LaLonde and C. B. Davies. 
cis ;trans 
Scheme 12. Solution photochemistry of some cinnamic acidderivatives 
220 
240 
260 
280 
i\ nm 
300 
320 
340 
360 
Figure 8. Absorption spectra of et, ß unsaturated amides (2 x 10- 5 M in ethanol): (1) thienyl-
acrylamide, (2) p-chlorocinnamide, (3) cinnamide 
673 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
The reaction can to a first approximation be described as follows 72 : 
A~A* 
B~B* 
for unfiltered light 
A * + A --+ A2 
B* + B --+ B2 
A* + B--+ AB 
B* + A--+ AB 
B~B* 
for filtered light 
B* + A--+ AB 
B* + B--+ B2 
Since the 1 A Ievel is higher than 1 B energy transfer from 1 B to 1 A is not 
expected. On the other band, energy transfer 1 A + 0 B --+ 0 A + 1 B which 
could take place in the experiment with unfiltered light, could quench either 
of the two processes: 
1 A--+ dimer 
1 A --+ 3 A --+ dimer 
There is no experimental evidence that incorporation of B into the lattice of 
A affects the formation of A2 : energy transfer in the singlet state seems 
improbable. 
If the photoreactive state derives from the triplet 3 A or 3 B, then energy 
transfer in the triplet states 
3B + OA --+·3A +OB 
3A + OB--+OA + 3B 
depending upon the relative triplet energy Ievels is ruled out by a similar 
argument, namely the absence of the homodimer in the filtered, and the 
absence of quenching in the unfiltered, experiment. 
These qualitative arguments leave us with two possibilities. The reaction 
may proceed from the singlet excited state at a rate faster than that of energy 
transfer; alternatively, the reaction proceeds from the triplet state with 
intersystem crossing faster than singlet energy transfer and with reaction 
faster than triplet energy transfer. In either case the reaction would occur 
near the site of light absorption. 
Since excitation ofB Ieads to B2 and AB only and energy is not transferred 
from B to A the only photochemical path to ABis via 
B* + A--+ AB 
that is, the combination of an excited with a ground-state molecule, a 
conclusion which bears out the result derived from the quantum yield 
measurements quoted above. 
The solution photochemistry of the chalcones has been investigated 
systematically; there is evidence that these ketones can undergo dimerization, 
isomerization and other reactions. Dr Luwisch20 has shown in this Labora-
tory that, while dimerization in the solid state follows the topochemical rules 
(see above), the photochemistry is notasclean asthat of, say, cinnamic acid; 
the non-dimeric products have not, however, been investigated. 
F or the detailed analysis of coumarin photochemistry the Originalliterature 
must be consulted. We note the general agreement that the cis,syn dimer, 
674 

PHOTODIMERIZATION IN THE SOLID ST ATE 
unlike the trans,syn and trans,anti dimers, is formed from the singlet excited 
state 73• 74. In this connection the observation that the [coumarin, mercuric 
chloride] complex yields the cis,syn dimer is of interest; one wonders which 
excited state of coumarin is involved in the solid medium mainly composed 
of heavy atoms likely (in solution) to promote intersystem crossing. 
The photochemistry of thymine and other pyrimidines has been studied 
in some detail 75• 76. Triplet dimerization in the fluid state has been 
demonstrated by sensitization and quenching experiments on thymine and 
derivatives. There is highly suggestive evidence from thymine in frozen 
aqueous solution (i.e. under conditions where crystalline thymine hydrate is 
formed which is known to yield cis, syn dimer on irradiation with A > 290 nm) 
that dimerization in the crystalline phase takes place from the singlet state; 
the less probable alternative, that intersystem crossing to the triplet precedes 
dimerization, requires the former process tobe 104 times faster in the crystal 
than in isolated thymine molecules as weil as totally efficient reaction to 
dimer of the triplet species 75. 
We can only briefly mention the use of the KBr pellets containing solid 
monemers for the determination of quantum yields of dimerization in the 
pyrimidine series 76. The quantum yields of dimer formation range from 0.1 
for 3-methylthymine to 0.4 for 1-methylthymine and 0.45 for orotic acid; 
the authors suggest that a relationship might exist between effective rate of 
reaction and geometry of the crystallattice, i.e. that with increasing separation 
between )c=c<bonds the value of the quantum yield falls off. We feel 
that a word of caution is needed here: the crystallography of pyrimidines 
(including the monohydrates of thymine and of methylthymine) is complex, 
and it is more than doubtful whether the crystalline species in KBr pellets are 
those crystal forms on which the geometrical arguments are based. lt seems 
likely that the preparation of the pellets introduces into the crystalline 
material a higher than normal dislocation density, and that it is the quantum 
yield in such stressed materials which is reported, rather than that of the 
normal crystal lattice. It is also doubtful whether the monohydrate of 
thymine is stable under condition of pellet formation. 
We summarize the information on the electronic states involved in 
solid-state dimerization with the generalization that in the majority of cases 
the reaction proceeds from the first singlet state. The benzalacetophenones 
(chalcones) as aromatic ketones likely to have a high probability of inter-
system crossing to the triplet state, may be a genuine exception; it is tempting 
to speculate that the more complex photochemistry of solid chalcones is 
connected with Ionger lifetimes of the triplet as compared with the singlet 
states. 
We may reasonably assume, in the light of all that has been said so far 
about solid-state cyclodimerization, that reaction between excited monomer 
and its ground-state neighbour takes place with the minimum of molecular 
motion. Consequently, it should be possible to consider the variation of 
energy with the reaction coordinate such as the continuously decreasing 
intermolecular separation of the two monomer molecules. 
Lamola and Eisinger 77 have suggested that this path can be divided into 
three steps, apart from a fourth in which monomers are separated by more 
675 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
than 5 A and emit absorbed energy from the singlet excited state by monomer 
fluorescence. The excitonic region somewhere near 3 A can be reached in 
experiments in which the dimer is imbedded in a rigid glass and then photo-
dissociated; the two monomer units formed are held in parallel or near-
parallel separation estimated to be 2.8 A (for dimethylthymine) from the 
exciton splitting of the absorption spectrum. These monomer pairs which 
show no fluorescence, are redimerized with a quantum yield of unity. The 
authors suggest that this state is an intermediate in the dimerization of 
thymine in the crystalline state and propose to connect the (lower) exciton 
state with the excimer state 'so that the latter is most likely an intermediate 
in the photodimerization'. 
In my opinion there is yet inadequate evidence for the hypothesis that the 
excimer state is an intermediate in the sequence of non-radiative relaxation 
steps connecting the monomer in its excited state with the chemical product 
in its ground state, at least that excimer state which is currently defined as the 
species that emits unstructured fluorescence red-shifted with respect to 
monomer emission. 
Pending elucidation of the energy surface over which the two molecules 
move, we may Iook for information on the changes in molecular structure 
during the course of the reaction. Thus, whilst there is little nuclear re-
organization of cyclic monomers such as pyrimidines, coumarins, etc. during 
cyclodimerization, some changes in molecular conformation obviously must 
occur in the reaction of open-chain systems. 
We know from the position of the fluorescence emission that, in the 
majority of organic molecules, the change in their nuclear configuration 
during the interval between absorption and re-emission is small; major 
re-organization must begin during the motion of the two molecules towards 
each other, that is during the rehybridization (sp 2 --+ sp3) of the four reacting 
centres at distances which permit partial bond formation but also imply 
repulsion between the substituent groups of the four centres. Such repu1sion 
sets in at the latest at 2.8 A so that at this separation of the reacting atoms 
the molecule is almost certainly no Ionger planar. 
I suggest that a study of the molecular deformation which takes place as 
the molecules move towards each other, can throw light on the type of 
molecular interaction· which is responsible for the passage via the first 
singlet-ground-state pair to the dimer. I believe further that this study is by 
no means as impossible as it appears at first sight. I am thinking in particular 
of reactions in chiral crystal structures where dimerization within the 
molecular stack of twisted and hence prochiral monomer units may proceed 
in a preferred direction leading to chiral product; in other words, front-side 
and rear-side attack of the excited molecule on the prochirat ground-state 
molecule (that is: attack on the upper or lower partner in the translation 
stack) may have sufficiently different probability to generate excess of one or 
the other enantiomer. Several variants of this experiment are possible and 
being investigated in our Laboratory. Determination of x-ray methods of the 
absolute configuration of one of the crystals and of the product generated in 
excess from this enantiomer will permit a still more detailed description of the 
reaction course. 
676 

PHOTODIMERIZA Tl ON IN THE SOLID ST A TE 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The solid-state chemistry group of the Department of Chemistry gratefully 
acknowledges financial support by the National Bureau of Standards, 
Washington, D.C. and by the Stiftung Volkswagen. The author thanks 
Mrs T. Schwarz for help in the preparation of the manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
1 W. Marckwald, Z. Phys. Chem. 30, 140 (1899). 
2 G. Ciamician and P. Silber, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges . .34, 2040 (1901). 
3 H. Stobbe and F. K. Steinberger, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 55, 2225 (1922). 
4 A. W. K. de Jong, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 56, 818 (1923). 
5 A. Senier and F. G. Shephard, J. Chem. Soc. 95, 1943 (1909). 
6 For summary of the results of this phase see H. Bacher, in Handbücher der biologischen 
Arbeitsmethoden, Abt. I, Teil 2, li, 1, p 1829. Ed. Abderhalden, Urban and Schwarzenberg. 
Springer: Berlin-Vienna (1929). 
7 P. Groth, Chemische Krystallographie, W. Engelmann: Leipzig (1917). 
8 For summary see G. M. J. Schmidt, 'The photochemistry of the solid state'. Contribution to 
the 13e Conseil de Chimie de l'Institut International de Chimie (Bruxelles 1965), which 
appeared in condensed form in Reactivity ofthe Photoexcited Organic Molecule, lnterscience: 
London (1967). 
9 M. D. Cohen, Mol. Cryst. Liquid Cryst. 9, 287 (1969). 
10 D. P. Craig and S. Sarti-Fantoni, Chem. Commun. 742 (1966). 
11 J. M. Thomas and J. 0. Williams, Chem. Commun. 432 (1967). 
12 M. D. Cohen, I. Ron, G. M. J. Schmidt and J. M. Thomas, Nature, London, 224, 167 (1969). 
13 D. P. Craig, R. Mason, P. Pauling and D. P. Santry, Proc. Roy. Soc. A, 286, 98 (1965). 
14 D. E. Williams, J. Chem. Phys. 45,3770 (1966); 
D. E. Williams, Acta Cryst. A25, 464 ( 1969). 
15 L. Leiserowitz and G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Chem. Soc. A, 2372 ( 1969). 
16 B. S. Green and G. M. J. Schmidt, tobe published. 
17 e.g. M. A. EI Sayed, M. T. Wauk and G. W. Robinson, Molec. Phys. 5, 205 (1962). 
18 G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Chem. Soc. 2014 (1964). 
19 M. Lahav and G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Chem. Soc. B, 239 (1967). 
20 M. Lu wisch, Ph.D. Thesis, Weizmann Institute of Science: Rehovot ( 1968). 
21 F. I. Sonntag and G. M. J. Schrnidt, unpublished results. 
22 R. Goldstein, Ph.D. Thesis, Weizmann Institute of Science: Rehovot (1967). 
23 D. Rabinovich and G. M. J. Schrnidt, J. Chem. Soc. B, 144 (1967). 
24 G. W. Griffin, A. F. Vellturo and K. Furukawa, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 83, 2725 (1961). 
25 T. Sadeh and G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 84, 3970 (1962). 
26 M. Lahav and G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Chem. Soc. B, 312 (1967). 
27 B. S. Green, M. Lahav and G. M. J. Schrnidt, J. Chem. Soc. B, 1552 (1971). 
28 M. D. Cohen, B. S. Green, Z. Ludmer and G. M. J. Schrnidt, Chem. Phys. Letters, 7, 486 (1970). 
29 B. S. Green, A. Elgavi and G. M. J. Schmidt, unpublished results. 
30 J Bregman, K. Osaki, G. M. J. Schmidt and F. I. Sonntag, J. Chem. Soc. 2021 (1964). 
31 L. Leiserowitz and G. M. J. Schmidt, Acta Cryst. 18, 1058 (1965). 
32 B. S. Green, unpublished results. 
33 W. Drenth and E. H. Wiebenga, Acta Cryst. 8, 755 (1955). 
34 I. Ron and G. M. J. Schrnidt, to be published. 
35 M. Gorodetzky and Y. Mazur, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 90, 6540 (1968). 
36 J. L. R. Williams, in Topics in Current Chemistry, 13, 227 (1969). 
37 F. I. Sonntag and R. Srinivasan, quoted in ref. 36. 
38 S. Kikuchi and K. Nakamura, quoted in ref. 36. 
39 E. Heller, Ph.D. Thesis, Weizmann Institute of Science: Rehovot (1969). 
40 J. C. J. Bart and G. M. J. Schmidt, to be published. 
41 M. D. Cohen, Z. Ludmer, J. M. Thomas and J. 0. Williams, Chem. Commun. 1172 (1969). 
42 K. S. Wei and R. Livingston, J. Chem. Phys. 71, 548 (1967). 
R. Livingston and K. S. Wei, J. Chem. Phys. 71, 541 (1967). 
43 A. Chapiro and G. Lozach, C.R. Acad. Sei., Paris, Ser. C, 267, 37 ~1968). 
677 
P.A.C.-27/4-1 

G. M. J. SCHMIDT 
44 D. 0. Cowan and R. L. Drisko, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 89,3068 (1967). 
45 G. W. Griffin, J. E. Basinski and A. F. Vellturo, Tetrahedron Letters, No. 3, 13 (1960); 
G. W. Griffin, U.S. Pat. No. 3139395 to American Cynamid Co. (30 June 1964). 
46 R. E. Marsh, E. Ubell and H. E. Wilcox, Acta Cryst. 15, 35 (1962). 
47 Ju. T. Struchkov, A. J. Kitaigorodskii and T. L. Khotsyanova, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 93, 
675 (1953). 
48 D. Rabinovich and G. M. J. Schmidt, unpublished results. 
49 W. Nieuwenkamp and J. M. Bijvoet, Z. Kristallogr. 84, 49 (1932). 
50 S. E. Filippakis, L. Leiserowitz and G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Chem. Soc. B, 297 (1967). 
51 S. E. Filippakis, L. Leiserowitz and G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Chem. Soc. B, 290 (1967). 
52 H. P. Kaufmann and A. K. Sen Gupta, Liebigs.Ann. Chem. 681, 39 (1965). 
53 W. D. Closson, S. F. Brady, E. M. Kosower and P. C. Huang, J. Org. Chem. 28, 1161 (1963). 
54 S. E. Filippakis, L. Leiserowitz and G. M. J. Schmidt, J. Chem. Soc. B, 305 (1967). 
55 M. Lahav and G. M. J. Schmidt, Tetrahedron Letters, 2957 (1966). 
56 W. L. Dilling, Chem. Rev. 69, 845 (1969). 
57 H. Stobbe and E. Färber, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 58, 1548 (1925). 
58 R. C. Cookson, D. A. Cox and J. Hudec, J. Chem. Soc. 4499 (1961). 
59 H. Midorikawa, Bull. Chem. Soc. Japan, 26, 302 (1953). 
60 J. Corse, B. J. Finkle and R. E. Lundin, Tetrahedron Letters, 1 (1961). 
61 B. S. Green and G. M. J. Schmidt, Tetrahedron Letters, 4249 (1970). 
62 N. E. Rowland, F. Sondheimer, G. A. Bullok, E. LeGoff and K. Grohmann, Tetrahedron 
Letters 4769 (1970). 
63 M. Hasegawa, F. Suzuki, H. Nakamishi and Y. Suzuki, Polymer Letters, 6, 293 (1968). 
64 M. Hasegawa and Y. Suzuki, Polymer Letters, 5, 815 (1967). 
65 M. Iguchi, H. Nakamishi and M. Hasegawa, J. Polym. Sei. A, 6, 1055 (1968). 
66 D.-J. Hung, M.Sc. Thesis, Weizmann Institute of Science: Rehovot (1969). 
67 M. Tsudas, J. Soc. Sei. Phot. Japan, 28, 7 (1965). 
68 H. Krönert, Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Universität: Berlin (1967). 
69 H. G. Curme, C. C. Natale and D. J. Kelley, J. Phys. Chem. 71, 767 (1957). 
70 R. T. LaLonde and C. B. Davies, Canad. J. Chem. 47, 3250 (1969). 
71 J. Rennert, E. M. Ruggiero and J. Raff, Photochem. Photobiol. 6, 29 (1967). 
72 P. N. Nie, M.Sc. Thesis, Weizmann Institute of Science: Rehovot (1969). 
73 G. S. Hammond, C. A. Stout and A. A. Lamola, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 86,3103 (1964). 
74 H. Morrison, H. Curtis and T. McDowell, J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 88, 5415 (1966). 
75 A. A. Lamola, Photochem. Photobiol. 7, 619 (1968). 
76 R. Lisenski and K. L. Wierzchowski, Photochem. Photobiol. 11, 327 (1970). 
77 A. A. Lamola and J. Eisinger, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sd, Wash. 59, 46 (1968). 
OBITUARY 
Professor Gerhard M. J. Schmidt died in Zurich on 12 July 1971, aged 51, where, 
characteristically, he was delivering a series oflectures in spite ofhis illness; from there 
he was planning to travel to the XXIII IUPAC Congress in Boston where he was to 
have chaired a Photochemistry section. 
Professor Schmidt was at home bothin pure scientific researchandin the applica-
tion of that research, bringing dynamic imagination and dedication to both. His 
unique approach to solid-state chemical reactions, reflected so welJ in the present 
contribution on Solid State Photodimerization, was based on his conviction that the 
results obtained from a combination ofthe disciplines of organic chemistry, crystallo-
graphy, and spectroscopy were important for the intimate understanding ofthe factots 
governing chemical reactivity. He further believed that an understanding of the 
behaviour of crystalline systems would help elucidate the roJe of short-range and 
long-range order in highly organized biological systems as weil. 
His death, at the peak of his active investigation into problems such as organic 
photochemistry, high-pressure reactions, heterogeneous catalysis, gas-solid, liquid-
solid, and solid-solid chemical reactions, systematics ofmolecular packing in crystals, 
spectroscopy in organic crystals, and asymmetric synthesis, is a major blow. The loss 
of bis incisive and original contributions will be deeply feit both by his immediate 
co-workers in these areas and by the international scientific community. 
BERNARD S. GREEN 
678 
