Food Sci. Technol. Res., 9 (3), 205–218, 2003
Review 
Reactions of Plant Phenolics with Food Proteins and Enzymes under Special Consider-
ation of Covalent Bonds
Jürgen KROLL, Harshadrai M. RAWEL and Sascha ROHN
Institute of Nutritional Science, University of Potsdam, D-14558 Bergholz-Rehbruecke, A.- Scheunert Allee 114-116, Germany 
Received January 23, 2003; Accepted March 28, 2003
Secondary plant metabolites are important native food components, which are becoming more and more interest-
ing due to their physiological effects on human beings. One of the largest groups of these compounds is represented by
plant phenols. This review summarizes the structure, classiﬁcation and distribution of the phenolic compounds in
plant foods, their chemistry and signiﬁcation with regard to food processing and -storage as well as their physiological
effects. This work focuses mainly on such reactions of the phenolic substances with proteins and enzymes that lead to
covalent bonds. The derivatives formed have been characterized in terms of changes in their physicochemical and
structural properties. The effect on the proteolytic in vitro digestion has been also illustrated. Further aspects reported
include the inﬂuence on enzyme activity and -kinetic parameters. The different aspects of the nutritional-physiological
consequences of such reactions in food and body, especially considering their signiﬁcance to food science and technol-
ogy are discussed. 
Keywords: phenolic acids, ﬂavonoids, food protein/enzyme derivatization, physicochemical characterisation, structure, in-vitro proteolytic degra-
dation, biological activity
1. Phenols as natural substances of plant foods    
1.1 Introduction    
Phenolic compounds as food components represent, with
more than 6000 identiﬁed substances, the largest group of sec-
ondary metabolites in plant foods. They are characterized by a
large range of structures and functions, but generally possessing
an aromatic ring bearing one or more hydroxy substituents
(Robards et al., 1999). They are usually found in plants bound to
sugars as glycosides (Hollman & Arts, 2000). Plant phenols are
present in many foodstuffs as colour imparting ingredients (e.g.
anthocyanins in red wines, red cabbage, eggplant, strawberry,
blueberry, raspberry, plum, cherry etc.) (Robards et al., 1999;
Clifford, 2000a; Hollman & Arts, 2000). Interest in these com-
pounds is related to their dual role as substrates for oxidative
browning reactions and as antioxidants, underlining their impact
on organoleptic and nutritional qualities of fruits and vegetables,
their role in plant growth and metabolism and, more recently,
their demonstrated physiological activity in humans (Friedman,
1996; Robards et al., 1999; Hollman & Arts, 2000). In both
roles, the key process is oxidation (Robards et al., 1999). The
oxidative browning is probably restricted to foods and is invari-
ably detrimental although, in some instances (e.g. tea, cacao,
dates, currants, sultanas), it is intentional and essential to the
character of the product (Friedman, 1996; Robards et al., 1999).
The action of phenolics as antioxidants is viewed as beneﬁcial in
both foods (e.g. gallates as supplementary food ingredient) and
the body where phenolics are oxidized in preference to other
food constituents or cellular components and tissues (Vinson et
al., 1995; Hertog et al., 1997; Meyer et al., 1998; Robards et al.,
1999; Yoshida et al., 1999; Miura et al., 2001). 
1.2 Structure, classiﬁcation, distribution of phenols in plant
foods, intake and their physiological effects    
With regard to their structure, the major groups of phenolic
compounds are distinguished by a number of constitutive carbon
atoms in conjunction with the basic phenolic skeleton. The food
relevant groupings include ﬁrstly, the hydroxybenzoic acid deriv-
atives (HBAs) with a general structure C6-C1 (e.g. salicylic and
gallic acids) as illustrated in Fig. 1. Variations in their basic struc-
ture being hydroxylations and methoxylations of the aromatic
ring. As a general rule HBAs are present as conjugates (Tomás-
Barberán & Clifford, 2000a), although they can also be detected
as free acids in some fruits (e.g. gallic acid in persimmons), after
being released during fruit and vegetable maturation or more
importantly during food processing. The main source of gallic
acid is tea, especially green tea, where it occurs as (–)-epigallo-
catechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and (–)-epigallocatechin. The con-
sumption of EGCG was estimated for Japan to be as high as 1 g/
per day (Authors-group, 1999). A detailed account on the specif-
ic occurrence and content of hydroxycinnamic and hydroxyben-
zoic acid compounds in foods has also been reported (Herrmann,
1989; Authors-group, 1999; Clifford, 1999; Robards et al., 1999;
Clifford, 2000b; Tomás-Barberán & Clifford, 2000a). 
The second group is that of those phenolic compounds having
the general formula C6-C3 (hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives,
Fig. 2), representing a series of trans-phenyl-3-propenoic acids
differing in their ring substitution. These compounds are widely
distributed as conjugates in plant material including many foods
and beverages (Herrmann, 1989; Clifford, 1999; Clifford,
2000b). The commonest (Fig. 2) is caffeic acid (3,4-dihydroxy-
cinnamic acid); ferulic (3-methoxy, 4-hydroxy), sinapic (3,5-di-
methoxy, 4-hydroxy) and p-coumaric (4-hydroxy) also are wide-
E-mail: jkroll@rz.uni-potsdam.de

206
J. KROLL et al.
spread (Clifford, 2000b). The best-known conjugate is 5-caf-
feoylquinic acid (IUPAC numbering, Fig. 2), commonly referred
to as chlorogenic acid (CGA) (Clifford, 2000b). Accurate data on
population-wide intakes of phenolic compounds are not avail-
able. Recent studies show, that the human dietary intake of chlo-
rogenic acids and other cinnamates ranges from 25 mg up to 1 g/
day depending upon the dietary constitution (Clifford, 1999).
The content of chlorogenic acid is relatively high with 6–10% in
green coffee beans, and a cup of coffee may contain up to 675
mg (Clifford, 1999).       
The third and the largest group are represented by the ﬂa-
vonoids, with more than 4000 compounds characterized (Ader et
al., 2000). They are also the most widespread and diverse, built
upon a C6-C3-C6 ﬂavone skeleton (Fig. 3), in which the three-car-
bon bridge between the phenyl groups is commonly cyclised
with oxygen (Robards et al., 1999). Several sub-classes of ﬂa-
vonoid are differentiated on the degree of unsaturation and
degree of oxidation of the three-carbon segment (e.g. ﬂavones,
isoﬂavones, ﬂavonols, ﬂavanones, catechin, anthocyanins etc.).
Within the various classes, further differentiation is possible,
based on the number and nature of substituent groups attached to
the rings (Robards et al., 1999). The main dietary sources of ﬂa-
vonoids include fruits, vegetables as well as tea, and detailed
accounts of their content have been reviewed recently (Kühnau,
1976; Cook & Samman, 1996; Böhm et al., 1998; Robards et al.,
1999; Hollman & Arts, 2000; Miean & Mohamed, 2001). The
estimated total intake of ﬂavonoids in the USA was 1 g/person/
day (expressed as glycosides) (Kühnau, 1976). This seems to be
an overestimation, as recent reviews indicate a daily intake of
only 6–60 mg/person/day (Böhm et al., 1998; Hollman & Arts,
2000).        
The largest number of ﬂavonoids is represented by the sub-
group of ﬂavonols (Fig. 4), usually found in plants bound to sug-
ars as O-glycosides (Robards et al., 1999). The most important
representatives of ﬂavonols are kaempferol, quercetin and
myricetin. Aglycones of ﬂavonols do not occur in fresh plants but
may be present as a result of food processing. Sugars are pre-
dominantly bound to the ﬂavonoid nucleus via a -glycosidic
Fig. 1.
The structure of hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives with a general
structure C6-C1.
Fig. 2.
The structure of hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives with a general
formula C6-C3.
Fig. 3.
The structure of the Flavonoids with a C6-C3-C6 ﬂavone skeleton.
Fig. 4.
The structure of the sub-group of ﬂavonols.

Reactions of Plant Phenolics with Proteins
207
bond. Sugar molecules can bind to various positions in the parent
ﬂavonoid, although there is a preference for the C3-position. 179
different glycosides of quercetin alone have been described in
nature (Hollman & Arts, 2000), rutin (quercetin-3-O-rhamnosyl-
glucoside) being one of the commonest. A further physiological-
ly interesting sub-group of the ﬂavonoids is that of isoﬂavones
(Fig. 5), representing the hormone-like bisphenolic phytoestro-
gens of dietary origin (Mazur et al., 1998; Cassidy et al., 2000;
Ren et al., 2001). More than 60 representatives of this class have
been identiﬁed in plants, especially those of leguminous seeds,
soy beans being the most important source and the commonest
isoﬂavones being genistein and daidzein (Cassidy et al., 2000). 
Intense research activity in recent years has been directed
towards the absorption, metabolism and bioavailability of phe-
nolic compounds and detailed data on the bioavailability and
uptake of selected phenolic compounds has been reported (Cook
& Samman, 1996; Hollman et al., 1996; Hollman et al., 1997;
Böhm et al., 1998; Bourne & Rice-Evans, 1998; Lapidot et al.,
1998; de Vries et al., 1998; Chesson et al., 1999; Clifford, 1999;
Hollman et al., 1999; Ader et al., 2000; Andlauer et al., 2000;
Azuma et al., 2000; Cassidy et al., 2000; Clifford, 2000a,b; Clif-
ford & Scalbert, 2000; Hollman & Arts, 2000; Tomás-Barberán
& Clifford, 2000a,b; Andlauer et al., 2001; Baba et al., 2001;
Cao et al., 2001; Olthof et al., 2001; Adam et al., 2002). 
The ﬂavonoids have been reported to exhibit a wide range of
positive biological effects including anticarcinogen (Brown,
1980; Stich & Rosin, 1984; Huber et al., 1997; Mazur et al.,
1998; Manthey & Guthrie, 2002), antimutagen (Stich & Rosin,
1984; Malaveille et al., 1996), antibacterial (Cook & Samman,
1996), antiviral (Cook & Samman, 1996), anti-inﬂammatory
(Cook & Samman, 1996), antiallergic (Cook & Samman, 1996;
Noguchi et al., 1999), antithrombic and vasodilatory effects
(Gryglewski et al., 1987; Middleton & Kandaswami, 1992;
Cook & Samman, 1996). Most of these positive effects result
from their property as antioxidants, free radical scavengers and
chelators of divalent cations (Cook & Samman, 1996; Rice-
Evans et al., 1996; Meyer et al., 1998; Robards et al., 1999;
Yoshida et al., 1999; Miura et al., 2001; Hodek et al., 2002). The
phytoestrogens and their metabolites have many potent hormonal
and non-hormonal activities that may explain some of the biolog-
ical effects of diets rich in isoﬂavones (Mazur et al., 1998; Setch-
ell, 1998; Song et al., 1999; Ren et al., 2001; Arjmandi & Smith,
2002). On the other hand, depending on the concentration and
hydroxyl substituent pattern, phenolic compounds can also act as
pro-oxidants (Laughton et al., 1989; Yamanaka et al., 1997;
Metodiewa et al., 1999). Other negative physiological effects of
ﬂavonoids (mutagenicity, genotoxicity, cytotoxicity) have also
been described (MacGregor & Jurd, 1978; Brown & Dietrich,
1979; Brown, 1980; Rueff et al., 1992; Yamanaka et al., 1997;
Metodiewa et al., 1999; Hodek et al., 2002). Most of these phys-
iological effects are based on either in vitro models, cell/tissue
culture studies, animal experiments or epidemiological data. The
results thus obtained are generally projected to show if a strong
association or correlation of activity in humans is possible or not,
since data on basis of human investigations are relatively rare.
1.3 Chemistry and signiﬁcation regarding to food processing
and -storage    
Enzymatic browning is the most known reaction of plant
foods. Browning reactions can be in some instances (e.g. tea,
cacao, dates, currants, sultanas), intentional and essential to the
character (e.g. coloring and taste) of the product (Friedman,
1996; Robards et al., 1999). The action of phenolics as antioxi-
dants is perhaps the most beneﬁcial effect in both foods and the
body (Cook & Samman, 1996; Rice-Evans et al., 1996; Meyer et
al., 1998; Robards et al., 1999; Yoshida et al., 1999; Miura et al.,
2001; Hodek et al., 2002). In order to function as an antioxidant,
the phenolic compound must be capable of forming a resonance
stabilized phenoxyl radical, which in turn can react with other
available radicals (e.g. peroxyl radical), consequently deactivat-
ing them (Robards et al., 1999; Pedrielli et al., 2001). However,
the reactivity of the phenoxyl radicals should remain so low, such
that the radical formation e.g. by H-subtraction from unsaturated
fatty acids is not possible. A further beneﬁcial property of phe-
nolic compounds in food processing and -storage is their anti-
microbial ability (Scalbert, 1991; Cook & Samman, 1996). 
The presence of polyphenols in foods and beverages (e.g. sor-
ghum, millet, fruit, cocoa, coffee, tea, beer, and wine) also pro-
duces a sensation of astringency, which is perceived as a diffuse
feeling of extreme dryness and roughness that is not conﬁned to
a particular region of the mouth or tongue, thus effecting the taste
of foodstuffs (Baxter et al., 1997). Proteins and polyphenolic
compounds can combine to form soluble complexes; these can
grow to colloidal size, leading to visible haze formation and as a
result limiting the shelf life of products the consumer expects to
be clear including beer, wine, fruit juices, coffee an tea (Siebert et
al., 1996; Baxter et al., 1997; Siebert, 1999). The same phenom-
enon can contribute to the fouling of process equipment surfaces
with deposits that are difﬁcult to remove by in-place cleaning
(Siebert et al., 1996). Polyphenol-oxidase-catalyzed oxidation of
polyphenol compounds in fruits and vegetables to quinones,
which then polymerize to dark melanin pigments of unknown
structure causing discoloring of foodstuffs, e.g., formation of
brown or black spots from chlorogenic acid in bananas, pears,
lettuce, and potatoes and the browning of fruit juices (Friedman,
1996). Enzyme-catalyzed browning reactions of amino acids and
proteins with oxidized plant phenols may cause deterioration of
food during storage and processing leading to a loss in nutritional
quality, which is especially serious in underprivileged countries
(Friedman, 1996). Plant phenols may also display many other
possible detrimental effects, including inhibition of iron absorp-
Fig. 5.
The structure of the sub-group of isoﬂavones.

208
J. KROLL et al.
tion and irreversible complexation of dietary proteins (Mehansho
et al., 1987; Baxter et al., 1997). The loss of nutritional quality is
also attributed to the destruction of essential amino acids and a
decrease in digestibility and inhibition of proteolytic and glyco-
lytic enzymes (Friedman, 1996). The production of antinutrition-
al and toxic compounds may further reduce the nutritional value
and possibly the safety of foods (Friedman, 1996).    
With regard to the chemical reactivity of phenolic compounds,
it is now generally accepted that two reaction steps are involved
(Nicolas et al., 1994). The ﬁrst reaction step consists of the
hydroxylation of monophenols into o-diphenols and the second,
the oxidation of the o-diphenols into o-quinones. These two reac-
tions consume oxygen and are catalyzed by the enzymes mono-
phenolase (E.C. 1.14.18.1, cresolase activity) and o-diphenolase
(E.C. 1.10.3.1, catecholase activity) (Nicolas et al., 1994). Simi-
larly the laccases (E.C. 1.10.3.2) oxidize o-diphenols as well as
p-diphenols forming their corresponding quinones. The quinones
resulting as the primary products of enzymatic oxidation repre-
sent a species of highly reactive substances (Fig. 6) which nor-
mally react further with other quinones to produce dark melanin
pigments (Nicolas et al., 1994; Friedman, 1996; Robards et al.,
1999). The quinone, being a reactive electrophilic intermediate
can also readily undergo attack by nucleophiles (Fig. 6) such as
lysine, methionine, cysteine and tryptophan residues in a protein
chain, leading to protein derivatization and consequently causing
changes in their physicochemical, structural and biological prop-
erties.
2. Reactions of phenolics and related substances with food
proteins    
Most of the literature sources deal with non-covalent type of
interactions between phenolic compounds and proteins. There is
only a very limited, especially experimental data on the covalent
bonds between these two reactants. Principally, ﬁve potential
types of interactions of phenolics and proteins can be proposed:
hydrogen bonding, -bonding, and hydrophobic, ionic, and
covalent linkages (Hagerman, 1992; Bianco et al., 1997). The
main mechanisms of protein polyphenol interaction at moderate
pH are thought to be governed by -bonding (Bianco et al.,
1997). Phenols may also be oxidized with ease in an alkaline
solution to its corresponding quinone (Hurrell & Finot, 1984).
The quinone, being a reactive electrophilic intermediate, can
readily undergo attack by nucleophiles such as lysine, methion-
ine, cysteine and tryptophan moieties in a protein chain (see also
chapter 1.3) (Pierpoint, 1969a,b; Hurrell et al., 1982; Hurrell &
Finot, 1984; Matheis & Whitaker, 1984a,b; Machholz & Lewer-
enz, 1989; Nicolas et al., 1994). Upon further oxidation of this
addition product to form its quinone, a second addition may
occur, which leads to formation of cross-linked protein polymers
(Matheis & Whitaker, 1984a,b; Machholz & Lewerenz, 1989). In
most of these reports, theoretical aspects of covalent linkages
between proteins and phenolic compounds with corresponding
reaction schemes are discussed. Few results showing such reac-
tions of o-quinone with proteins are reported (Pierpoint, 1969a,b;
Vithayathil & Murthy, 1972; Hurrell et al., 1982; Hurrell &
Finot, 1984; Muralidhara & Prakash, 1995). 
Contrary to the above-mentioned non-covalent type of interac-
tions, our main interest was to focus our studies on covalent link-
ages between plant phenols and proteins/enzymes. Recently, it
was possible for the authors of this review to derivatize proteins/
enzymes with phenols and related compounds in absence of
polyphenoloxidases. The derivatives were characterized, to dem-
onstrate the changes induced in their physicochemical and struc-
tural properties and as well as in the biological activities of the
enzymes. The food proteins and enzymes tested by us included
myoglobin, lysozyme, bovine serum albumin, whey proteins, soy
proteins, -amylase, bromelain, chymotrypsin and trypsin. A
series of simple phenolic and related compounds (quinic-, feru-
lic-, caffeic-, chlorogenic-, and gallic acid; rescorcinol, pyrocate-
chol, hydroquinone representing m-, o-, p-dihydroxyphenols and
ﬁnally p-quinone) were applied and the results reported in detail
(Kroll et al., 2000; Rawel et al., 2000a,b; Kroll et al., 2001; Kroll
& Rawel, 2001; Rawel et al., 2001a,b; Rohn et al., 2001; Rawel
et al., 2002a,b; Rohn et al., 2002a,b). The studies were further
extended to include the reaction of proteins with ﬂavonoids (ﬂa-
vone, apigenin, kaempferol, quercetin and myricetin; C6-C3-C6
structure) (Kroll et al., 2002; Rawel et al., 2002a; Rawel et al.,
2003). Some of the characteristic changes in proteins and
enzymes derivatized with these phenolic compounds are dis-
cussed with help of recent and partly unpublished data in the fol-
lowing sections.
2.1 Reactions at the reactive side chains of proteins: amino-,
sulfhydryl groups and tryptophan   
The derivatization of the proteins was conducted under rela-
tively mild conditions (pH 5–9, room temperature, different con-
centrations) as found during the technological food processing.
The speciﬁc details can be referred to in our publications listed
above. 
The amount of free amino groups was determined using trini-
trobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS), which binds to the nucleophilic
nitrogen of the e-amino side chains of lysine. The reaction of the
Fig. 6.
The basic reactions determining the chemical reactivity of phenolic
compounds.

Reactions of Plant Phenolics with Proteins
209
phenolic compounds with the free amino groups of the proteins
results in the consequent binding and blocking of this reaction
site for TNBS. This leads to a corresponding decrease in the
amount of the free amino groups in the myoglobin derivatives of
ﬂavonoids as illustrated in Fig. 7. Since the amount of free amino
groups was determined in presence of 1% SDS (a well known
agent, which destroys non-covalent protein interactions), we can
assume, that the derivatization has occurred through covalent
binding. The reaction of lysine side chains of myoglobin with
simple phenolic and related compounds (quinic-, ferulic-, caffe-
ic-, chlorogenic-, and gallic acid, m-, o-, p-dihydroxyphenols and
p-quinone) has already been reported (Kroll et al., 2000; Kroll &
Rawel, 2001). The basic requirement for such a reaction is the
formation of a corresponding quinone, this condition being ful-
ﬁlled by caffeic-, chlorogenic-, and gallic acid, o- and p-dihy-
droxyphenols. Ferulic acid and m-dihydroxyphenol cannot be
oxidized to their corresponding quinone derivative, but were
found to react with the proteins applied (Rawel et al., 2000b).
One possible explanation can be given by considering the forma-
tion of a radical, which in turn can attack a nucleophilic reaction
partner. The possible reaction intermediates from ferulic acid and
m-dihydroxyphenol have been postulated (Kroll & Rawel, 2001;
Rawel et al., 2001b). Quinic acid as a simple cyclic compound
also reacts with the free amino groups only to a small, but signif-
icant level (Rawel et al., 2000b). The mechanisms of this reac-
tion are not yet clear. 
From the ﬂavonoids tested, ﬂavone (having no hydroxy sub-
stituents) and apigenin (hydroxy substituents on ring A and 4´ of
ring B) showed no signiﬁcant reactivity towards the free amino
groups, whereas kaempferol, quercetin and myricetin did under-
go a reaction (Fig. 7). This would mean for quercetin and
myricetin that primarily the hydroxy substituents on the ring B
and C (positions 3, 3´, 4´, 5´) of the ﬂavonoids invoke a strong
reaction with lysine side chains in proteins. A possible route for
the reaction of kaempferol with proteins can be explained by
means of enol-keto tautomerization across the 2–3 bond (Fig. 8).
Therefore, the occurrence of the catechol moiety, i.e. the two
adjacent (ortho) aromatic hydroxyl groups in quercetin and
myricetin (C3´and C4´, ring B) and the subsequent autoxidation
(alkaline pH 9, presence of oxygen during the derivatisation) of
these to reactive and redox active o-quinones appears to be a pre-
requisite condition, to generate electrophilic species capable of
undergoing such nucleophilic addition.   
A further possibility of reaction of oxidized phenolic com-
pounds is at the heterocyclic N-atom of tryptophan as already
discussed (Matheis & Whitaker, 1984a; Machholz & Lewerenz,
1989). The quenching of the ﬂuorescence intensity as an indica-
tor of tryptophan changes was studied after activation at 295 nm
and measurement of the emission between 300–360 nm. The
results did also show a decrease of tryptophan content in depen-
dence of the added reactant as documented in Fig. 9 for the
applied ﬂavonoids. A similar observation was also made with
simple phenolic and related compounds as reported earlier (Kroll
et al., 2000; Rawel et al., 2000a,b; Kroll & Rawel, 2001; Rawel
et al., 2001a,b). Further, from the ﬂavonoids (Fig. 9), even ﬂa-
vone and apigenin were found to react. Kaempferol, quercetin as
Fig. 7.
Changes in the amount of the free amino groups in the myoglobin
derivatives of ﬂavonoids (1.07 mmol phenol/g protein). Code: 1unmodiﬁed
(control) myoglobin; 2ﬂavone derivative; 3apigenin derivative; 4
kaempferol derivative; 5quercetin derivative; 6myricetin derivative. 
Fig. 8.
Enol-keto tautomerization in kaempferol.
Fig. 9.
The change of tryptophan content of myoglobin in dependence of
the added reactant (1.07 mmol phenol/g protein). Code: 1unmodiﬁed (con-
trol) myoglobin; 2ﬂavone derivative; 3apigenin derivative; 4kaemp-
ferol derivative; 5quercetin derivative; 6myricetin derivative.

210
J. KROLL et al.
well as myricetin were more reactive (Fig. 9). The mechanisms
of the interactions of ﬂavone with the tryptophan groups are not
yet clear and that of apigenin are likely to be similar to that with
ferulic acid over the formation of a radical as mentioned above.
Since the tryptophan ﬂuorescence was measured in presence of 8
M urea (destroying of non-covalent protein interactions), it can be
assumed that covalent binding has occurred. These trends in the
decrease of tryptophan were also conﬁrmed by performing alkali
hydrolysis of the derivatives, followed by consequent amino acid
analysis (unpublished data).    
Besides the above mentioned inﬂuence on lysine and tryp-
tophan concentration of proteins, the content of the thiol groups
can also be decreased by undergoing similar reactions with oxi-
dized phenolic compounds as postulated and documented (Raw-
el et al., 2000b; Kroll et al., 2002; Rawel et al., 2002a,b). As
recently reported, o-quinone trapping method by glutathione
appeared to be an accurate method for quantiﬁcation of o-quino-
ne metabolites (Awad et al., 2000; Boersma et al., 2000; Awad et
al., 2001; Awad et al., 2002a,b). In these studies, the method
proved useful for analysing the nature and biochemical behavior
of quercetin o-quinone, and characterization of its p-quinone
methide isomers (Awad et al., 2000; Boersma et al., 2000; Awad
et al., 2001; Awad et al., 2002a,b). According to these authors,
for quercetin o-quinone and p-quinone methide III, glutathione
adducts can be formed only at C2´, C5´, and C6´, whereas for p-
quinone methides I and II, adduct formation at C2´, C5´, C6´,
C6, and C8 is possible (Boersma et al., 2000; Awad et al., 2001).
Translating this information to our case and consequently in
accordance to the observed decrease in the nucleophilic protein
side chains, similar covalent adduct formation at the proposed C
atoms for the ﬂavonoids is possible. 
This estimation of the reactivity of the protein side chains is
incomplete, since it has been theoretically and experimentally
observed that further amino acid residues like proline, methion-
ine, histidine and tyrosine also have the potential to react with the
phenolic compounds (Matheis & Whitaker, 1984a; Machholz &
Lewerenz, 1989; Rawel et al., 2000b). 
On the other hand, the methods of characterization and identi-
ﬁcation of plant phenolics show that their spectrophotometric
absorption properties can be applied to estimate the amount of
the phenolic compound covalently bound to the proteins. But
consideration should be given to the fact that the extinction coef-
ﬁcient and absorption maximum wavelength can change in an
adducted species. Hydroxycinnamic acids (like chlorogenic acid)
and ﬂavonoids (like quercetin) exhibit absorption bands at 305–
330 nm and 320–385 nm respectively (Robards et al., 1999).
This absorption characteristics were successfully applied to esti-
mate the amount of the individual chlorogenic acid and quercetin
covalently bound (Rawel et al., 2002b; Rawel et al., 2003)
2.2 Changes in solubility induced by derivatization   
Solubility is a prime requisite for a functional ingredient pro-
tein and is critically necessary for products such as beverages.
For example, whey proteins are nitrogenous fraction remaining
soluble in the supernatant at pH 4.6 after precipitation of casein.
Thus, the loss in solubility at this pH is commonly used to access
the extent of protein denaturation (Kinsella & Whitehead, 1989).
Therefore, it was possible to estimate the degree of denaturation
in whey proteins caused by their reaction with the simple phenol-
ic and related compounds (Rawel et al., 2001a) and recently with
ﬂavonoids (Rawel et al., 2003). The complexation of myoglobin
with oxidized ﬂavonoids is demonstrated by the pH dependent
solubility proﬁle, whereby the unmodiﬁed control myoglobin
had a good solubility in buffer at the investigated pH range (Fig.
10). The reaction of myoglobin with the derivatizing ﬂavonoids
is accompanied by a corresponding blocking of the hydrophilic
amino acid side chains, causing a parallel change of its solubility
(Fig. 10). Flavone caused hardly any inﬂuence on the solubility
behavior, where as apigenin, kaempferol, quercetin as well as
myricetin produced signiﬁcant changes (Fig. 10). These changes
in solubility reﬂect the respective changes in the amount of
charged groups as documented for free available amino groups in
Fig. 7, having a good correlation with the structure of the ﬂa-
vonoids. Certainly, with pH near 4, phenols are also known to
complex with proline-containing proteins by non-covalent asso-
ciations that lead to reduced solubility (Siebert, 1999). Myoglo-
bin has about 2.5 mol% proline (GenBank Protein sequences,
Accession No. 2506462 for myoglobin from horse). Under these
conditions a complexation of phenols with proline would be
expected, whereby phenolic compounds are known to be much
stronger in binding to proline-rich proteins than other conﬁgura-
tions (Siebert & Lynn, 1998; Siebert, 1999). From the nutritional
and technological-functional points of view, such decrease in sol-
ubility may adversely affect not only protein extraction from raw
materials with a relative high content of phenolic compounds
(such as sorghum, sunﬂower seeds, rapeseed), but also the diges-
tion properties as shown below.
2.3 Changes in hydrophilic/hydrophobic character of the
protein derivatives    
The surface activity of proteins is important in a number of
functional applications, e.g. foams and emulsions. The number
and disposition of apolar groups contribute to the effective hy-
drophobicity of proteins by promoting a greater afﬁnity of the
protein e.g. for an oil phase. The covalent attachment of the phe-
nolic compound to proteins causes on one hand the blocking of
the hydrophilic groups like amino and thiol groups as discussed
above, but on the other hand there is also an increase in the
amount of apolar groups (benzene ring) and polar groups (hy-
droxyl and carboxyl groups as in the case of the phenolic acids)
Fig. 10.
The Solubility behaviour of myoglobin-ﬂavonoid derivatives
(1.07 mmol phenol/g protein). Code: 1 unmodiﬁed (control) myoglobin;
2 ﬂavone derivative; 3 apigenin derivative; 4 kaempferol deriva-
tive; 5 quercetin derivative; 6 myricetin derivative.

Reactions of Plant Phenolics with Proteins
211
being introduced. Simultaneously, the solubility behaviour indi-
cates denaturation, which means structural and conformational
changes. All these changes affect the hydrophilic/hydrophobic
character of the derivatized proteins, which can be illustrated by
RP-HPLC. This is documented in a rise of the retention times of
the main peak e.g. illustrated for myoglobin ﬂavonoid derivatives
in Fig. 11. The peak formation may be adversely affected, indi-
cating possible denaturation and molecular interactions (Fig. 11).
Contrary to these results, an increase in the hydrophilic character
(using RP-HPLC) of the derivatives of whey proteins with phe-
nolic compounds was also observed (Rawel et al., 2001a; Rawel
et al., 2003). To summarize, it appears that the effect of the treat-
ment of proteins with phenolic compounds on their hydrophilic/
hydrophobic character seems to be governed by different factors,
some of which like pH, phenol concentration, protein and/or
phenol conﬁguration have been documented (Kroll et al., 2000;
Rawel et al., 2000a,b; Kroll et al., 2001; Kroll & Rawel, 2001;
Rawel et al., 2001a,b; Rohn et al., 2001; Rawel et al., 2002a,b;
Rawel et al., 2003). On the other hand, to optimize the biological
and technological utilization of proteins, especially of low-quali-
ty proteins in underdeveloped countries, a better understanding is
needed of the various interrelated parameters that inﬂuence their
nutritional value and functional properties. As noted above, the
hydrophobic-hydrophilic properties and solubility behavior have
also been modiﬁed by reactions of proteins with phenolic com-
pounds, which in turn may inﬂuence the functional properties
(emulsion-, foam properties) of the derivatives.
2.4 Characterization of the protein-phenol-derivatives with
electrophoretical methods      
As a result of the covalent linkages of the phenolic compounds
with the proteins and in accordance with the observed changes in
the pH dependent solubility of the derivatives (Fig. 10), there is a
change in the net charge of the protein molecules, which is
reﬂected in the corresponding change of the isoelectric point of
the derivatives. Exemplary, the changes obtained by the reaction
of selected ﬂavonoids with myoglobin is depicted in the Fig. 12.
With the increasing number of hydroxyl groups and their posi-
tions in the reacting ﬂavonoids and their corresponding higher
reactivity as witnessed by the blocking of free amino groups
(Fig. 7) and tryptophan (Fig. 9), a shift in the isoelectric points of
the myoglobin fractions can be documented (Fig. 12). Generally
we can summarize following: With higher degrees of derivatiza-
tion, lower isoelectrical points for proteins can be observed i.e.
the proteins become more acidic in nature. This observation is
consistent in all our investigations regarding interactions of pro-
teins with phenolic compounds.   
The estimated data obtained for the total number of amino
acid residues blocked in proteins (BSA, whey proteins) was gen-
erally higher as compared to the amount of phenolic compound
bound (chlorogenic acid, quercetin) (Rawel et al., 2002b; Rawel
et al., 2003) underlining the fact that some protein groups must
be involved in intra- and intermolecular cross-linking. The later
can be conﬁrmed by SDS-PAGE analysis as documented in Fig.
13 for myoglobin-ﬂavonoid derivatives. Again ﬂavon and apige-
nin did not show any change in the electrophoretical behavior,
whereas kaempferol, quercetin as well as myricetin induced
strong polymerization. These high molecular complexes pro-
duced, were not spliced by use of SDS and mercaptoethanol. The
latter reagent is generally used to split disulﬁde bonds during
sample preparation. This is a further indication, that the bonds
formed between the molecules must be of covalent nature. A
summary of the nature of several of the reaction products report-
ed in the literature to be formed upon the chemical or enzymatic
oxidation of ﬂavonoids is given in Awad et al. (2000). The gener-
al picture emerging from these studies is that the oxidation of ﬂa-
Fig. 11.
RP-HPLC of the myoglobin-ﬂavonoid derivatives (1.07 mmol
phenol/g protein). Code: 1unmodiﬁed (control) myoglobin; 2ﬂavone de-
rivative; 3apigenin derivative; 4 = kaempferol derivative; 5quercetin de-
rivative; 6myricetin derivative.
Fig. 12.
Isoelectric focussing (IEF) of myoglobin-ﬂavonoid derivatives
(1.07 mmol phenol/g protein). Code: 1unmodiﬁed (control) myoglobin;
2ﬂavone derivative; 3apigenin derivative; 4kaempferol derivative; 5
quercetin derivative; 6myricetin derivative. 

212
J. KROLL et al.
vonoids is complex, resulting in a wide variety of, in many cases,
unidentiﬁed reaction products. In the presence of glutathione,
however, these products were no longer observed, formation and
dimerization of glutathione adducts originating from glutathione
conjugation with quercetin were observed and identiﬁed by 1H
NMR (Awad et al., 2000; Boersma et al., 2000; Awad et al.,
2001; Awad et al., 2002a,b). According to these studies, the
adduct formation at following sites-C2¢, C5¢, C6¢, C6, and C8 of
quercetin is possible.    
2.5 Characterization of the protein-phenol-derivatives with
mass spectrometry    
The conﬁrmation of the covalent addition of the phenolic
compounds to the monomer protein molecules was obtained by
applying the analytical methods of mass spectrometry like MAL-
DI-TOF-MS and SELDI-TOF-MS. Exemplary, the results ob-
tained for myoglobin with simple phenolic and related com-
pounds (quinic-, ferulic-, caffeic-, chlorogenic-, and gallic acid,
m-, o-, p- dihydroxyphenols and p-quinone) document this cova-
lent attachment (Kroll et al., 2000; Kroll & Rawel, 2001). Recent
experiments with whey proteins and quercetin also conﬁrm the
covalent linkages for ﬂavonoids (Rawel et al., 2003). The mass
spectra of the myoglobin derivatives with chlorogenic acid and
p-quinone illustrating such changes are shown in Fig. 14. The
reaction of myoglobin with chlorogenic acid (352.3 Da) deliv-
ered the highest molecular mass of 18025 Da, which in turn
could account for addition of at least 3 molecules of chlorogeno-
quinone to one myoglobin molecule (Fig. 14). In case of p-
quinone (108.1 Da), a high molecular weight of 18117 Da was
derived, which accounts for a corresponding addition of ca.11
molecules of p-quinone (Kroll & Rawel, 2001).
2.6 Inﬂuence of the reaction parameters and conditions   
The pre-requisite condition for the reaction of phenolic com-
pounds with proteins is the presence of oxygen, in order to pro-
duce a reactive and redox active quinone or a semi-quinone
radical, an electrophilic species capable of undergoing nucleo-
philic addition at the reactive side chains of the proteins. It is
clear that the reaction conditions like time period, temperature,
pH, oxygenation, concentration of the phenolic compounds as
well as the position and the amount of hydroxyl groups present,
may greatly inﬂuence the extent of their covalent attachment to
proteins. The presence or absence of enzymes (e.g. tyrosinase)
can also be important with regard to the oxidation products form-
ed and consequently the reaction products produced with pro-
teins (Hurrell et al., 1982; Hurrell & Finot, 1984). Some inter-
esting aspects of reactions of caffeic- and chlorogenic acids with
casein, showing the inﬂuence of pH, reaction time, temperature
and presence or absence of enzymes (tyrosinase) have been re-
ported (Hurrell et al., 1982; Hurrell & Finot, 1984). The inﬂu-
ence of pH was also documented for reaction of chlorogenic acid
with lysozyme and -amylase, where even at low pH values (pH
4–5) derivatization occurred and consequent change of their
activity was witnessed (Rawel et al., 2002b; Rohn et al., 2002b).
With regard to ﬂavonoids, recent results showed that, the adduct
formation of quercetin quinone or quercetin quinone methide
was found to be pH dependent (Awad et al., 2002a). A shift in
adduct formation was noted from the C ring at pH 3.5, to the A
ring at pH 7.0 and ﬁnally to the B ring at pH 9.5. This indicates a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the pH on the regioselectivity of gluta-
thione conjugation to quercetin quinone/quinone methide (Awad
et al., 2002a). The concentration of the phenolic compounds
present during the derivatization also showed considerable effect,
the degree of derivatization increasing with their rising concen-
tration as documented for myoglobin and phenolic acids in
(Kroll et al., 2000) and for -amylase activity in (Rohn et al.,
Fig. 13.
SDS-PAGE of the myoglobin-ﬂavonoid derivatives (1.07 mmol
phenol/g protein). Code: 1unmodiﬁed (control) myoglobin; 2ﬂavone de-
rivative; 3apigenin derivative; 4kaempferol derivative; 5quercetin de-
rivative; 6myricetin derivative.
Fig. 14.
MALDI-TOF-MS of myoglobin-phenol derivatives (0.42 mmol
phenol/g protein). Code: 1unmodiﬁed (control) myoglobin; 2chlorogenic
acid derivative; 3p-quinone derivative.

Reactions of Plant Phenolics with Proteins
213
2002b). The different conﬁgurations of hydroxyl groups, i.e their
amount and their position in the phenolic compounds, also deter-
mine the degree of protein derivatization (Kroll & Rawel, 2001;
Rawel et al., 2001a,b; Rawel et al., 2002a; Rawel et al., 2003).
The dependence of the reactivity on the different conﬁgurations
of hydroxyl groups in ﬂavonoids is also demonstrated by studies
using the glutathione trapping method followed by HPLC,
NMR, MALDI-TOF, and LC/MS analysis to identify the differ-
ent glutathionyl adducts formed (Awad et al., 2000; Boersma et
al., 2000; Awad et al., 2001).
3. Characterization of structural changes in protein-phenol-
derivatives    
The structural changes were studied using circular dichroism,
differential scanning calorimetry, intrinsic ﬂuorescence, and
binding of anilinonaphthalenesulfonic acid. These results have
been published recently (Rawel et al., 2002a,b; Rawel et al.,
2003). A far-UV-CD study was conducted e.g. to evaluate the
inﬂuence of derivatization by chlorogenic acid on the secondary
structure of BSA (Rawel et al., 2002b). The results showed that
there was a signiﬁcant perturbation of the secondary structure
with increasing degree of derivatization, causing a loss of the -
helix and a parallel increase in the content of unordered structure
elements (Rawel et al., 2002b). The derivatisation of -lactoglo-
bulin with quercetin and rutin (quercetin-3-O-rhamnosylgluco-
side) also caused a decrease in -helix (esp. the regular -helix)
with a parallel increase in the remaining structure conﬁrming the
destructuring effect (Rawel et al., 2003). The perturbation of the
secondary structure became more signiﬁcant after derivatisation
with rutin leading to an increased amount of unordered structure
elements (Rawel et al., 2003). The reason being its bulkiness re-
sulting from the attached rhamnosylglucoside at C3. Investiga-
tions on thermodynamics of interactions of caffeic acid and quin-
ic acid with multisubunit proteins from sunﬂower seeds also
suggested a marginal increase in -sheet content, while -helix
and -turn contents were marginally decreased (Suryaprakash et
al., 2000). Interaction of chlorogenic acid with human serum
albumin was also shown to cause a decrease in -helix structure
with other structures unaltered (Muralidhara & Prakash, 1995).
These results are in agreement with our observations for BSA
and -lactoglobulin.
The interactions of ﬂavonoids (apigenin, kaempherol and
quercetin) with soy glycinin on the other side produced an in-
crease in -helix and -strand (Rawel et al., 2002a). A similar
observation was also made during experiments concerning inter-
actions of a globular protein (arachin) exposed to simple poly-
phenols (catechol and pyrogallol) and was attributed to the num-
ber of the introduced hydroxyl groups (Neucere et al., 1978).
The interaction was thought to be of the hydrogen bond type,
either through interpeptide chains or encompassing the phenols
themselves (Neucere et al., 1978). Derivatization with myricetin
causes a decrease in -helix, with a parallel increase in -strand
and -turn. In summary, CD studies and estimation of changes in
secondary structures clearly demonstrates a perturbation, that is
dependent of phenolic compounds and proteins applied. 
The inﬂuence of the derivatization on the tertiary structure of
soy glycinin and -lactoglobulin were evaluated by means of a
near-UV-CD study (Rawel et al., 2002a; Rawel et al., 2003). The
CD of proteins in the near UV (310–240 nm) derives from transi-
tions in the prosthetic groups e.g. tryptophan. The variation of
CD in this region can be used to monitor changes in conforma-
tion and local environment. Chlorogenic acid caused a decrease
in the molecular ellipticity compared to the unmodiﬁed soy gly-
cinin, where as caffeic- and gallic acid an increase. Conversely,
ﬂavonoids-ﬂavone and apigenin caused hardly any change,
kaempherol only a slight, and quercetin as well as myricetin a
signiﬁcant increase in molecular ellipticity compared to the con-
trol sample (Rawel et al., 2002a). An increase in molecular ellip-
ticity was also obtained by the derivatization of -lactoglobulin
with quercetin and rutin (Rawel et al., 2003). These changes in
spectra highlight some conformational changes induced by the
derivatization, affecting the tertiary structure and perturbing the
initial conformation of the protein. Chemical modiﬁcation (acy-
lation and sulfamidation) also produces a similar destructuring of
proteins (Gerbanowski et al., 1999).
An intrinsic ﬂuorescence study was also performed e.g. to
evaluate changes in tertiary structure caused by reaction of BSA
with chlorogenic acid (Rawel et al., 2002b). The maximum
emission decreased in intensity as a function of the level of BSA
modiﬁcation by the covalent attachment of the chlorogenic acid
and a red shift of the maximum emission was observed (Rawel et
al., 2002b). The interaction of the aromatic ring of caffeic acid
with aromatic residues such as tyrosine and tryptophan of the
protein may be responsible for quenching of ﬂuorescence inten-
sity based on tryptophan ﬂuorescence experiments (Suryap-
rakash et al., 2000). Such interactions can be conﬁrmed as shown
by the progressive decrease in the amount of free tryptophan
(Suryaprakash et al., 2000; Rawel et al., 2002b). From the pro-
gressive quenching and the red shift observed in the maximum
ﬂuorescence emission of derivatized BSA, it can be deduced that
conformational changes induced by the modiﬁcation lead to a
further exposure of tryptophan residues to the polar solvent
(Jackman & Yada, 1989; Gerbanowski et al., 1999). Similar
observations were also recorded for the reaction of -lactoglobu-
lin with quercetin and rutin (Rawel et al., 2003). 
Differential scanning calorimetry was applied to assess the
response of BSA-chlorogenic acid derivatives from a thermal
stability perspective (Rawel et al., 2002b). The thermal stability
of BSA, as reﬂected by denaturation temperature (Td), decreased
signiﬁcantly as a function of the level of derivatization (Rawel et
al., 2002b). Generally the enthalpy of denaturation (H) of
derivatized BSA was also lowered (Rawel et al., 2002b). This
decrease was not continuous making conformational changes
apparent. The end-product of such a denaturation is generally a
partly random coiled protein; this result is caused primarily by
the disruption of non-covalent interactions (Ismond et al., 1985).
The increase in the random coiled or unordered structure has
been documented by CD analysis as described above (Rawel et
al., 2002b). 
The inﬂuence on surface hydrophobicity of BSA molecules
by covalent linkage of chlorogenic acid was documented by
binding of hydrophobic ﬂuorescence probe, 1-anilino-8-naptha-
lensulfonate (ANS) (Rawel et al., 2002b). ANS is widely used to
monitor conformational changes in proteins and to characterize
surface exposure of hydrophobic sites (Hayakawa & Nakai,
1985; Ismond et al., 1985; Ismond et al., 1988; Gerbanowski et
al., 1999). The surface hydrophobicity decreased with increasing
degree of derivatization of BSA as shown by the low initial

214
J. KROLL et al.
slopes (S0-hydrophobicity index), calculated from the corre-
sponding ﬂuorescence intensity vs. protein concentration plots
(Rawel et al., 2002b). This means that the surface of BSA
becomes hydrophilic. This also explains the better solubility of
the BSA-chlorogenic acid derivatives as compared to e.g. myo-
globin-phenol derivatives, which exhibited increased hydropho-
bicity (Kroll et al., 2000; Kroll & Rawel, 2001). According to
Hayakawa and Nakai (1985), the decrease in solubility correlates
generally well with an increase in surface hydrophobicity as
measured by the hydrophobic ﬂuorescence probe ANS. The sur-
face hydrophobicity was also decreased when -lactoglobulin
was derivatized by quercetin and rutin respectively (Rawel et al.,
2003). The observed decrease in the surface hydrophobicity can
be explained as combined effect of a conformational change of
the protein that increased the exposure of some additional hydro-
philic regions which were previously buried, the covalent block-
ing of exposed hydrophobic residues like tryptophan and that the
phenolic compounds bound, introduced new hydrophilic compo-
nents (hydroxyl- and carboxyl groups). 
In summary, CD studies and estimation of changes in second-
ary structures clearly demonstrates that the reaction of proteins
with phenolic compounds leads to changes in -helix. The intrin-
sic ﬂuorescence, DSC measurements and ANS binding experi-
ments further indicate signiﬁcant changes in the conformation of
protein derivatized with the phenolic compounds.
4. Effect of protein derivatization on the proteolytic in vitro
digestion    
The enzymatic hydrolysis of derivatized food proteins as test-
ed by trypsin, chymotrypsin, pepsin and pancreatin were differ-
ently inﬂuenced. Exemplary, an increase in concentration of
phenolic substance present during derivatization caused the pro-
teolytic digestion to become negatively inﬂuenced as reported for
myoglobin derivatives (Kroll et al., 2000). Similarly, an alkaline
pH lead to a higher derivatization and the proteolytic digestion
(e.g. peptic hydrolysis of lysozyme derivatives with chorogenic
acid) was correspondingly poor (Rawel et al., 2000a). Quinic
acid (a non aromatic substance) reacts only to small extent with
protein, where as starting from resorcinol, ferulic acid, chloro-
genic-, caffeic acid, pyrocatechol, hydroquinone, p-quinone and
gallic acid a corresponding stronger reactivity and a correspond-
ing stronger negative effect on proteolytic digestion was ob-
served. The effect of derivatization of myoglobin and whey pro-
teins with some of these phenolic compounds on all of the four
proteolytic digestions tested, were negatively effected (Kroll et
al., 2000; Kroll & Rawel, 2001; Rawel et al., 2001a). The results
also showed that lysozyme derivatization with these plant phe-
nols leads generally to a better digestion by trypsin, chymot-
rypsin and pancreatin, where as the peptic digestion is not
favoured (Rawel et al., 2001b). With regard to the derivatization
of soy glycinin with selected ﬂavonoids, general observations
were that the tryptic, chymotryptic and pancreatic hydrolysis
were promoted (except that ﬂavone had little or no effect),
whereas the peptic digestion remained more or less unaffected
(Rawel et al., 2002a). A similar observation was also made,
when digesting myoglobin derivatized with the these ﬂavonoids,
except here even the peptic digestion was also promoted. Exem-
plary, the chymotryptic digestion is presented in Fig. 15.
In conclusion, the proteolytic degradation of food proteins
derivatized with phenolic compounds was effected by the pH
milieu and the concentration of the phenolic substance present
during the derivatization as well as from the phenol and protein
conﬁguration.   
5. Reactions of phenolics and related substances with en-
zymes   
The plant phenolic substances react with enzymes inﬂuencing
their physicochemical and structural properties as described
above and consequently their in vitro enzymatic activity was also
adversely affected (Rawel et al., 2000b; Rawel et al., 2001b;
Rohn et al., 2001; Rohn et al., 2002a,b). The proteolytic diges-
tion of food proteins with -chymotrypsin derivatized by phenol-
ic compounds was adversely affected as reported in Rohn et al.
(2001). This decrease depended on the reactivity of the phenolic
and related substances tested as well as on the kind of substrate
applied (Rohn et al., 2001). Reactions of phenolic compounds
with other enzymes (trypsin, lysozyme, -amylase) showed sim-
ilar results with regard to changes in physicochemical properties
and the effect on their activities (Rohn et al., 2002b). The evalua-
tion of the lytic activity against gram-positve bacteria (Micrococ-
cus lysodeikticus) showed that the lytic degradation of their cell
walls by lysozyme derivatives of different phenolic compounds
was signiﬁcantly reduced due to the covalent attachment of the
phenolic substances (Rawel et al., 2001b; Rohn et al., 2002b).
The soy trypsin inhibitor activity against tryptic digestion de-
clined as tested for the two different substrates (N-benzoyl-arg-
nitroanilide-BAPA and casein) (Rawel et al., 2002a). Soy trypsin
inhibitors cause growth inhibition, pancreatic hypertrophy, and
hyperplasia in experimental animals (Sessa et al., 1988). Such
biological properties may also be effected by phenolic com-
pounds, but remain to be researched. Figure 16 summarises the
detrimental effects on biological activity of the tested enzymes
and inhibitor. The standard substrates were applied: For -amy-
Fig. 15.
Chymotryptic digestion of the myoglobin-ﬂavonoid derivatives
(1.07 mmol phenol/g protein; Enzyme:Substrate ratio-E : S1 : 60). Code:
1 unmodiﬁed (control) myoglobin; 2 ﬂavone derivative; 3 apige-
nin derivative; 4 kaempferol derivative; 5＊ quercetin derivative; 6
 

 

 
myricetin derivative.

 
Reactions of Plant Phenolics with Proteins
 
215
 
lase-potato starch; trypsin-BAEE (N
 

 
-benzoyl-arg-ethyl ester);
 

 
-chymotrypsin-N-suc-ala-ala-pro-phe-
 
p
 
-nitroanilide; 
brome-
lain-N-CBZ-LNPE (N
 

 
-carbobenzoxy-lys-
 
p
 
-nitrophenyl ester);
lysozyme-cells from 
 
Micrococcus lysodeikticus
 
; soy trypsin
inhibitor-N
 

 
-benzoyl-arg-nitroanilide. Detailed experimental con-
ditions are reported elsewhere (Rawel 
 
et al
 
., 2001b; Rohn 
 
et al
 
.,
2001; Rohn 
 
et al
 
., 2002b; Rawel 
 
et al
 
., 2002a).   
The kinetics of the enzymatic reactions showed that the hy-
drolysis of selected food proteins becomes slower and the afﬁnity
of the enzyme to these substrates declined as measured by
Michaelis-Menten constant and maximum velocity of the enzy-
matic reaction (Rohn 
 
et al.
 
, 2003). This enzyme inhibition de-
pended on the reactivity of the phenolic and related substances
tested as well as on the degree of the derivatization. Further, in-
ﬂuence of the enzyme-substrate ratio was also demonstrated. The
effects of the derivatization are more pronounced with increasing
concentration of the substrates.
 
6. Conclusions: Nutritional-physiological consequences of
such reactions
 
    
These interactions of ﬂavonoids with myoglobin conﬁrm our
former results with other proteins/enzymes, showing that the per-
quisite condition for a phenol to form covalent bonds with pro-
teins lies in its capability to form corresponding quinones or
semi-quinone radicals. The later being in position to undergo
nucleophilic addition at the amino side chains of the proteins.
The reaction proceeds in a further stage, where polymerization
may take place. 
The nutritional value of food proteins is governed by amino
acid composition, ratios of essential amino acids, susceptibility
to hydrolysis during digestion, source, and the effects of process-
ing. To optimize the biological utilization of proteins, especially
of low-quality proteins in underdeveloped countries, a better
understanding is needed of the various interrelated parameters
that inﬂuence their nutritional value. Enzyme-catalyzed brown-
ing reactions of amino acid and proteins with oxidized plant phe-
nols may cause deterioration of food during storage and process-
ing leading to a loss in nutritional quality, which is especially
serious in underprivileged countries. Some complex polyphenols
such as tannins are present in many cereal foods, e.g., grain sor-
ghum, the latter being widely used in many African countries. A
similar problem also encountered in the utilization of proteins
from sunﬂower, safﬂower, cotton seed and alfalfa leaf is that they
contain high levels of phenolic compounds (Hurrell 
 
et al
 
., 1982;
Hurrell & Finot, 1984; Matheis & Whitaker, 1984a). Further,
alkaline processing of proteins may also be applied in technolog-
ical treatments of foods and feeds by solubilization and puriﬁca-
tion, to destroy toxic contaminants, to obtain functional proper-
ties, including the formation of textured vegetable protein ﬁbers
(Hurrell 
 
et al
 
., 1982). These conditions would promote reactions
of proteins with secondary plant metabolites as shown above
inducing changes in their physico-chemical properties. The enzy-
matic digestion of the food protein derivatives by trypsin, chy-
motrypsin, pepsin and pancreatin is adversely effected. And,
ﬁnally the biological function e.g. enzyme activity could also be
negatively inﬂuenced.
Further, after intake of food materials containing phenolic
compounds and after their corresponding absorption, these free
ligands may interact with many transport proteins and enzymes
as shown by the inhibition of human spleen tyrosine kinases
(Lazaro 
 
et al.
 
, 1995). Further, phenols have also been attributed
with positive properties like having antimutagenic, antimicrobial
and anticancerogenic effects as well as being antioxidants—a
possible mechanism by which dietary components protect the
body from free radicals and reactive oxygen species (Robards 
 
et
al.
 
, 1999). This is biologically relevant especially with respect to
possible toxicological risks of these supposed beneﬁcial antioxi-
dants, apparently able to be converted to electrophilic pro-oxi-
dants (Awad 
 
et al.
 
, 2000; Boersma 
 
et al.
 
, 2000; Awad 
 
et al.
 
,
2001; Awad 
 
et al.
 
, 2002a,b). The 
 
p
 
-quinone methide of quercetin
may prove to be an important toxic metabolite involved in the
cytotoxicity and pro-oxidant effects of quercetin (Boersma 
 
et al.
 
,
2000). Further, this is of utmost importance, in connection with
the recent trends of introducing more and more supplementary
foods on the commercial level with the intention of marketing
the positive (antioxidative!) effects of ﬂavonoids. These supple-
mentary foods contain high concentrations of ﬂavonoids, which
are physiologically disquieting, especially since depending on
Fig. 16.
Effect of derivatization with chlorogenic acid on the biological activity of proteins. Code: 1control enzyme; 2enzyme derivatized in presence of
0.28 mmol chlorogenic acid/g protein, except for lysozyme and soy trypsin inhibitor, where 0.14 mmol and 0.3 mmol chlorogenic acid respectively were
applied.

216
J. KROLL et al.
the concentration and hydroxyl substituent pattern, they can also
act as pro-oxidants (Awad et al., 2000; Boersma et al., 2000;
Awad et al., 2001; Awad et al., 2002a,b). Recently, the quercetin
adduct formation with glutathione was indicated to be reversible,
leading to possibilities for release and further electrophilic reac-
tions of the quercetin quinone methide at cellular sites different
from those of its generation (Boersma et al., 2000). 
The different aspects of consumption of protein-phenol deriva-
tives and their consequent proteolytic digestion have been ade-
quately commented by Friedman (Friedman, 1997) as follows:
“the nutritional and toxicological signiﬁcance of consuming such
protein derivatives is largely unknown.”
References   
Adam, A., Crespy, V., Levrat-Verny, M.A., Leenhardt, F., Leuillet, M.,
Demigne, C. and Remesy, C. (2002). The bioavailability of ferulic
acid is governed primarily by the food matrix rather than its metab-
olism in intestine and liver in rats. J. Nutr., 132, 1962–1968. 
Ader, P., Wessmann, A. and Wolffram, S. (2000). Bioavailability and
metabolism of the ﬂavonol quercetin in the pig. Free Radic. Biol.
Med., 28, 1056–1067. 
Andlauer, W., Kolb, J. and Furst, P. (2000). Isoﬂavones from tofu are
absorbed and metabolized in the isolated rat small intestine. J. Nutr.,
130, 3021–3027. 
Andlauer, W., Stumpf, C. and Furst, P. (2001). Intestinal absorption of
rutin in free and conjugated forms. Biochem. Pharmacol., 62, 369–
374. 
Arjmandi, B.H. and Smith, B.J. (2002). Soy isoﬂavones’ osteoprotec-
tive role in postmenopausal women: mechanism of action. J. Nutr.
Biochem., 13, 130–137. 
Authors-group. (1999). ()-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) and
()-epigallocatechin (EGG). In “Special issue: ILSI North America
Food Components Reports.” ed. by F.M. Clydesdale. Crit. Rev. Food
Sci. Nutr., 39, 215–226. 
Awad, H.M., Boersma, M.G., Vervoort, J. and Rietjens, I.M. (2000).
Peroxidase-catalyzed formation of quercetin quinone methide-glu-
tathione adducts. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 378, 224–233. 
Awad, H.M., Boersma, M.G., Boeren, S., van Bladeren, P.J., Vervoort,
J. and Rietjens, I.M. (2001). Structure-activity study on the quinone/
quinone methide chemistry of ﬂavonoids. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 14,
398–408. 
Awad, H.M., Boersma, M.G., Boeren, S., van Bladeren, P.J., Vervoort,
J. and Rietjens, I.M. (2002a). The regioselectivity of glutathione
adduct formation with ﬂavonoid quinone/quinone methides is pH-
dependent. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 15, 343–351. 
Awad, H.M., Boersma, M.G., Boeren, S., van der Woude, H., van
Zanden, J., van Bladeren, P.J., Vervoort, J. and Rietjens, I.M.
(2002b). Identiﬁcation of o-quinone/quinone methide metabolites of
quercetin in a cellular in vitro system. FEBS Lett., 520, 30–34. 
Azuma, K., Ippoushi, K., Nakayama, M., Ito, H., Higashio, H. and
Terao, J. (2000). Absorption of chlorogenic acid and caffeic acid in
rats after oral administration. J. Agric. Food Chem., 48, 5496–5500. 
Baba, S., Osakabe, N., Natsume, M., Muto, Y., Takizawa, T. and Terao,
J. (2001). In vivo comparison of the bioavailability of ()-catechin,
()-epicatechin and their mixture in orally administered rats. J.
Nutr., 131, 2885–2891. 
Baxter, N.J., Lilley, T.H., Haslam, E. and Williamson, M.P. (1997).
Multiple interactions between polyphenols and a salivary proline-
rich protein repeat result in complexation and precipitation. Bio-
chemistry, 36, 5566–5577. 
Bianco, A., Chiacchio, U., Resciﬁna, A., Romeo, G. and Uccella, N.
(1997). Biomimetic supramolecular biophenol-carbohydrate and
biophenol-protein models by NMR experiments. J. Agric. Food
Chem., 45, 4281–4285. 
Boersma, M.G., Vervoort, J., Szymusiak, H., Lemanska, K., Tyra-
kowska, B., Cenas, N., Segura-Aguilar, J. and Rietjens, I.M. (2000).
Regioselectivity and reversibility of the glutathione conjugation of
quercetin quinone methide. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 13, 185–191. 
Böhm, H., Boeing, H., Hempel, J., Raab, B. and Kroke, A. (1998).
Flavonols, ﬂavone and anthocyanins as natural antioxidants of food
and their possible role in the prevention of chronic diseases. Z.
Ernaehrungswiss., 37, 147–163. 
Bourne, L.C. and Rice-Evans, C. (1998). Bioavailability of ferulic
acid. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 253, 222–227. 
Brown, J.P. and Dietrich, P.S. (1979). Mutagenicity of plant ﬂavonols
in the Salmonella/mammalian microsome test: activation of ﬂavonol
glycosides by mixed glycosidases from rat cecal bacteria and other
sources. Mutat. Res., 66, 223–240.
Brown, J.P. (1980). A review of the genetic effects of naturally occur-
ring ﬂavonoids, anthraquinones and related compounds. Mutat. Res.,
75, 243–277. 
Cao, G., Muccitelli, H.U., Sanchez-Moreno, C. and Prior, R.L. (2001).
Anthocyanins are absorbed in glycated forms in elderly women: a
pharmacokinetic study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 73, 920–926. 
Cassidy, A., Hanley, B. and Lamuela-Raventos, R.M. (2000). Isoﬂa-
vones, lignans and stilbenes-origins, metabolism and potential im-
portance to human health. J. Sci. Food Agric., 80, 1044–1062. 
Chesson, A., Provan, G.J., Russell, W.R., Scobbie, L., Richardson, A.J.
and Stewart, C. (1999). Hydroxycinnamic acids in the digestive tract
of livestock and humans. J. Sci. Food Agric., 79, 373–378. 
Clifford, M.N. (1999). Chlorogenic acids and other cinnamates:
nature, occurrence and dietary burden. J. Sci. Food Agric., 79, 362–
372. 
Clifford, M.N. and Scalbert, A. (2000). Ellagitannins: nature, occur-
rence and dietary burden. J. Sci. Food Agric., 80, 1118–1125. 
Clifford, M.N. (2000a). Anthocyanins: nature, occurrence and dietary
burden. J. Sci. Food Agric., 80, 1063–1072. 
Clifford, M.N. (2000b). Chlorogenic acids and other cinnamates:
nature, occurrence, dietary burden, absorption and metabolism. J.
Sci. Food Agric., 80, 1033–1043. 
Cook, N.C. and Samman, S. (1996). Flavonoids: Chemistry, metabo-
lism, cardioprotective effects, and dietary sources. J. Nutr. Biochem.,
7, 66–76. 
de Vries, J.H., Hollman, P.C., Meyboom, S., Buysman, M.N., Zock,
P.L., van Staveren, W.A. and Katan, M.B. (1998). Plasma concentra-
tions and urinary excretion of the antioxidant ﬂavonols quercetin
and kaempferol as biomarkers for dietary intake. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
68, 60–65.
Friedman, M. (1996). Food browning and its prevention: an overview.
J. Agric. Food Chem., 44, 631–653. 
Friedman, M. (1997). Chemistry, biochemistry, and dietary role of
potato polyphenols. A review. J. Agric. Food Chem., 45, 1523–1540. 
Gerbanowski, A., Malabat, C., Rabiller, C. and Gueguen, J. (1999).
Grafting of aliphatic and aromatic probes on rapeseed 2S and 12S
proteins: inﬂuence on their structural and physicochemical proper-
ties. J. Agric. Food Chem., 47, 5218–5226. 
Gryglewski, R.J., Korbut, R., Robak, J. and Swies, J. (1987). On the
mechanism of antithrombotic action of ﬂavonoids. Biochem. Phar-
macol., 36, 317–322. 
Hagerman, A.E. (1992). Tannin-protein interactions. In “Phenolic
Compounds in Food and Their Effects on Health. I-Analysis, Occur-
rence and Chemistry.” ed. by P. Ho, C.Y. Lee and M.T. Huang.
American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, ACS Symposium
Series No. 506, pp 237–247. 
Hayakawa, S. and Nakai, S. (1985). Solubility of milk and soy pro-
teins. J. Food Sci., 50, 486–491. 
Herrmann, K. (1989). Occurence and content of hydroxycinnamic and
hydroxybenzoic acid compounds in foods. Crit. Rev. Food Sci.
Nutr., 28, 315–347. 
Hertog, M.G., Sweetnam, P.M., Fehily, A.M., Elwood, P.C. and Krom-
hout, D. (1997). Antioxidant ﬂavonols and ischemic heart disease in
a Welsh population of men: the Caerphilly Study. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
65, 1489–1494. 
Hodek, P., Treﬁl, P. and Stiborova, M. (2002). Flavonoids-potent and
versatile biologically active compounds interacting with cyto-
chromes P450. Chem. Biol. Interact., 139, 1–21. 
Hollman, P.C., vd Gaag, M., Mengelers, M.J., van Trijp, J.M., de
Vries, J.H. and Katan, M.B. (1996). Absorption and disposition

Reactions of Plant Phenolics with Proteins
217
kinetics of the dietary antioxidant quercetin in man. Free Radic.
Biol. Med., 21, 703–707. 
Hollman, P.C., van Trijp, J.M., Buysman, M.N., van der Gaag, M.S.,
Mengelers, M.J., de Vries, J.H. and Katan, M.B. (1997). Relative
bioavailability of the antioxidant ﬂavonoid quercetin from various
foods in man. FEBS Lett., 418, 152–156. 
Hollman, P.C.H., Bijsman, M., van Gameren, Y., Cnossen, E.P.J., de
Vries, J.H.M. and Katan, M.B. (1999). The sugar moiety is a major
determinant of the absorption of dietary ﬂavonoid glycosides in
man. Free Radic. Res., 31, 569–573. 
Hollman, P.C.H. and Arts, I.C.W. (2000). Flavonols, ﬂavones and ﬂa-
vanols: nature, occurrence and dietary burden. J. Sci. Food Agric.,
80, 1081–1093. 
Huber, W.W., McDaniel, L.P., Kaderlik, K.R., Teitel, C.H., Lang, N.P.
and Kadlubar, F.F. (1997). Chemoprotection against the formation
of colon DNA adducts from the food-borne carcinogen 2-amino-1-
methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP) in the rat. Mutat.
Res., 376, 115–122. 
Hurrell, R.F., Finot, P.A. and Cuq, J.L. (1982). Protein-polyphenol re-
actions. 1. Nutritional and metabolic consequences of the reaction
between oxidized caffeic acid and the lysine residues of casein. Br.
J. Nutr., 47, 191–211. 
Hurrell, R.F. and Finot, P.A. (1984). Nutritional consequences of the
reactions between proteins and oxidized polyphenolic acids. Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol., 177, 423–435. 
Ismond, M.A.H., Murray, E.D. and Arntﬁeld, S.D. (1985). Stability of
vicilin, a legume seed storage protein, with step-wise electrostatic
modiﬁcation. Int. J. Pept. Prot. Res., 26, 584–590. 
Ismond, M.A.H., Murray, E.D. and Arntﬁeld, S.D. (1988). The role of
noncovalent forces in micelle formation by vicilin from vicia-faba.
3. The Effect of urea, guanidine-hydrochloride and sucrose on pro-
tein interactions. Food Chem., 29, 189–198.
Jackman, R.L. and Yada, R.Y. (1989). Ultraviolet-absorption and ﬂuo-
rescence properties of whey-potato and whey-pea protein compos-
ites. Can. Inst. Food Sci. Technol. J., 22, 252–259. 
Kinsella, J.E. and Whitehead, D.M. (1989). Proteins in whey, chemi-
cal, physical and functional properties. Adv. Food Nutr. Res., 33,
343–438. 
Kroll, J., Rawel, H.M. and Seidelmann, N. (2000). Physicochemical
properties and susceptibility to proteolytic digestion of myoglobin-
phenol derivatives. J. Agric. Food Chem., 48, 1580–1587. 
Kroll, J. and Rawel, H. (2001). Reactions of plant phenols with myo-
globin: Inﬂuence of chemical structure of the phenolic compounds.
J. Food Sci., 66, 48–58. 
Kroll, J., Rawel, H.M., Rohn, S. and Czajka, D. (2001). Interactions of
glycinin with plant phenols: Inﬂuence on chemical properties and
proteolytic degradation of the proteins. Nahrung/Food, 45, 388–389. 
Kroll, J., Rawel, H. and Czajka, D. (2002). Changes induced in prop-
erties of food proteins by apigenin and quercetin. Food Sci. Biotech-
nol., 11, 1–3. 
Kühnau, J. (1976). The Flavonoids. A class of semi-essential food
components: their role in human nutrition. World Rev. Nutr. Diet.,
24, 117–191. 
Lapidot, T., Harel, S., Granit, R. and Kanner, J. (1998). Bioavailability
of red wine anthocyanins as detected in human urine. J. Agric. Food
Chem., 46, 4297–4302. 
Laughton, M.J., Halliwell, B., Evans, P.J. and Hoult, J.R. (1989). Anti-
oxidant and pro-oxidant actions of the plant phenolics quercetin,
gossypol and myricetin. Effects on lipid peroxidation, hydroxyl rad-
ical generation and bleomycin-dependent damage to DNA. Bio-
chem. Pharmacol., 38, 2859–2865.
Lazaro, I., Palacios, C., Gonzales, M. and Gonzalezporque, P. (1995).
Inhibition of human spleen protein-tyrosine kinases by phenolic-
compounds. Anal. Biochem., 225, 180–183. 
MacGregor, J.T. and Jurd, L. (1978). Mutagenicity of plant ﬂavonoids:
structural requirements for mutagenic activity in Salmonella typh-
imurium. Mutat. Res., 54, 297–309. 
Machholz, R. and Lewerenz, H.J. (1989). Lebensmitteltoxikologie.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp 226–231. 
Malaveille, C., Hautefeuille, A., Pignatelli, B., Talaska, G., Vineis, P.
and Bartsch, H. (1996). Dietary phenolics as anti-mutagens and in-
hibitors of tobacco-related DNA adduction in the urothelium of
smokers. Carcinogenesis, 17, 2193–2200. 
Manthey, J.A. and Guthrie, N. (2002). Antiproliferative activities of
citrus ﬂavonoids against six human cancer cell lines. J. Agric. Food
Chem., 50, 5837–5843. 
Matheis, G. and Whitaker, J.R. (1984a). Modiﬁcation of proteins by
polyphenol oxidase and peroxidase and their products. J. Food Bio-
chem., 8, 137–162. 
Matheis, G. and Whitaker, J.R. (1984b). Peroxidase-catalyzed cross
linking of proteins. J. Prot. Chem., 3, 35–48. 
Mazur, W.M., Duke, J.A., Wahala, K., Rasku, S. and Adlercreutz, H.
(1998). Isoﬂavonoids and lignans in legumes: nutritional and health
aspects in humans. J. Nutr. Biochem, 9, 193–200. 
Mehansho, H., Butler, L.G. and Carlson, D.M. (1987). Dietary tannins
and salivary proline-rich proteins: Interactions, induction, and de-
fense-mechanisms. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 7, 423–440. 
Metodiewa, D., Jaiswal, A.K., Cenas, N., Dickancaite, E. and Segura-
Aguilar, J. (1999). Quercetin may act as a cytotoxic prooxidant after
its metabolic activation to semiquinone and quinoidal product. Free
Radic. Biol. Med., 26, 107–116. 
Meyer, A.S., Heinonen, M. and Frankel, E.N. (1998). Antioxidant
interactions of catechin, cyanidin, caffeic acid, quercetin, and ellagic
acid on human LDL oxidation. Food Chem., 61, 71–75. 
Middleton, E., Jr. and Kandaswami, C. (1992). Effects of ﬂavonoids
on immune and inﬂammatory cell functions. Biochem. Pharmacol.,
43, 1167–1179. 
Miean, K.H. and Mohamed, S. (2001). Flavonoid (myricetin, querce-
tin, kaempferol, luteolin, and apigenin) content of edible tropical
plants. J. Agric. Food Chem., 49, 3106–3112. 
Miura, Y., Chiba, T., Tomita, I., Koizumi, H., Miura, S., Umegaki, K.,
Hara, Y., Ikeda, M. and Tomita, T. (2001). Tea catechins prevent the
development of atherosclerosis in apoprotein E-deﬁcient mice. J.
Nutr., 131, 27–32. 
Muralidhara, B.K. and Prakash, V. (1995). Interaction of 3¢-O-caffeoyl
D-quinic acid with human serum-albumin. Int. J. Pept. Prot. Res.,
46, 1–8. 
Neucere, N.J., Jacks, T.J. and Sumrell, G. (1978). Interactions of glob-
ular protein with simple polyphenols. J. Agric. Food Chem., 26,
214–216. 
Nicolas, J.J., Richard-Forget, F.C., Goupy, P.M., Amiot, M.J. and Aub-
ert, S.Y. (1994). Enzymatic browning reactions in apple and apple
products. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 34, 109–157. 
Noguchi, Y., Fukuda, K., Matsushima, A., Haishi, D., Hiroto, M.,
Kodera, Y., Nishimura, H. and Inada, Y. (1999). Inhibition of Df-
protease associated with allergic diseases by polyphenol. J. Agric.
Food Chem., 47, 2969–2972. 
Olthof, M.R., Hollman, P.C. and Katan, M.B. (2001). Chlorogenic
acid and caffeic acid are absorbed in humans. J. Nutr., 131, 66–71. 
Pedrielli, P., Pedulli, G.F. and Skibsted, L.H. (2001). Antioxidant
mechanism of ﬂavonoids. Solvent effect on rate constant for chain-
breaking reaction of quercetin and epicatechin in autoxidation of
methyl linoleate. J. Agric. Food Chem., 49, 3034–3040. 
Pierpoint, W.S. (1969a). o-Quinones formed in plant extracts: Their
reaction with bovine serum albumin. Biochem. J., 112, 619–629. 
Pierpoint, W.S. (1969b). o-Quinones formed in plant extracts: Their re-
actions with amino acids and peptides. Biochem. J., 112, 609–616. 
Rawel, H., Kroll, J. and Riese, B. (2000a). Reactions of chlorogenic
acid with lysozyme: physicochemical characterization and pro-
teolytic digestion of the derivatives. J. Food Sci., 65, 1091–1098. 
Rawel, H., Rohn, S. and Kroll, J. (2000b). Reactions of selected sec-
ondary plant metabolites (glucosinolates and phenols) with food
proteins and enzymes: Inﬂuence on physico-chemical protein prop-
erties, enzyme activity and proteolytic degradation. In “Recent Re-
search Developments in Phytochemistry,” ed. by S.G. Pandalai. Re-
search Signpost, Trivandrum, India, 4, pp. 115–142. 
Rawel, H.M., Kroll, J. and Hohl, U.C. (2001a). Model studies on reac-
tions of plant phenols with whey proteins. Nahrung/Food, 45, 72–
81. 
Rawel, H.M., Kroll, J. and Rohn, S. (2001b). Reactions of phenolic
substances with lysozyme: physicochemical characterisation and
proteolytic digestion of the derivatives. Food Chem., 72, 59–71. 

218
J. KROLL et al.
Rawel, H.M., Czajka, D., Rohn, S. and Kroll, J. (2002a). Interactions
of different phenolic acids and ﬂavonoids with soy proteins. Int. J.
Biol. Macromol., 30, 137–150. 
Rawel, H.M., Rohn, S., Kruse, H.P. and Kroll, J. (2002b). Structural
changes induced in bovine serum albumin by covalent attachment of
chlorogenic acid. Food Chem., 78, 443–455. 
Rawel, H., Rohn, S. and Kroll, J. (2003). Inﬂuence of a sugar moiety
(rhamnosylglucoside) at 3-O position on the reactivity of quercetin
with whey proteins. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., in press. 
Ren, M.Q., Kuhn, G., Wegner, J. and Chen, J. (2001). Isoﬂavones,
substances with multi-biological and clinical properties. Eur. J.
Nutr., 40, 135–146. 
Rice-Evans, C.A., Miller, N.J. and Paganga, G. (1996). Structure-anti-
oxidant activity relationships of ﬂavonoids and phenolic acids. Free
Radic. Biol. Med., 20, 933–956. 
Robards, K., Prenzler, P.D., Tucker, G., Swatsitang, P. and Glover, W.
(1999). Phenolic compounds and their role in oxidative processes in
fruits. Food Chem., 66, 401–436. 
Rohn, S., Rawel, H.M., Pietruschinski, N. and Kroll, J. (2001). In vitro
inhibition of -chymotryptic activity by phenolic compounds. J. Sci.
Food Agric., 81, 1512–1521. 
Rohn, S., Rawel, H.M. and Kroll, J. (2002a). Inﬂuence of plant phe-
nols on the activity of enzymes. Food Sci. Biotechnol., 11, 4–9. 
Rohn, S., Rawel, H.M. and Kroll, J. (2002b). Inhibitory effects of
plant phenols on the activity of selected enzymes. J. Agric. Food
Chem., 50, 3566–3571. 
Rohn, S., Rawel, H., Wollenberger, U. and Kroll, J. (2003). Enzymati-
cal behaviour of -chymotrypsin after derivatization with phenolic
compounds. Nahrung/Food, in press. 
Rueff, J., Laires, A., Gaspar, J., Borba, H. and Rodrigues, A. (1992).
Oxygen species and the genotoxicity of quercetin. Mutat. Res., 265,
75–81. 
Scalbert, A. (1991). Antimicrobial properties of tannins. Phytochemis-
try, 30, 3875–3883. 
Sessa, D.J., Baker, E.C. and Friedrich, J.P. (1988). Inactivation of
trypsin-Inhibitors in whole and cracked soybeans with sodium met-
abisulﬁte. Lebensm.-Wiss. Technol., 21, 163–168. 
Setchell, K.D. (1998). Phytoestrogens: the biochemistry, physiology,
and implications for human health of soy isoﬂavones. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 68, 1333S–1346S.
Siebert, K.J., Troukhanova, N.V. and Lynn, P.Y. (1996). Nature of
polyphenol-protein interactions. J. Agric. Food Chem., 44, 80–85. 
Siebert, K.J. and Lynn, P.Y. (1998). Comparison of polyphenol interac-
tions with polyvinylpolypyrrolidone and haze-active protein. J. Am.
Soc. Brew. Chem., 56, 24–31. 
Siebert, K.J. (1999). Effects of protein-polyphenol interactions on bev-
erage haze, stabilization, and analysis. J. Agric. Food Chem., 47,
353–362. 
Song, T.T., Hendrich, S. and Murphy, P.A. (1999). Estrogenic activity
of glycitein, a soy isoﬂavone. J. Agric. Food Chem., 47, 1607–1610.
Stich, H.F. and Rosin, M.P. (1984). Naturally occurring phenolics as
antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic agents. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol.,
177, 1–29. 
Suryaprakash, P., Kumar, R.P. and Prakash, V. (2000). Thermodynam-
ics of interaction of caffeic acid and quinic acid with multisubunit
proteins. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 27, 219–228. 
Tomás-Barberán, F.A. and Clifford, M.N. (2000a). Dietary hydroxy-
benzoic acid derivatives: nature, occurrence and dietary burden. J.
Sci. Food Agric., 80, 1024–1032. 
Tomás-Barberán, F.A. and Clifford, M.N. (2000b). Flavanones, chal-
cones and dihydrochalcones-nature, occurrence and dietary burden.
J. Sci. Food Agric., 80, 1073–1080. 
Vinson, J.A., Jinhee, J., Dabbagh, Y.A., Serry, M.M. and Songhuai, C.
(1995). Plant polyphenols exhibit lipoprotein-bound antioxidant ac-
tivity using an in vitro oxidation model for heart disease. J. Agric.
Food Chem., 43, 2798–2799. 
Vithayathil, P.J. and Murthy, G.S. (1972). New reaction of o-benzo-
quinone at thioether group of methionine. Nature-New Biol., 236,
101–103.
Yamanaka, N., Oda, O. and Nagao, S. (1997). Prooxidant activity of
caffeic acid, dietary non-ﬂavonoid phenolic acid, on Cu2-induced
low density lipoprotein oxidation. FEBS Lett., 405, 186–190.
Yoshida, H., Ishikawa, T., Hosoai, H., Suzukawa, M., Ayaori, M.,
Hisada, T., Sawada, S., Yonemura, A., Higashi, K., Ito, T., Naka-
jima, K., Yamashita, T., Tomiyasu, K., Nishiwaki, M., Ohsuzu, F.
and Nakamura, H. (1999). Inhibitory effect of tea ﬂavonoids on the
ability of cells to oxidize low density lipoprotein. Biochem. Phar-
macol., 58, 1695–1703.
