Pure & Appl. Chern., Vol. 66, No. 8, pp. 1739-1758, 1994. 
Printed in Great Britain. 
Q 1994 IUPAC 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF PURE 
AND APPLIED CHEMISTRY 
PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY DIVISION 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY* 
Subcommittee on Characterization of Porous Solids 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POROUS SOLIDS 
(Technical Report) 
Prepared for publication by the Subcommittee 
on Characterization of Porous Solids, consisting of 
J. ROUQUEROLt (France, Chairman); D. AVNIR (Israel); C. W. FAIRBRIDGE (Canada); 
D. H. EVERETT (UK); J. H. HAYNES (UK); N. PERNICONE (Italy); J. D. F. RAMSAY (UK; France); 
K. S. W. SING (UK) and K. K. UNGER (FRG). 
*Membership of the Commission during the period (1987-93) when the report was prepared was as 
follows: 
Chairman: 1987-91 K. S. W. Sing (UK); 1991-93 J. RouquCrol (France); Vice-Chairman: 1987-91 J. H. 
Block (FRG); Secretary: 1987-93 B. Vincent (UK); Titular Members: A. M. Cazabat (France; 1991-93); 
J. Czamescky (Poland; 1987-93); B. Delmon (Belgium; 1989-93); P. C. Gravelle (France; 1987-89); M. 
Misono (Japan; 1991-93); J. Ralston (Australia; 1987-93); J. Rouqutrol (France; 1987-91); P. J. Stenius 
(Sweden; 1987-89); K. K. Unger (FRG; 1991-93); Associate Members: J. B. Butt (USA; 1987-91); J. 
Czamescky (Poland; 1987-89); B. Delmon (Belgium; 1987-89); C. W. Fairbridge (Canada; 1991-93); D. 
Fairhurst (USA; 1987-91); K. Kunitake (Japan; 1991-93); H. N. W. Lekkerkerker (Netherlands; 
1987-89); A. J. G. Maroto (Argentina; 1987-91); M. Misono (Japan; 1989-91); J. A. Pajares (Spain, 
1991-93); G. 1. Panov (Russia; 1989-93); P. Pendelton (USA; 1989-93); D. Platikanov (Bulgaria; 
1987-93); National Representatives: G. F. Froment (Belgium; 1987-91); L. A. Petrov (Bulgaria; 
1987-91); F. Galembeck (Brazil; 1991-93); C. W. Fairbridge (Canada; 1987-91); Blanca Wichterlova 
(Czechoslovakia; 1991-93); G. Lagaly (FRG; 1987-89); G. H. Findenegg (FRG; 1987-91); G. Ohlmann 
(FRG; 1987-91); L. G. Nagy (Hungary; 1987-91); S. R. Sivaraja Iyer (India; 1987-89); D. K. Chattoraj 
(India; 1989-91); J. Manassen (Israel; 1987-91); S. Ardizzone (Italy; 1987-93); M. S. Suwandi 
(Malaysia; 1987-93); J. Lyklema (Netherlands; 1987-93); J. Haber (Poland; 1987-93); E. F. de Araujo 
Gouveia Barbosa (Portugal; 1991-93); M. Brotas (Portugal; 1987-91); H. Chon (Republic of Korea; 
1989-93); M. S. Scurrell (RSA; 1989-93); J. A. Pajares (Spain; 1987-91); H. Eicke (Switzerland; 
1987-91); S. Pecker (Turkey; 1987-93); K. R. Kutsenogii (Russia; 1989-91); D. H. Everett (UK; 
1987-91); C. J. Powell (USA; 1987-89); S. Milonjic (Yugoslavia; 1989-91). 
?Centre de Thermodynamique et de MicrocalorimCtrie du CNRS, 26 rue du 14kme RIA, 13003 
Marseille, France. 
Names of countries given after Members’ names are in accordance with the ZUPAC Handbook 
1991-93; changes will be effected in the 1994-95 edition. 
~~~ 
~ 
Republication of this report is permitted without the need for formal IUPAC permission on condition that an 
acknowledgement, with full reference together with IUPAC copyright symbol (0 
I994 IUPAC), is printed. 
Publication of a translation into another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval from the 
relevant IUPAC National Adhering Organization. 

Recommendations for the characterization of 
porous solids 
Abstract - These recommendations aim to be a tool for the selection and appraisal of the 
methods of characterization of porous solids, and to also give the warnings and 
guidelines on which the experts generally agree. For this purpose, they successively 
consider the description of a porous solid (definitions, terminology), the principal 
methods available (stereology , radiation scattering, pycnometry, adsorption, intrusion, 
suction, maximum buble pressure, fluid flow, immersion or adsorption calorimetry, 
thermoporometry , size exclusion chromatography, Xenon NMR and ultrasonic methods) 
and finally the general principles which are worth being followed in the selection of the 
appropriate method. 
Contents 
I. 
Introduction 
II. Description of a porous solid 
1. General definitions and terminology 
2. Qualitative description of a porous solid 
3. Origin of pore structures and a few resulting features 
4. Quantitative description of pore structures 
5. Idealized systems : pore shape and size 
6. The fractal analysis 
JII. Principal methods available to characterize a porous solid 
1. Stereology 
2. Radiation scattering 
3. Pycnometry 
4. Adsorption from the gas phase 
5. Methods depending on interfacial curvature (intrusion, suction, maximum bubble pressure) 
6. Fluid flow 
7. Calorimetric determinations (immersion calorimetry, gas or liquid adsorption calorimetry, 
8. Other methods (Size exclusion chromatography, Xenon NMR, Ultrasonic methods) 
thermoporometry) 
IV. Conclusions and Recommendations 
V. References 
1740 

Recommendations for the cheracterization of porous solids 
1741 
I. Introduction 
Most materials are to some extent porous : indeed, it is quite difficult to find or prepare a truly 
non-porous solid. It is well known that physical properties such as density, thermal conductivity and 
strength are all dependent on the pore structure of a solid and that the control of porosity is of great 
industrial importance for example in the design of catalysts, industrial adsorbents, membranes and 
ceramics. Furthermore, porosity is one of the factors which influence the chemical reactivity of solids 
and the physical interaction of solids with gases and liquids. 
The complexity and variety of porous materials has led to the application of many experimental 
techniques for their characterization. For example, a great deal of effort has been expended in the 
development and refinement of various methods for the determination of pore size distribution. 
Unfortunately, much of this work has been carried out on ill-defined materials, which may partly 
explain why there is a lack of general agreement on the advantages and disadvantages of the various 
procedures described in the literature. 
The following recommendations are presented in order to clarify : 
1- The terms used to describe real porous materials ; 
2- The quantitative description of pore structure of different types. ; 
3- The selection of appropriate experimental techniques for the characterization of porous materials ; 
4- The appraisal and significance of experimental data. 
Because many of the major applications and therefore important methods of characterization of 
porous solids depend upon adsorption, these recommendations are closely related to the former 
recommendations of Commission 1-6 entitled "Reporting physisorption data for gadsolid systems with 
special reference to the determination of surface area and porosity" (Ref. 1) ; "Reporting data on 
adsorption from solution at the solidholution interface" (Ref. 2) ; "Manual of symbols and terminology 
for physicochemical quantities and units. Appendix 11. Part I : Definitions, Terminology and Symbols 
in Colloid and Surface Chemistry" (Ref. 3) ; and "Part I1 : Heterogeneous Catalysis" (Ref. 4), 
respectively. Also, these recommendations rely heavily on material presented during three IUPAC 
meetings specially organized for that purpose and whose proceedings are available in the three books 
"Characterization of porous solids" (Ref. 5 to 7). These books also provide an up-to-date source of 
references for most methods and aspects referred to in this document, so that, except for a very few 
special cases, it was not considered necessary to quote here other references than the basic ones 
mentioned above. 
11. Description of a porous solid 
1. General definitions and terminology 
In this section, which is intended for convenient reference, a number of useful terms are listed and defined 
in a condensed way. They are introduced in a more detailed manner in the following sections. 
Aggregate : loose, unconsolidated assemblage of particles. 
Agglomerate : rigid, consolidated assemblage of particles. 
Density : 
"true" density : density of the material excluding pores and interparticle voids 
"apparent" density : density of the material including closed and inaccessible pores 
"bulk" density : density of the material including pores and interparticle voids. 

1742 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
Divided solid : solid made of more or less independent particles which may be in the form of a 
powder, aggregate or agglomerate. 
Hydraulic radius : mean value for a porous solid, obtained through the relationship : 
q,=Vp/A 
(Q : hydraulic radius, Vp : pore volume determined at saturation, A : surface area, e.g. determined by 
the BET method). 
Porous solid : a solid with pores, i.e. cavities, channels or interstices,which are deeper than they are 
wide. 
Pore volume Vp : volume of the pores, as measured by a given method which must be stated, (together, 
for instance, with the nature of the probe-molecule, the wavelength of the radiation used or the ultimate 
intrusion pressure ...). 
Pore size (generally, pore width) : the distance between two opposite walls of the pore (diameter of 
cylindrical pores, width of slit-shaped pores). Micro-, Meso- or Macropores : see end of section 115. 
Pore size distribution : represented by the derivatives 3 
or - 
dVP as a function of rp, where Ap, Vp 
d’P 
d’P 
and rp are the wall area, volume and radius of the pores. The size in question is here the radius, which 
implies that the pores are known to be, or assumed to be, cylindrical. In other cases rp should be 
replaced by the width. 
Porosity E : ratio of the total pore volume Vp to the apparent volume V of the particle or powder 
(excluding interparticle voids). In some cases one may distinguish between open porosity (i.e. the 
volume of pores accessible to a given probe molecule) and closed porosity. The methods used to 
measure pore volume and apparent volume should be stated. 
Roughness (or rugosity) factor : ratio of the external surface area to the area of the geometrical 
envelope of the particles. 
Surface area : extent of the total surface as determined by a given method under stated conditions.It is 
essential to state the method used. 
External sutface area of a powder : area of the external surface of the particles, taking into account 
their roughness, i.e. all cavities which are wider than deep, but not the surface of the pore walls. 
Internal sutface area of a powder : area of the pore walls, excluding the external surface area. 
2. Qualitative description of a porous solid 
Any solid material which contains cavities, channels or interstices may be regarded as porous, though 
in a particular context a more restrictive definition may be appropriate. Thus, in describing a porous 
solid, care must be exercised in the choice of terminology in order to avoid ambiguity. With the help of 
Fig. 1, we can for instance classify the pores according to their availability to an externalfluid. From 
this viewpoint, a first category of pores are those totally isolated from their neighbours, as in region 
(a), which are described as closed pores. They influence such macroscopic properties as bulk density, 
mechanical strength and thermal conductivity, but are inactive in such processes as fluid flow and 
adsorption of gases. On the other hand, pores which have a continuous channel of communication with 
the external surface of the body, like (b) (c) (d) (e) and (f), are described as open pores. Some may be 
open only at one end (like b) and (f) ; they are then described as blind (i.e. dead-end, or saccafe) 
pores. Others may be open at two ends (through pores), like around (e). Pores may also be classified 
according to their shape : they may be cylindrical (either open (c) or blind (f)), ink-bottle shaped (b), 

Recommendations for the characterization of D O ~ O U S  solids 
1743 
finnel shaped (d) or slit-shaped. Close to, but different from porosity is the roughness of the external 
surface, represented around (g). To make the distinction, a convenient and simple convention is to 
consider that a rough surface is not porous unless it has irregularities that are deeper than they are 
wide. 
Fig. 1 : Schematic cross-section of a porous solid 
3. Origin of pore structures 
Some porous materials are consolidated, existing as relatively rigid, macroscopic bodies whose 
dimensions exceed those of the pores by many orders of magnitude ; they may be called agglomerates. 
Others are unconsolidated, being nonrigid, more-or-less loosely packed assemblages of individual 
particles ; they may be called aggregates. The particles themselves may be nonporous (e.g. sand), and 
therefore surrounded by a network of interpanicle voids, with properties dependent only on the size, 
shape and manner of packing of the constituent particles. In other cases (e.g. spraydried catalysts) the 
particles themselves may be significantly porous, and it may then be necessary to distinguish between 
internal (or intrupanicle) voids, and interpanicle voids. In general, internal pores will be smaller, both 
in size and in total volume, than the voids between particles ; nevertheless, they will often provide the 
dominant contribution to the surface area of the solid. 
The distinction between consolidated and unconsolidated materials is not always clearcut. Indeed, the 
two forms are aften interconvertible for example, by grinding of the former, and by sintering of the 
latter. 
Thus, porous materials can be formed by several different routes. 
In a first case, pores are an inherent feature of particular crystalline structures, e.g. zeolites and some 
clay minerals. Such intracrystalline pores are generally of molecular dimensions, and form highly 
regular networks. 
A second class of porous materials is formed by loose packing (i.e. aggregation) and subsequent 
consolidation (i.e. agglomeration) of small particles as for instance in some inorganic gels and in 
ceramics. These processes are constitutive, in that the final structure depends mainly on the original 
arrangement of the primary particles and on their size. 
A third route is described as subtractive, in that certain elements of an original structure are selectively 
removed to create pores. Examples are the formation of porous metal oxides by thermal decomposition 

1744 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
of hydroxides, carbonates, nitrates, oxalates and of porous glasses by chemical etching of multiphase 
solids. Many porous organic polymer membranes are formed in this way. A more complex process, 
although related to the same mechanisms, is that of the activation of carbons. 
Finally, the pore structure of plant and animal tissues, which is of literally vital importance and must 
fulfil stringent conditions, is determined by natural processes of cell division and selforganization, 
which are as yet imperfectly understood. 
4. Quantitative description of pore structures 
"Porosity" may be defined as the fraction E of the apparent volume of the sample which is 
attributed to the pores detected by the method used : E = Vp/V. The value of this fraction depends 
on the method used to determine the apparent volume V, which excludes interparticle voids 
(geometrical determination, fluid displacement) and on that used to assess the pore volume V 
(adsorption and capillary condensation, fluid displacement, ultrasonics etc . . .). Some methods , indeet 
have only access to "open pores" (i.e. the methods using a fluid) whereas others may also have access 
to "closed pores" (i.e. methods using a radiation). Moreover, for a given method, the value depends on 
the size of the molecular probe (fluid displacement, adsorption) or of the yardstick (stereology). Thus, 
a recorded value of porosity can be expected to reflect not only a physical property of the material, but 
also the experimental method used for its determination. 
The pore volume Vp used in the above relationship may be either that of the open pores (leading to the 
"open porosity") or that of the closed pores (leading to the "closed porosity") or that of both types of 
pores together (leading to the "total porosity"). 
The "specific surface area" (a, up or s) is defined as the accessible (or detectable) area of solid 
surface per unit mass of material. It is similarly dependent on the method and experimental 
conditions employed, and on the size of the probe used (e.g. adsorbate molecular size, wavelength of 
radiation, etc .. .). However, since the interpretation of such measurements usually relies on simplified 
models of the processes concerned, the recorded value may further depend on the validity of the 
assumptions inherent to the model. 
The "pore size" is a property of major importance in practical applications of porous materials, but it is 
even less susceptible to precise definition. The problems already mentioned for the specific surface area 
are complicated by the fact that the pore shape is usually highly irregular and variable, leading to a 
variety of definitions of 
"the size". Moreover, pore systems usually consist of interconnected 
networks, and the recorded results will often depend on the sequence in which pores are encountered 
within the method used (e.g. mercury intrusion). For these reasons, quantitative descriptions of pore 
structure are often based on model systems. 
5. Idealized systems : pore shape and size 
For the sake of simplicity, the shape of pores, when known or assumed, is preferably described in 
terms of cylinders (which may be the case for activated oxides like alumina or magnesia), prisms (some 
fibrous zeolites), cavities and windows (other zeolites), slits (possible in clays and activated carbons), 
or spheres (although, most often, the pores are on the contrary, the voids left between solid spheres in 
contact with each other, as it happens with gels : silica gel, zirconia gel etc . . .). The real description of 
many real porous solids is complicated by the existence of : 
-- different shapes of pores in the same material 
-- connections between pores, which may vary in size, shape and location 
-- a distribution in the size of the pores. 
To describe these complexities it was necessary to introduce descriptors based upon the concepts of 
"connectivity", "percolation", "tonuosity" and, more recently, 'Ifractal geometry" which is referred to 

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids 
1745 
in the next section. 
In most uses of porous solids, the size of pores is a major parameter : hence the development of a 
number of methods whose aim is to carry out a "pore size analysis". Pore size has a precise meaning 
when the geometrical shape of the pores is well defined and known (e.g. cylindrical, slit-shaped 
etc ...). Nevertheless, the limiting size of a pore, for most phenomena in which porous solids are 
involved, is that of its smallest dimension which, in the absence of any further precision, is referred to 
as the width of the pore -(i.e. the width of a slit-shaped pore, the diameter of a cylindrical pore ...)-. 
To avoid a misleading change in scale when comparing cylindrical and slit-shaped pores, one should 
use the diameter of a cylindrical pore (rather than its radius) as its "pore-width ". 
The following distinctions and definitions were adopted in previous IUPAC documents (Ref. 1 and 4) : 
-- Micropores have widths smaller than 2 nm. 
-- Mesopores have widths between 2 and 50 nm. 
-- Macropores have widths larger than 50 nm. 
6. Fractal analysis 
Fractal geometry has emerged recently as an analytical tool which is suitable for the description of 
complex structures, such as those which are found in most porous objects. It is basically a 
multiple-resolution analysis which searches for simple scaling power laws of the type : 
amount of surface property oc resolution of analysisD 
(1) 
where D is the fractal dimension of the surface for which the property is relevant. "Amount of surface 
property" is, for instance, the monolayer value, the pore volume, or the intensity of scattered radiation. The 
corresponding change in resolution is then achieved by changing the size of the adsorbate, the pore radius, 
or by changing the angle of the scattered light. Obviously, the surface which scatters need not coincide 
with the surface accessible for adsorption or for pore-filling. Therefore D characterizes the effective 
geometry for a given process, and not necessarily the geometry. This conclusion of the fractal approach 
bears, in fact, on all methods used to characterize a porous solid. 
An explicit example of eq. (1) is : 
where Nm is the number of molecules needed to form a monolayer coverage, 0 is the cross-sectional 
area of the adsorptive molecule, k is a constant, and the subscript "ads" denotes that the D is the fractal 
dimension of the surface accessible for adsorption. 
Also, the pore-volume distribution, dVp/drp vs rp, of a solid whose surface is fractal, is given by : 
where k' is another constant 
In addition to adsorption, fractal analysis has been employed for virtually all experimental methods 
described in this report, and especially to small angle X-ray and neutron scatterings, image analysis, nmr , 
and flow. For each of these cases, eq. (l), suitably expressed and modified, has been used. 

1746 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
III. Principal methods available to characterize a porous solid 
1. Stereology 
Stereology is based on direct observations of cross-sections of the solid. 
The first practical requirement is that a plane cross-section of the material under study can be prepared, 
in a suitable form for study by optical or electron microscopy. The contrast between matrix and pores 
may require enhancement, e.g. by impregnating the pores with a fluorescent resin, or by surface 
replication and shadowing. The resolution of the imaging determines the range of pore sizes accessible 
by this method. If the pore structure is suspected of being anisotropic, sections in a variety of 
non-parallel planes should be examined. 
The second practical requirement is the collection of a statistically significant number of measurements 
of a variety of geometrical characteristics of the image. These may include : 
a) the ratio of the fractional areas of pore and matrix in the total image 
b) the distribution of lengths of randomly chosen straight lines which traverse a pore from one 
c) the perpendicular distance between parallel tangents to the boundary of each pore, and 
d) the number of times that an arbitrary line, of given length, terminates in pore or matrix, and the 
boundary with the matrix to another 
number of times that it crosses the pore-matrix interface. 
In practical terms, such data can be acquired speedily and reliably by modern image-analysis 
techniques, and processed automatically to yield values of porosity, and measures of pore-size 
distribution, specific surface, and mean curvature of the solid surface. Qualitative impressions of the 
pore shape may also be gained. 
A refinement of this technique employs serial sectioning, whereby a series of parallel planes, separated 
perpendicularly by a distance commensurate with the pore size, is examined sequentially. This can give 
information on the connectivity of the pore space, which would otherwise be lacking. 
Because stereology is based on direct observations, it can yield values of the pore structural parameters 
that are, in a sense, more realistic than those derivedfrom less direct methods, which require the use 
of idealised models for their interpretation. On the other hand, such real values are of little use in 
predicting many of the practically important properties of porous media, such as permeability. A 
further point is that the specific surface measured stereologically will generally be considerably lower 
than that deduced from gas adsorption, to an extent dependent on the resolution of the microscopic 
image (in the usual case when a molecular resolution is not reached). This is a consequence of the 
fractal nature of the solid surface. 
2. Radiation scattering 
2.1 Basic principle 
Radiation scattering from solids can arise from variations of scattering length density (see below) which 
occur over distances exceeding the normal interatomic spacings. Such variations occur when solids 
contain pores, and details of the porosity and surface area can be obtained from measurements of the 
angular distribution of scattered intensity. The appropriate angular range (see below) where this 
information is contained is given by d - 1/28 where d is the pore size, and A the wavelength of 
radiation, which may be X-rays, neutrons or light. 
In a scattering experiment a monochromatic beam of electromagnetic radiation (light, X-rays) or 
neutrons of wavelength A, intensity I, and wavevector k, on a sample, and the scattered intensity is 
measured as a function of angle, 26, to the incident direction (Fig.2). 

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids 
1747 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ - -  
Sample 
Fig.2 : Schematic representation of the incident and scattered beams 
Typical wavelengths for different types of radiation and the corresponding spatial resolution of density 
fluctuations or inhomogeneities such as pores, which may be determined experimentally are given in 
Table I. 
Table I 
2.2 aperimentul method 
Both small angle X-ray and neutron scattering are established techniques and their experimental application 
is similar. However, limitations on sample size, thickness and containment are much more restricted with 
X-rays because of absorption of radiation. Instrumentally both require a source of radiation, a 
monochromator, collimation system, sample containment and a detection system. 
The usual options available for both radiations are summarised below : 
Variable (- 2 to 40 m) 

1748 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
2.3 Scope of application 
Scattering techniques are non-destructive and have particular advantages in the characterisation of the 
surface and porous properties of materials containing either closed or molecular sized pores and where 
outgassing pretreatment may result in irreversible changes in microstructure. Measurements may be 
carried out, indeed, in the presence of a gas and there is no need to evacuate the sample. For these 
reasons, these techniques have been used to measure mean pore sizes covering a range from 1 to 
1000 nm. 
Important information on the contribution of porosity contained in closed and open pores can be 
derived from X-ray and neutron scattering. This is achieved by condensing probe molecules, having a 
similar scattering cross section to the solid, in the open pores. 
3. Pycnometry 
Fluid displacement measurements (pycnometry) lead to an estimate of the "apparent density" of a solid, 
defined as the ratio of its mass to the volume enclosed by an envelope of fluid surrounding the solid. 
Various criteria can be used for defining the envelope. In the limit, where the envelope follows the 
contours of the surface structure at an atomic level, then in the absence of internal closed pores the 
apparent density will be a close approximation to the density of bulk solid. In practice, the envelope 
may be defined in terms of increasingly fine-grained criteria. The apparent density will then be 
dependent on the scale on which the surface contours are followed ; porosity is thus a fractal property 
(see 11,6). 
Experimentally, the volume may be measured by fluid displacement. If a liquid does not wet the solid 
the surface of the liquid will follow only convex regions of the solid, and so will not penetrate the pore 
structure. (Measurements of mercury intrusion at higher pressures are dealt with in section 111,.5). On 
the other hand, a fluid that wets the surface will tend to penetrate all pores which are accessible to its 
molecules. Since probe molecules may be excluded from the finest pores, the pore volume obtained in 
this way may be expected to increase as the size of the probe molecule decreases. 
It is often assumed that the density, pt measured with helium gas (the so-called "true density") 
represents that of the bulk solid, ps but this assumption is valid only if there is independent evidence 
that the gas is not adsorbed, and that the solid does not contain closed pores. The absence of adsorption 
may be checked by carrying out measurements in various pressure and temperature ranges. It is usually 
wise to make measurements at as high a temperature as convenient. The absence of closed pores may 
be inferred if pt = ps where ps is determined independently. 
The measurement of apparent densities by liquid displacement also assumes that the density of the bulk 
liquid remains constant up to the solid surface. In practice the effects of adsorption are often small, but 
they can be detected by comparing the results of experiments using liquids of similar molar volume, 
but different chemical properties. It is also important to use an experimental technique in which both 
the solid and the liquid are thoroughly degassed before being brought into contact. Sufficient time must 
be allowed for equilibrium penetration to occur. Difficulties in arriving at well defined values arise if 
the solid swells in contact with the liquid (e.g. certain clays). 
4. Adsorption from the gas phase 
Gas adsorption measurements are widely used for the characterization of a variety of porous solids (e.g. 
oxides, carbons, zeolites and organic polymers). Of particular importance is the application of 
physisorption (physical adsorption) for the determination of the surface area and pore size distribution of 
catalysts, industrial adsorbents, pigments, fillers and other materials. 

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids 
1749 
Nitrogen (at 77 K) is the recommended adsorptive for determining the su@ace area and mesopore size 
distribution, but it is necessary to employ a range of probe molecules to obtain a reliable assessment of the 
micropore size distribution. An alternative technique to gas adsorption (e.g. mercury porosimetry) must be 
used for macropore size analysis. For operational reasons, krypton adsorption (at 77 K) is usually adopted 
for the determination of relatively low specific surface areas (say, < - 2 mzg-l), but this technique cannot 
be employed for the study of porosity. 
4.1 Basic methodology 
Various procedures have been devised for determining the amount of gas adsorbed. Volumetric methods 
are generally employed for measuring nitrogen or krypton isotherms at temperatures - 77 K, but 
gravimetric techniques are especially usehl for studying the adsorption of vapours at, or near, ambient 
temperature. The isotherm is usually constructed point-by-point by the admission and withdrawal of 
known amounts of gas, with adequate time allowed for equilibration at each point. Recently, automated 
techniques have been developed, which in some cases involve the slow continuous admission of the 
adsorptive and thus provide a measure of the adsorption under quasi-equilibrium conditions. Alternatively 
a carrier gas technique, along with conventional gas chromatographic equipment, may be employed 
-provided that the adsorption of the carrier gas is negligible under the conditions used. Prior to the 
determination of the isotherm, it is usual to remove all physisorbed material. The exact conditions required 
to attain a "clean" surface depend on the nature of the system. For the determination of the surface area 
and mesopore size distribution by nitrogen adsorption, outgassing to a residual pressure of - lo4 Torr is 
considered acceptable. Determination of the outgassed mass of the sample is one of the major sources of 
error (or at least of discrepancy between different experimenters). Inorganic oxides are usually outgassed 
at temperatures -1 50°C whilst microporous carbons and zeolites require higher temperatures (- 3OOOC). 
4.2 Determination of su@ace area 
It is now standard practice to apply the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method to derive the surface area 
from physisorption isotherm data. For this purpose it is convenient to apply the BET equation in the form 
p 
=-+-*- 
1 
(C-1) 
P 
na(pO-p) n;c 
n;c 
po 
where na is the amount adsorbed at the relative pressure plpo, n; is the monolayer capacity and C is a 
constant, which is dependent on the isotherm shape. 
According to the BET equation, a linear relation is given ifplna(p0-p) is plotted against plpo (i.e. the BET 
plot). In this manner it is possible to obtain n;? but the range of linearity of the BET plot is always 
restricted to a limited part of the isotherm -usually not above plpo - 0.3. 
The second stage in the application of the BET method is the calculation of the surface area, A (BET) 
-often termed the "BET area"- from n;. This requires a knowledge of the average area, a, (i.e. molecular 
cross-sectional area), occupied by each adsorbed molecule in the complete monolayer. 
Thus, 
A(BET) = ~ ; * L . u ,  
where L is the Avogadro constant. 
It is usually assumed that the BET nitrogen monolayer is close-packed, giving a,(N2) = 0.162 nm2 at 
77 K. However, it must be kept in mind that a constant value of a,(N2) is unlikely and that caution 
needs to be exercised in dealing with surfaces which give rise to either especially strong or weak 
adsorbent-adsorbate interactions which are able to influence the packing. 

1750 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
It is now recognized that the underlying BET theory is unsound since it is based on an oversimplified 
extension of the Langmuir mechanism to multilayer adsorption. To obtain a reliable value of nk it is 
necessary that the knee of the isotherm is fairly sharp (i.e. the BET constant C is not less than - 100). 
A very low value of C (< 20) is associated with an appreciable overlap of monolayer and multilayer 
adsorption and the application of the BET analysis is then of doubtful value. 
In view of the complexity of physisorption, it has been found useful to apply an empirical procedure 
for isotherm analysis. This approach makes use of standard adsorption data obtained with non-porous 
reference materials and attempts to interpret the differences in isotherm shape in terms of the various 
mechanisms of physisorption. In favourable cases, it can provide an independent assessment of the total 
surface area of mesoporous or macroporous solids and the external area of microporous solids. 
4.3 Assessment of microporosity 
Physisorption in pores of molecular dimensions is associated with enhanced adsorbent-adsorbate 
interactions and takes place at very low plpo. In addition, there appears to be a cooperative micropore 
filling process which occurs at somewhat higher pIp0 -but still before the onset of capillary condensation. 
These micropore filling processes lead to a distortion of the isotherm shape in the monolayer range and in 
the absence of capillary condensation they are followed by multilayer adsorption on the relatively small 
external surface. The net result is the appearance of a classical "Langmuir" (or Type I) isotherm, which 
was formerly attributed to monolayer adsorption. It is now generally agreed that the values of surface area 
as derived by either the Langmuir or the BET analysis are incorrect. 
If the plateau is virtually horizontal, the limiting uptake can be taken as a measure of the micropore 
capacity since multilayer adsorption on the external surface is negligible. If the isotherm has a finite slope 
in the multilayer region, the micropore capacity and external area can be evaluated provided that capillary 
condensation is absent or confined to high PIP", 
To convert the micropore capacity into the micropore volume, it is usually assumed that the pores are 
filled with liquid adsorptive -as in the case of mesopore filling. However, this does not allow for the fact 
that the degree of molecular packing in small pores is affected by the pore size and shape. To allow for this 
complication, it is recommended that the term apparent micropore volume should be adopted and linked 
with the adsorption of a particular gas. 
As indicated earlier, no reliable procedure has been developed for the computation of the micropore size 
distribution from a single isotherm, For this purpose it is necessary to employ a range of adsorptive 
molecules of different size (preferably globular) and take into account the different stages of micropore 
filling. 
4.4 Assessment of mesoporosity 
Capillary condensation of nitrogen leads to one of the major methods to characterize mesoporosity. With 
other methods also involving the curvature of a meniscus it is presented in the next section. 
5. Methods depending on interfacial curvature 
A liquid/gas or liquidfliquid interface contained within a pore will tend, at equilibrium, to assume a shape 
of uniform mean curvature (gravity effects being altogether negligible at this scale). The value of the mean 
curvature will depend on the relative wettability of the pore wall by each of the two fluids separated by the 
interface, and on the size and shape of the pore. In a uniform cylindrical pore of radius r, or in a 
parallel-sided slit of width r, the mean curvature C will be equal to -2cos8/ r, where 8 is the contact angle 
(conventionally measured through the denser of the two fluids). In pores of less regular shape, the 
curvature cannot be calculated ; in pores of non-uniform cross-section, there may be regions where no 
stable positions of the interface exist, Nevertheless, C remains related, in principle at least, to the reciprocal 
of the "pore size". 

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids 
1751 
Two equilibrium conditions can be stated for such an interface. For hydrostatic equilibrium, the product of 
the curvature C and the interfacial tension a will equal the difference in hydrostatic pressure, AP, between 
the more and less dense fluids : 
A P =  d 
(Laplace equation) 
Moreover, if these two fluids are a pure liquid, of molar volume Vm, and its vapour, then under conditions 
of di@sional equilibrium the vapour pressurep at the temperature Twill differ from the normal saturation 
vapour pressure po according to 
1 
(Kelvin equation) 
RT 
-In 
PIP' = aC 
v: 
where R is the universal gas constant. These two conditions are not independent, of course, but since 
hydrostatic equilibrium will usually be established many orders of magnitude more quickly than diffusional 
equilibrium, they may be treated as independent in practice. 
Evidently, then, measurements of either plpo or of AP can be used to determine C and, thence, the pore 
radius r. These principles underlie the methods to be described hereafter. 
5.1 Capillary condensation method 
Physisorption by a mesoporous solid occurs in two stages : the initial part of the adsorption isotherm 
follows the same path as that given by the corresponding non-porous solid of the same surface area (i.e. 
monolayer-multilayer adsorption on the mesopore walls) ; secondly, the upward deviation at higher p/po is 
associated with the progressive filling of the mesopores by the process of capillary condensation. If the 
adsorbent contains no macropores, the isotherm reaches a plateau at high plpo, where the mesopore filling 
is complete. The total mesopore volume, Vp, can be derived from the amount of vapour adsorbed at the 
plateau (i.e. asplpo + 1) by assuming that the pores have been filled with the condensed adsorptive in the 
normal liquid state. If the pore size distribution extends continuously into the macropore range, or if 
swelling of the adsorbent occurs, the plateau may be indistinct -or even non-existent- and in that case the 
assessment of total pore volume is questionable. 
Mesopore size calculations are usually made with the aid of the Kelvin equation, which in its simplest form 
becomes 
2d"vL 
I k =  RTIn (PIP') 
and relates plpo, the relative pressure at which condensation occurs, to rK, the radius of the equivalent 
hemispherical meniscus. ok and V; 
are respectively the surface tension and the molar volume of the liquid 
condensate. 
If the radius of a cylindrical pore is rp and a correction is made for the thickness, t, of a layer already 
adsorbed on the pore walls, then 
rp= r ~ + t  
Correspondingly, for a parallel-sided slit, the slit-width, dp, is given by 
dp= rr< + 2 t  
Values o f t  are derived from adsorption data determined on an appropriate non-porous solid. 

1752 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
A number of different computational procedures have been proposed to obtain the mesopore size 
distribution from nitrogen adsorption data. All of them are more or less related to the well known "BJH" 
procedure (after Barrett, Joyner and Halenda). These procedures are based on the notional emptying of 
the mesopores by the step-wise reduction ofplpo, allowance being made for the thinning of the multilayer 
in those pores already emptied of condensate. It is necessarily assumed that the meniscus curvature is 
controlled by the pore size and shape, that the pores are rigid and confined to the mesopore range and that 
there are no pore blocking effects. Furthermore, the derived pore size distribution is dependent on whether 
the adsorption or desorption branch of the hysteresis loop is used for the computation. 
It is evident that the computation of mesopore size distribution is subject to a number of uncertainties and 
indeed the derived distribution may often give a misleading picture of the true pore structure. On the other 
hand, gas adsorption is one of the few non-destructive methods available for investigating mesoporosity 
and the various distinctive features of physisorption isotherms (including the types of hysteresis loops) 
have been found to be extremely useful for the characterization of industrial adsorbents and catalysts. 
5.2 Intrusion methods 
A non-wetting liquid (xi2 < 81 z) requires a positive excess hydrostatic pressure AP to be applied to 
enable it to enter pores of radius r ; AP will vary inversely with r. This principle is the basis of mercury 
porosimetly . 
A weighed sample is enclosed in a stout metal bomb, and evacuated to remove air from the pores. Mercury 
is then admitted to fill the cell and surround the sample, and is subjected to progressively increasing 
pressures, applied hydraulically. At each pressure P, the corresponding volume V of mercury contained in 
the cell is measured. (Alternatively, V may be made the independent variable, yielding measurements of 
P(V) ; many commercial instruments work in this way). 
It is assumed that as the pressure is increased, mercury enters pores in decreasing order of size. Thus, if AV 
is the volume intruded between P and P +  AP, it will equal the volume of pores with radii between r and 
r - Ar, with 
In this way, a volumetric distribution of pore sizes is obtained. 
This interpretation evidently depends on the validity of the geometrical and other assumptions involved. 
The radius r is to be regarded not as a literal pore dimension, but rather as the size of an equivalent 
cylindrical pore which would fill at a given pressure. A value of the factor o c o s e  must be assumed ; 
customarily, o is taken to be 484 mN m-1, the value for pure mercury, despite the likelihood of 
contamination by hydraulic fluid. The contact angle @is usually assumed to be 141", for no stronger reason 
than that of tradition. Most importantly, the presumption that the pores are invaded in decreasing order of 
size may be invalidated by network effects, which imply that the sequential filling of pores is dictated 
primarily by their mode of interconnection. 
Experimentally, the pressure can be varied between 0.1 and 2000 bars, corresponding to cylindrical pore 
radii between 75 pm and 3.5 nm. (At high pressures, a blanck correction must be applied to compensate 
for the compressibility of mercury and for elastic distortion of the cell and other component parts). 
Adequate control of temperature is essential, since the pressure within a closed, liquid-filled cell will be 
strongly temperature-dependent. This is not usually provided for in commercial instruments, and absolute 
calibration of pressure and volume transducers is not normally available. At the high pressures employed, 
the sample may be deformed elastically or even damaged irreversibly. On reducing the pressure, a 
substantial volume of mercury may be retained in the pores. The method is therefore destructive. 
Despite these potential drawbacks, mercury porosimetry is very widely accepted as a standard measure 

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids 
1753 
of total pore volume and of pore size distribution, in the macro- and mesopore ranges. In those rare cases 
where there may be specific interaction between mercury and the material under examination, the method 
may be modified by substitution of another non-wetting fluid. 
5.3 Suction method 
When a wetting liquid (0 S 8 < 717'2) is held within a porous solid, the Laplace equation predicts that it will 
experience a reduced hydrostatic pressure, inversely proportional to the radius of pores in which menisci 
are formed. This principle is the basis of suction porosimetry. In practice, water is often chosen as a 
suitable wetting liquid for most inorganic solids. 
An initially saturated sample of a porous medium is placed on a permeable support, through which it 
maintains hydraulic contact with a reservoir of water. The hydrostatic pressure in the reservoir is 
progressively reduced, and the volume of water withdrawn from the sample is recorded. The resultant 
relationship between reduced pressure (suction) and equilibrium saturation is often known as the moisture 
characteristic of the porous solid, and is related to the pore size distribution in much the same way as is 
the mercury intrusion curve. 
The lower limit of pore size accessible to this technique will be reached when vapour bubbles nucleate in 
the reservoir. For this reason, the liquid should be thoroughly outgassed. Suctions of several bars may then 
be achieved, corresponding to pore radii as small as a few tenths of a micron. Even this limit can be 
surpassed (i.e. smaller pores detected), in principle, by increasing the gas pressure above the sample, rather 
than reducing the liquid pressure beneath it. 
Clearly, the pore size of the supporting plate must be smaller than that of the sample. 
For solids not wetted by water, or for those that are appreciably water-soluble, other liquids (preferably of 
low volatibility, such as silicone oils) may be used. 
When the direction of pressure change is reversed, marked hysteresis is often found between drainage and 
rewetting. The pore size distribution is customarily derived from the drainage curve. This is closely 
analogous to the merculy intrusion curve, and where the two methods overlap they give reasonably 
concordant results. For the same reason, the suction method is open to the same objections as mercury 
porosimetry, notabIy model-dependence and interference from network effects (also found with the 
capillary condensation method). 
5.4 Maximum bubble pressure method 
This method is usually applied to thin samples of consolidated materials, e.g. paper, membranes, filter 
discs, etc ... The sample is mounted horizontally in a cell in such a way that its outer edge is sealed. It is 
then saturated with a wetting liquid (usually water) and a thin layer (2-3 mm) of liquid is allowed to remain 
on top of the sample. An increasing air pressure is then applied beneath the sample, until an air bubble is 
forced through the sample. This will occur at the largest through pore in the sample, whose size can then 
be calculated from the Laplace equation in the usual way. 
Applied in this fashion, the method is chiefly useful for discovering imperfections in thin films. It can be 
extended, however, to give a distribution of pore sizes, by continuing to increase the gas pressure and 
measuring the increasing gas flow rate. It thus becomes a variant of the permeability method, in which the 
population of pores being sampled is determined by capillarity. 
Clearly, the pressures attainable may be limited by the mechanical strength of the material ; a lower limit of 
pore size of some microns is to be expected. 
6. Fluid flow 
This method aims to derive the porous structure of a plug of material from its permeability to a fluid 
flow. 

1754 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
The steady state flux of a fluid through a porous material is sensitive to all structural aspects of the 
material. In its simplest application an elementary measurement of gas or liquid flux through a compact 
is all that is required, but a variety of extensions including the use of two component mixtures and 
non-steady state flow have been discussed in the literature. 
In practice the interpretation of flux data can become complicated -even for the steady state- and is 
subject to uncertainties which render such procedures inadvisable as characterization methods without 
supplementation by other techniques. 
The steady state volume flux Jv of an incompressiblefluid through a porous medium of cross sectional 
area A,, length 1 and porosity E under a pressure differential Ap can be measured as a mean fluid 
velocity u in the porous medium, and can be also be expressed in terms of the mean velocity in the 
pores up, 
Jv = A,u = A,E up 
In the classical Kozeny treatment, the Poiseuille equation links this experimental quantity to the 
hydraulic radius rh, equal to CIA, where A is the surface area per unit volume of porous medium, by 
Here p, is a factor dependent on pore structure. Kozeny assigned values of p, = 0.5 for cylinders and 
0.33 for slits, Carman divided these factors by T ~ ,  
where z is interpreted as a tortuosity factor to which 
he gave a value of 1.5. 
Steady state gas flow is more complicated because compressibility and molecular effects, which 
predominate at low pressures, introduce a pressure dependence. By the same token however the 
interpretation is richer. A general equation, due to Weber, recognizes three components of the gas 
phase flux J due to Poiseuille flow, slip flow, and self diffusion respectively. The measured flux can be 
expressed in terms of the permeability (or mean diffusion coefficient) Pg by 
AP 
J = A , E P  - 
RTI 
and Pg can be expressed in terms of the three components by the equation 
Here the pressure dependence is expressed through the (hydraulic) Knudsen number, rhlh where h is 
the mean free path and is given, according to simple kinetic theory, by 
The factor D g ~  
is the Knudsen diffusion coefficient 
DgK =<pKrh[,M] 
4 
8RT 

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids 
1755 
Three new structure factors PK , P, , PP, 
are introduced in these equations and are related to the ratios 
of the measured permeability components in real materials to the same component in a single circular 
capillary having the same hydraulic radius as the experimental material. Their geometry dependence is 
involved since it includes both cross-sectional shape and short tube effects. 
In general Pg passes through a minimum with rhlh, becoming linear at high pressure and passing to the 
limit DgK at low pressure. Short tube effects, which truncate long trajectories inside porous media, 
usually eliminate the minimum and simple linear behaviour is observed. 
The interpretation of flux data must be further considered in heterogeneous media due to the effects of 
pore size distribution and pore connectivity. This is conveniently done in terms of the structure factors. 
Structure factors have been calculated for a wide range of network pore models and simple analytical 
equations are available for some of these. It should be noted that in most porous compacts pore 
properties are likely to vary with position on a macroscopic scale. Structure factors are modified by 
these variations which can also have profound effects on non-steady state flow. 
The foregoing assumes that adsorption is negligible, although in practice adsorption can give rise to 
extra fluxes not accounted for in the simple kinetic theory treatments referred to above as well as to 
blocking effects which can modify the channel available for gas phase flow. Applications of flow 
methods should always be critically examined with this in mind. 
7. Calorimetric methods 
Brief accounts are given hereafter of a few calorimetric methods, quite different from each other, 
which provide an independent assessment of the surface area, microporosity or mesoporosity of a 
porous solid. 
7.1 Immersion calorimetry 
This method is based on the determination of the enthalpy change occumng on immersing a "dry" 
sample into a liquid. This enthalpy change is related to the extent of the solid surface, to the presence 
of micropores and to the chemical and structural nature of the surface. 
To assess the overall suvace area, in favourable cases one may simply determine the enthalpy of 
immersion of the outgassed solid into the liquid. For this purpose, the knowledge of the areal enthalpy 
of immersion of the solid is a prerequisite. This requires the measurement of the enthalpy of immersion 
of a non-microporous reference sample of known surface area and with similar nature of the surface 
and after outgassing under the same conditions. The immersion liquid is usually either water (for any 
hydrophilic solid, like mineral oxides) or an organic liquid (n-hexane, benzene, . . .) for hydrophobic 
solids like carbons. Even for microporous solids, the enthalpy of immersion is approximately 
proportional to the extent of the surface area including the walls of the micropores (in contrast to the 
BET method). Another approach, which now determines the non-microporous part of the surface area, 
is a modified Harkins and Jura (HJ) procedure where the solid is precovered with ca. two layers of 
adsorbate prior to immersion, so that the micropores are filled and the chemical nature of the surface is 
screened. In this case there is no need for any calibration or reference experiment and only the surface 
tension of the liquidhapour interface must be known. 
To assess the area associated with microporosity one simply needs to take the difference between the 
overall surface area contribution and the "non-microporous" surface area. Information on the size of 
the micropores can be obtained from the kinetics and enthalpy of immersion into a set of liquids with 
increasing molecular size. 
Immersion calorimetry has the advantage of being sensitive and accurate, but it requires the preparation 
of sealed thin-walled or brittle-ended glass bulbs enclosing the outgassed or pre-covered sample. Rather 

1756 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
specialised expertise is therefore involved. 
7.2 Gas adsorption calorimetry 
Adsorption calorimetry of argon and nitrogen also provides a means for detecting microporosity, which 
enhances the enthalpy of adsorption of both gases (as compared with a non-porous surface). In case the 
enhancement is appreciable with nitrogen but negligible with argon, this will usually mean that 
micropores smaller than 1 nm are absent and that the quadruplar N2 molecule is in specific interaction 
with chemical functions of the surface. 
7.3 Liquid adsorption calorimetry 
A liquid-flow microcalorimeter can be used to determine the enthalpy of displacement of, say, an 
alkane (e.g. n-heptane) by an alcohol (e.g. n-butanol). After pre-calibration with a similar sample of 
known surface area, one obtains a value for the surface area of the sample under study. This method 
does not assess the porosity proper (only the surface area) and has a limited accuracy but it is simple 
and convenient, specially when the sample must not be dried. 
7.4 Thenoporometry 
This is a method to assess the mesoporosity. It relies on the depression of the melting point of a 
condensed adsorbate, due to the presence of pores. The porous solid is usually first saturated with 
either water or benzene, frozen down to, say, 213 K and then studied on heating in a Differential 
Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) equipment up to the bulk 3D-melting point Tks of the adsorbate. The 
melting temperature is depressed by AT in the mesopores, down to Tts, which is pore-size dependent 
so that an appropriate analysis of the experimental DSC curve leads to a pore-size distribution curve. 
The adsorbate condensed out of the mesopores finally melts at the normal 3D-melting point and may be 
used for internal calibration. 
For this method a low-temperature DSC must be used but has the advantage of providing the internal 
size ofthe pores (in the case of bottle-shaped pores) in the 1.5 to 150 nm range whereas the common 
capillary condensation method based on the N2 desorption isotherm are expected to provide the sizes of 
the pore-openings (when they are smaller than the pore proper). Clearly, these two methods are 
complementary. Thermoporometry is well suited for studies of wet porous samples (which could not 
withstand being dried or evacuated) and to foresee, of course, the effect of frost ; whereas the 
accessibility of pores to gases or liquids is advantageously studied by the capillary condensation 
method. 
8. Other methods 
8.1 Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) 
The porous material is packed into a column which is inserted into a high pressure liquid 
chromatography (HPCL) equipment. Solutions of polymers of known molecular mass and low 
polydispersity are successively injected and eluted. For each solution, the retention volume V, is 
measured. Smaller probe molecules penetrate more pores (provided a smaller pore size is present in the 
material), have a longer path and therefore lead to a larger retention volume. 
The assumptions in the calculation of the pore size distribution of the packing material are that the 
probe molecules are spheres and the pores are cylindrical in shape. It is further assumed that the 
polymer probe has zero enthalpy of transfer from the bulk solvent outside the particles to the solvent 
within the pores. 
Unlike other methods, this approach requires no assumptions about the contact angle or surface tension. 

Recommendations for the characterization of porous solids 
1757 
The method is particular suitable for the assessment of meso- and macroporosity of swelling polymers. 
8.2 Xenon NMR 
This technique for characteristing porous media relies on changes in the NMR chemical shift of a probe 
molecule that accesses an internal void. The method has been developed with 129Xe and depends on 
the structure and ease of diffusion of molecules in the pore structure. It has particular applications in 
the case of micropores e.g. with zeolites, and microporous silicas, aluminas, polymers . . . 
A contribution to the N M R  chemical shift for xenon, adsorbed, say, in a zeolite, is due to xenon-wall 
interactions : it depends on the structure and dimensions of cages and channels and the ease of diffusion 
in the zeolite crystal. 
This technique, which has probably scope for more development, is non-destructive and can provide 
microscopic information on pore networks. An understanding of the influence of the different 
contributions to the measured N M R  shifts is required for the technique to be fully exploited. In this 
respect, measurements at below ambient temperatures and at progressive degrees of pore filling are 
informative. 
8.3 Ultrasonic method 
The attenuation and velocity of propagation of ultrasound in porous solids depends on pore size and 
porosity. The theory of the method is very complex and has been developed mainly for two phase 
(solid/void) systems. Thus ultrasonic techniques can be applied to assess the width of voids, d and 
porosity, E, from variations in the ultrasonic velocity, v 
,and attenuation, aa.. The method is 
appropriate when CJ d > 0.2, where c i s  the longitudinal wave number in the matrix given by : 
w 
cJ-= - 
V 
w (=2x v) being the circular frequency of the sound wave of frequency v. 
Typically, when v > IO~HZ, the method is applicable for the non-destructive examination of voids in 
solids, where d > lpm. The method is applicable to materials with porosities up to -30%, such as 
solid foams, rocks and soils, but is also valuable in the detection and assessment of voids in ceramics, 
steels, alloys etc ... 
TV Conclusions and Recommendations 
Specific recommendations and indications on the limits of applicability of each method are given in the 
various sections of this document. In addition, we give hereafter a number of general remarks which 
summarize the philosophy of the Subcommittee : 
1. The complexity of the porous texture of materials is such that even on theoretical grounds the concepts 
which can be used to describe the texture usually entail the introduction of simplifying assumptions. 
2. No experimental method provides the absolute value of parameters such as porosity, surface area, 
pore-size, surface roughness : each gives a characteristic value which depends on the principles involved 
and the nature of the probe used (atom or molecule, radiation wavelength ...). One cannot speak of the 
surface area of an adsorbent but, instead, of its “BET-nitrogen surface area”, “equivalent BET-nitrogen 
surface area”, modified HJ-calorimetric surface area, cumulative water thermoporometry surface area 
etc ... 
3./ The selection of a method of characterization must start from the material and from its intended use 

1758 
COMMISSION ON COLLOID AND SURFACE CHEMISTRY INCLUDING CATALYSIS 
4. The method chosen must indeed assess a parameter related as directly as possible to phenomena 
involved in the application of the porous material. In this respect, it may often be advisable to select a 
method involving physical phenomena similar or close to those involved during the practical application 
(i.e. adsorption or capillary condensation methods if the porous substance is to be used as a dessicant, or a 
freezing point depression method if one is interested in the frost resistance of a construction material ...) so 
that the parameters determined are appropriate. 
5. Rather than to "check the validity" of distinct methods, certified reference materials are needed to 
establish how these methods differ and, of course, to calibrate any individual equipment or technique. 
6. As a consequence, one must not look for a 'lperfect agreement" between parameters provided by 
duerent methods. Such an agreement, when it occurs, is not necessarily a proof of the validity of the 
derived quantities. 
Instead, one must be aware of the specific, limited and complementary significance of the information 
delivered by each method of characterization of a porous solid. 
Acknowledgements 
The members of the Sub-committee wish to thank D. Nicholson and J.H. Petropoulos for their usehl 
contribution to this document. 
References 
(1) K.S.W. Sing, D.H. Everett, R.A.W. Haul, L. Moscou, R.A. Pierotti, J. Rouquerol and 
(2) IUPAC Recommendation "Reporting data on adsorption from solution at the solid/solution interface", 
(3) IUPAC "Definitions, Terminology and Symbols in Colloid and Surface Chemistry, Part I", D.H. 
(4) IUPAC "Manual on Catalyst Characterization", J. Haber, Pure and Appl. Chem., vo1.63, 
( 5 )  "Characterization of Porous Solids", K.K. Unger, J. Rouquerol, K.S.W. Sing and H. Kral eds., 
Elsevier, Amsterdam (1988), 645 p. (Proceedings of COPS-I, Bad-Soden, Germany, May 1987). 
(6) "Characterization of Porous Solids II", F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, J. Rouquerol, K.S.W. Sing and K.K. 
Unger eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam (1991), 782 p. (Proceedings of COPS-11, Alicante, Spain, May 
(7) "Characterization of Porous Solids III", J. Rouquerol, F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, K. S. W. Sing and K.K. 
Unger eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam, to be published in Spring 1994 (Proceedings of COPS-111, 
Marseille, France, May 1993). 
T. Siemieniewska, Pure andAppl. Chem., vo1.57, n04, pp 603-919, 1985. 
D.H. Everett, Pure andAppZ. Chem., vo1.58, n07, pp 967-984, 1986. 
Everett, Pure andAppZ. Chem., vo1.31, n04, pp 579-638, 1972. 
pp. 1227-1246, 1991. 
1990). 
