Pure & Appi. Chain., Vol.56, No.4, pp.461—466, 1984.
0033—4545/84 $3.00+0.00
Printed in Great Britain.
Pergamon Press Ltd.
©1984 IUPAC
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF PURE
AND APPLIED CHEMISTRY
PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY DIVISION
COMMISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY*
RECOMMENDATIONS ON REPORTING
ELECTRODE POTENTIALS IN
NONAQUEOUS SOLVENTS
(Recommendations 1983)
Prepared for publication by
G. GRITZNER' and J. KUTA2t
1lnstitute of Inorganic Chemical Technology,
-
University of Linz, Austria
2Ustav Fyzikâlni Chemie a Electrochemie J. Heyrovskeho,
Praha, Czechoslovakia
*Membership of the Commission for 1979-83 during which the report was prepared was as
follows:
Chairman: R. PARSONS (France) 1979-81; K. E. HEUSLER (FRG) 1981-83; Vice-
Chairman: A. BARD (USA) 1979-81; 5. TRASATTI (Italy) 1981-83; Secretary: J. C.
JUSTICE (France); Other Titular Members: J. KUTAt (Czechoslovakia); K. NIKI (Japan);
Associate Members: J. N. AGAR (UK); E. BUDEVSKI (Bulgaria); G. GRITZNER
(Austria); H. HOLTAN (Norway); N. IBLt (Switzerland); M. KEDDAM (France);
R. MEMMING (FRG); B. MILLER (USA); J. A. PLAMBECK (Canada); Y. SATO (Japan);
R. TAMAMUSHI (Japan); NationalRepresentatives: A. J. ARVIA (Argentina); B. E. CON-
WAY (Canada); G. HORANYI (Hungary); S. K. RANGARAJAN (India); J. W. TOMLIN-
SON (New Zealand); S. MIN (Poland); E. MATTSSON (Sweden); A. K. COVINGTON
(UK); M. KARSULIN (Yugoslavia) 1979-81; D. DRAZIC (Yugoslavia) 1981-83.
tDeceased.

RECOMMENDATIONS ON REPORTING ELECTRODE POTENTIALS
IN NONAQUEOUS SOLVENTS
G. GRITZNER1 and J. KUTA2
1lnstitute of Chemical Technology, University of Linz, Austria
2Ustav Fyzikâlni Chernie a Electrochemie J. Heyrovskho, Praha,
Czechoslovakia
Abstract -
This report recommends that the redox couples ferrocene/
ferriceniuxn ion Lferrocene : bis(r —cyclopentadienyl )iron(II )] and
bis(biphenyl)chromium(I)/bis(biphenyl)chrornium(O) be employed as
reference redox systems. Procedures for measuring and reporting electrode
potentials in nonaqueous solvents versus these reference redox systems
are presented. The difference in electrode potentials for ferrocene/
ferricenium ion and bis(biphenyl )chromium(O.)/bis(biphenyl)chranium(I) ion
for 22 solvents obtained by polarography and cyclic voltanimetry are
listed. Both of the recommended redox systems approach a solvent
independent redox system as closely as presently known. Electrode
potential data reported versus these systems permit the comparison of
electrode potentials for a given system in different nonaqueous solvents
and thus allow studies of solvent effects on electrode potentials in
nonaqueous systems by compiling and comparing data obtained in different
solvents.
INTRODUCTION
Electrochemical research activities in nonaqueous solvents have steadily increased over the
past thirty years. A considerable number of these studies employed polarographic,
voltarnmetric and to a lesser degree potentiometric techniques to learn about the redox
behaviour of inorganic and organic compounds in nonaqueous solvents. The interests of
different research groups varied. Some used nonaqueous solvents only because the compounds
of interest were not soluble in water, some were seeking new analytical techniques, some
were primarily interested in electrode kinetics, others only in the products obtainable by
an electrochemical process in nonaqueous solvents. Thus in reporting the experimental data
emphasis was generally placed on those parameters that were of particular interest to the
researcher. In many of these studies very little attention has been given to the reference
electrode used. Quite frequently electrode potentials have been reported versus aqueous
reference electrodes such as the calomel electrode, the silver—silver chloride electrode or
the standard hydrogen electrode in water. Many of the experimental arrangements that have
been employed included liquid junction potentials. Although some experimental arrangements
had phase bondaries that yielded stable liquid junction potentials and some research groups
reported reproducible values for the liquid junction potentials, very often the tacitly
made assumption of a stable and reproducible liquid junction potential was not justified.
Even some of the reference electrodes proposed in the nonaqueous solvents studied did not
yield stable and reproducible potentials, thus many of the data obtained versus reference
electrodes in the same medium have also to be viewed with caution. Many of the electrode
potentials reported in literature have been measured under conditions that are not
reproducible and therefore of little or no value. Furthermore potential differences of
reliable reference electrodes in nonaqueous solvents have rarely been measured, preventing
comparisons between electrode potentials in a given solvent as reported by different
research groups. For these reasons, compilation of definite and reliable electrode potentials
in nonaqueous solvents has been severely hindered. It is therefore necessary to agree on some
procedures to measure and report electrode potentials versus generally accepted standards.
There are several possibilities for such standards available at this time.
One would be to agree upon one reference electrode for each solvent and measure redox
potentials versus this reference electrode under conditions that are free of any liquid
junction potential. It would also be conceivable that one redox system could serve in the
respective solvents as a reference electrode. The system silver, silver perchlorate or
silver nitrate, dissolved in the nonaqueous solvent under study has been used (ref. 1).
The drawback of such reference electrodes is that while yielding stable potentials in
several solvents, decomposition limits the application in others.
462

Reporting electrode potentials in nonaqueous solvents
463
Another possibility is the use of reference redox systems. The concept of a reference redox
system has been developed during studies to find redox systems the electrode potentials of
which are only modestly affected by the nature of the solvent. Preferably such variation in
the electrode potentials should be smaller than the experimental error.
EXAMPLES OF REFERENCE REDOX SYSTEMS PROPOSED IN LITERATURE
Pleskov (ref.2) was the first to suggest such an idea and proposed the redox systems Rb/Rb
and Rb+/Rb(Hg) respectively as such a reference redox system assuming that, because of the
large ionic radius of Rb, changes in the Gibbs energy of solvation of this ion wuld be
small. It was later found that the changes in the Gibbs energy of solvation of Rb are too
large to be ignored (ref.3).
A very thorough study by Strehlow and coworkers on various organometallic complexes has led
to the formulation of the following requirements for a suitable reference redox system
(ref.3): (i). The ions or molecules forming the reference redox system should preferably be
spherical with as large a radius as possible, (ii) the ions should carry a low charge, (iii)
the equilibrium at the electrode should be rapid and reversible, (iv) both components of the
redox couple should be soluble, (v) no change in the geometry of the ligands should occur,
(vi) the redox potential should be in a potential range that is accessible in as many
solvents as possible and (vii) both forms should be stable enough to permit potentiometric
measurements. Strehlow suggested the systems ferrocene/ferricenium ion (ferrocene is bis—
(r—cyclopentadienyl )iron(II) ) and cobaltocene/cobalticenium ion (cobaltocene is bis-
(1-cyclopentadienyl)cobalt(II)). Besides these two several other reference redox systems
have been suggested and used, such as tris(2,2 '-bipyridine)iron(I)/tris(2,2'-bipyridine)—
iron(O)) (ref.2-t), bis(biphenyl)chranium(O)/bis(biphenyl)chromium(I) ion (ref.5,6) and redox
systems based on polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons and the respective radical ions (ref.7).
It is not the purpose of this recommendation to discuss the various extrathermodynamic
assumptions to obtain single ion properties in nonaqueous solvents, this has been done
already in various articles (ref.8—1O). The possibility to calculate such data would only be
an additional benefit in reporting electrode potential versus such systems. The prime object
must be to agree on a procedure to obtain reliable values for electrode potentials in
nonaqueous solvents.
RECOMMENDED REFERENCE REDOX SYSTEMS
For pragmatic reasons, namely the ease with which such reference redox systems can be used
experimentally, especially in polarography and voltaxnmetry — the two most commonly employed
techniques — and the added benefit to use data already reported versus such reference redox
systems, it is recarimended that electrode potentials in nonaqueous solvents be reported
versus a reference redox system.
As mentioned earlier the number of proposed reference redox systems has increased over the
years. While each reference redox system may have its merits as an extrathermodynamic
assumption, it is necessary to limit ourselves to two such reference redox systems. A greater
number would defeat the purpose of this recommendation and would again hinder an easy
compilation of electrode potentials in nonaqueous solvents. Although one reference redox
system should be the ultimate goal, two are suggested for the present, since not every
reference redox system can be used in all solvents. In order to maintain the same
experimental conditions the reference redox system is added to the solution studied with
exclusion of air and water. Quite often the redox potential of a reference redox system
will coincide with the redox potential of the species under study, making the evaluation
of data obtained by polarographic and voltammetric techniques difficult. These problems can
be circumvented by use of two reference redox systems, the potential differences of which
have been determined.
Any selection of two out of several published reference redox systems must be somewhat
arbitrary. It is recanmended that the two systems ferrocene/ferricenium ion and bis(biphenyl)
chromium(O)/his(hiphenyl)chranium(I) ion be used as reference redox systems. Both systems
fulfill the requirements for reference redox systems in many solvents. The difference
between the respective redox potentials of these two reference systems has been found to be
almost constant in a variety of solvents (of. ref s. 11, 15—17; Table 1). The observed
deviation from the average value of 1. 12 V obtained for 22 solvents was ±12 mV, which is
somewhat larger that the experimental error of 4 mV.
For polarographic and voltammetric measurements where only one form of the redox sstem has
to he added to the solution, ferrocene and his(biphenyl)chromium tetraphenylborate should
be used.
Note: Small amounts of his(hiphenyl)chromium tetraphenylborate can be obtained upon request
from G. Gritzner, Institut für Chemische Technologie Anorganischer Stoffe, Johannes—Kepler—
Universität Linz, A—4O4O L i n z / Auhof, Austria

464
CONNISSION ON ELECTROCFIEMISTRY
This recommendation, however, should not discourage further studies on reliable reference
electrodes in nonaqueous solvents nor should it discontinue the search for a more nearly
"ideal" reference redox system to report standard electrode potentials on a solvent
independent scale. It is merely asked that electrode potentials versus one of the two
recommended reference redox systems, measured under conditions outlined in this paper,
should be included among the experimental data and that the redox behaviour of these two
systems should also be investigated for solvents in which such work has not yet been carried
out. Besides facilitating the compilation of electrode potentials in nonaqueous solvents the
use of a reference redox system in reporting electrode potentials would be of considerable
assistance in obtaining further infonnation on the possibility of establishing a scale of
standard electrode potentials in nonaqueous solvents and in increasing our understanding of
the solvent effects on the behaviour of redoxactive species.
Note:
A destinction is made in this recommendation between the expressions "reference
electrode" and "reference redox system". The expression reference electrode is used for an
electrode with a known, invariant, electrode potential as defined under 8.9 in the nual
of Symbols and Terminology for Physicochemical Quantities and Units, Appendix III -
Electrochemical Nomenclature ( (19714) 501). Theexpressionreference redox system is
reserved for the recommended systems: ferrocene/ferricenium ion and bis(biphenyl)—
chromium(O)/bis(biphenyl)chrcmium(I)
ion.
The reference redox systems can be used in arrangement.; typical for a reference electrode e.g.
a platinum wire in contact with an equimolar mixture of ferrocene and ferricenium picrate in
the solvent under investigation. Such a setup will be preferred in potentianetric
measurements. In polarographic and voltammetric studies however it is sufficient to add one
form of the reference redox system (ferrocene or bis(biphenyl)chromium(I) tetraphenylborate)
to the solution under study. The other form of the redox couple is formed at the working
electrode during the measurement while a current is passed. In case of fast electrode
kinetics the redox potential measured will agree to the conditional standard potential for
this system. Quite frequently such measurements will be carried out in a three electrode
arrangement with reference electrodes other than the recommended reference redox system
serving as a reference electrode.
The expression "pilot ion" has been used in the past to specify the technique of adding only
one form of the redox couple. The expression pilot ion however does not seem to be fully
adequate since in any case it is a redox system which is used as a reference system not one
fona of the redox couple only.
RECOI+IENDATIONS FOR MEASURING ELECTRODE POTENTIALS IN NONAQUEOUS SOLVENTS
It is of prime importance that all measurements by polarographic and voltanimetric techniques
are made versus reference electrodes the potentials of which do not change during the time
of the experiment. If liquid junctions are part of the experimental arrangement it is
mandatory that the liquid junction potential remains constant within the experimental error
during the time of measurement. The stability of the reference electrode and the liquid
junction potential (if included) should be checked carefully. If no variation has been
observed in the obtained potential values for the redox system under investigation, a
solution containing the same concentration of the supporting electrolyte and the reference
redox system should be added to the solution under study with strict exclusion of air and
water. After this addition both the studied redox system and the reference redox system
should be measured at least twice versus the reference electrode. The potential data of the
studied redox system before and after the addition of the reference redox system measured
versus the reference electrode should agree within the limits of experimental error. The
difference in potentials between the studied redox system and the reference redox system
can then be calculated. The data for the two measurements must agree within the experimental
error.
If a stable reference electrode without liquid junction is used in polarographic and
voltammetric measurements it is sufficient to measure the redox potential of ferrocene and
bis(biphenyl)chraniurn(I) tetraphenylborate versus such an electrode. For solvents in which
these reference redox systems have not been studied, the polarographic and voltaninetric
behaviour of these systems should also be investigated.
Potentiometric measurements versus the suggested reference redox systems as a reference
electrode should be done in arrangements without a liquid junction. Care should be taken
that such electrodes yield stable and reproducible data. Since a slow decomposition of the
ferricenium ion or the bis(biphenyl)chromium compounds may occur in several solvents,
freshly prepared electrodes should be used. As in any studies in nonaqueous media the purity
of the solvent under investigation is of utmost importance. Great care should be taken in
purifying the solvents; the methods of purification should either be reported or reference
given to published procedures. Since traces of water or other impurities maystill be present

Reporting electrode potentials in nonaqueous solvents
465
TABLE 1 Difference between 1/2 or 1/2(E a values,* for ferrocene
and bis(biphenyl)chromium tetrapenyborate (E in tetraethyl—
ammonium perchiorate solutions (conc: 0.1 mol l ) and/or tetra—
butylan1moniim\perchlorate solutions (conc: 0.1 mol 11) in
22 solvents a, (T
298 K)
Propylene carbonate
Butyrolactone
Acetone
Methanol
Ethanol
N,N-.Dimethylformamide
Methyl-2-pyrrolidinone
Dimethyl sulfoxide
Tetrarnethylene sulfone
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
N,N-Diethylacetamide
Formamide
Trimethyl phosphate
Tetramethylurea
Hexamethylphosphoric triamide
N-Methylformamide
2,2' -Thiodiethanol
(Ferrocene—bis(biphenyl )—
chromium(I))
1 13 (b)
l•l52
1•112
1 . 1
1.118
1 11 (b)
.9
1.11)4
1112
1 . 1
1 . 13)4
1.13)4
1 .127
1 .126
1.123
1.11)4
113(b)
1 • 13
1.12 (b)
1 l3(D)
1. 130(b)
1 . 12)4
1.13
1125(b)
(a) For further data such as (3/)4—1/)4), (pa—pc) etc. see references
11, 15—17
(b) Tetrabutylammonium perchlorate solution (conc: 0.1 mol 11)
(c) Saturated solution of tetraethylammonium perchlorate
(d) Ferrocene undergoes an irreversible electrode reaction in dichloro—
methane
*
Bis(biphenyl)chrcmium( I) tetraphenylborate can he studied polarographically
on the dropping mercury electrode and by cycJic voltammetry on the
stationary platinum electrode. The 1/2 and <pa+pc) values were found
to agree within ±1 niV. The same holds true for ferrocene in those cases
where ferrocene can be studied on the dropping mercury electrode.
Reference
Solvent
no:
1, 2—Dichloroethane
Dichloromethane
Nitromethane
Nitrobenzene
Acetonitrile
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(11)
(16)
(16)
(16)
(16)
(16)
(16)
(17)
(15)

466
CONNISSION ON ELECTROCHEMISTRY
even upon careful purification of the solvent, the concentration of such impurities should
be reported; they may or may not affect the redox behaviour of the investigated species.
Their controlled addition to the solution under study will yield such information and should
be carried out.
RECOMMENDATION ON REPORTING ELECTRODE POTENTIALS IN
NONAQUEOUS SOLVENTS VERSUS A REFERENCE REDOX SYSTEM
It is recommended that electrode potentials of systems under study be reported directly with
respect to whichever of the two reference redox systems is chosen, in all solvents and at all
temperatures (insofar as possible). Potentiometric measurements should be made in cells
without liquid junctions. Salt bridges should be avoided if possible. In any case a detailed
description of the apparatus should be given.
Electrode potentials measured by polarographic and voltammetric techniques are generally
made in solutions containing a supporting electrolyte. While it is usually assumed (and in
many cases true) that tetraalkylainmonium perchiorates, most commonly employed as supporting
electrolytes, do not significantly affect redox potentials, cases have been reported where
altering the cation (ref.12) or the anion (ref.13) of the supporting electrolyte
significantly changed the redox potentials of redox active species. During studies of
organic compounds leading to radical cations or anions and of the redox behaviour of metal
complexes it was noticed that even small amounts of metal cations or anions significantly
affected half wave and peak potentials (ref.1). It is therefore mandatory that the nature
and the concentration of the supporting electrolyte and of any other compound in solution
besides the redox system of interest are reported in the publication.
All data should be reported as "crude" data first, omitting any corrections for ion—pair
formation or activity coefficients. While such correction can be made in the further
evaluation of the data, the absence of the crude data may prohibit the evaluation as
improved models for ion-pair formation or activity coefficients become available.
Abbreviations: It is recommended that the abbreviation Fc be used for the reference redox
system ferrocene/ferricenium ion and BCr for bis(biphenyl)chromium(O)/bis(biphenyl)—
chromium(I) ion. These abbreviations should be added when symbols for redox potentials are
given in the text or in figures, for example 1/2(1rr or FcY When specifying the
respective reference redox systems, the following àréviatiàns are suggested: Fc/Fc
and
BCr/BCrt Such abbreviations however should only be used in a publication after specifically
defining the names of the compounds to which they refer.
GIBBS ENERGIES OF TRANSFER
Both reference redox systems have also been employed as extra thermodynamic assumptions to
calculate Gibbs energies of transfer of single ions. Such data have generally been obtained
from polarographic half wave potentials of cations that are reversibly reduced to metal
amalgams. It is recommended hat the extrathermodynamic assumption employed be indicated
by abbreviations such as t(Fc when reporting Gibbs energies of transfer. Again the
meaning of such abbreviations mut be defined in each publication.
REFERENCES
1) J.W. Diggle and A.J. Parker, Electrochim. Acta 18, 975 (1973) and references cited
therein
2) W.A. Pleskow, Usp. Chin. 16, 2514 (19147)
3) Z.M. Koepp, H. Wendt and H. Strehlow, Z. Elektrochemie 614, 1483 (1960)
14) N. Tanaka and T. Ogata, Inorg. Nucl. Chem. Letters 10, 511 (19714)
5) A. Rusina, G. Gritzner and A.A. Vlôek, Proc. IVth Internat. Congress on Polarography
Prague 1966, p. 79
6) G. Gritzner, V. Gutmann and R. Schmid, Electrochim. Acta 13, 919 (1968)
7) D. Bauer and J.P. Beck, Bull. Soc. Chim. France 1252 (1973T
8) 0. Popovych, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 1, 73 (1970)
9) D. Bauer and M. Breant, Electroanalytical Chemistry, Vol. 8, p. 282_3148
(Marcel Dekker Inc. 1975)
10) A.J. Parker, Electrochim. Acta 21, 671 (1976)
11) G. Gritzner, Inorg. Chin. Acti Iç, 5 (1977)
12) G. Gritzner, K. DanksagmOller and V. Gutmann, J. Electroanal. Chem. 72, 177 (1976)
13) T. Fujinaga and I. Sakamoto, J. Electroanal. Chem. 73, 235 (1976)
114) T.M. Krygowski, J. Electroanal. Chem. 35, 1436 (1972T
15) G. Gritzner and P. Rechberger, J. Electroanal. Chem. 109, 333 (1980)
16) G. Gritzner and P. Rechberger, J. Electroanal. Chem. TTTi,
129 (1980)
17) G. Gritzner, J. Electroanal. Chem. 144, 259 (1983)
