Pure & Appl. Chem., Vol. 68, No. 12, pp. 2223-2286, 1996. 
Printed in Great Britain. 
Q 1996 IUPAC 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF PURE 
AND APPLIED CHEMISTRY 
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY DMSION 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY* 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
(IUPAC Recommendations 1996) 
Prepared for publication by 
J. W. VERHOEVEN 
Labratoy of Organic Chemistry, University of Amsterdam, Nieuwe Achtergracht 129, 
101 8 WS Amsterdam. Netherlands 
*Membership of the Commission during the period (1994-96) when the report was prepared was as 
follows: 
Chairman: J. D. Coyle (UK; 1991-95); J. R. Bolton (Canada; 1996-99); Secretary: R. Bonneau 
(France; 1989-96); Etular Members: J. D. Coyle (UK; 1991-97); F. D. Lewis (USA; 1994-97); 
I. Saito (Japan; 199497); F. Scandola (Italy; 199497); J. Wirz (Switzerland; 1991-99); Associate 
Members: A. U. Acuna Fernandez (Spain; 1996-99); D. R. Arnold (Canada; 1989-95); H.-D. B. 
Becker (Sweden; 1991-95); J. R. Bolton (Canada; 1994-97); H. Bouas-Laurent (France; 1996-99); 
V. Kuzmin (Russia; 1994-97); J. Mattay (Germany; 1991-97); E. A. San Roman (Argentina; 
1987-95); E. Vrachnou-Dorier (Greece; 1996-97); National Representatives: C. Wentrup (Australia; 
1996-97); 
F. C. De Schryver (Belgium; 1989-97); M. G. Neumann (Brazil; 1991-95); V. G. Toscano 
(Brazil; 1996-97); Y. Cao (Chinese Chemical Society; 1992-97); T. BCrczes (Hungary; 1985-97); 
M. V. George (India; 1994-95); G. Pandey (India; 1996-97); I Willner (Israel; 1989-97); S. J. 
Formosinho Sanches Simoes (Portugal; 1991-97); S. C. Shim (Korea; 1989-97); P. Hrdlovic 
(Slovakia; 1994-97); A. U. Acuna Fernandez (Spain; 1991-95); Y. Yagci (Turkey; 1991-97). 
Republication or reproduction of this report or its storage and/or dissemination by electronic means is permitted 
without the need for formal IUPACpermission on condition that an acknowledgement, with full reference to the 
source along with use of the copyright symbol 0, the name IUPAC and the year of publication are prominently 
visible. Publication of a translation into another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval 
from the relevant IUPAC National Adhering Organization. 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
(IUPAC Recommendations 1996) 
INTRODUCTION TO THE 1996 REVISION 
A provisional version of this Glossary was published in the period 1983-1984 in the Newsletters of the 
European Photochemical Association, the Inter-American Photochemical Society, and the Japanese 
Photochemical Association.The first edition of the "Glossary of Terms Used in Photochemistry" was 
prepared for publication in the Commission by S.E. Braslavsky and K.N. Houk. It was published in 1988 
(Pure h Appl. Chem. (1 988) 60,1055-1 106) and has since been incorporated in the "Handbook of Organic 
Photochemistry" Vol. 11, J.C. Scaiano Ed., CRC Press Inc., Boca Raton, 1989, and in "Photochromism: 
Molecules and Systems", H. Diirr and H. Bow-Lament Eds., Elsevier Science Publishers, 1990. 
In the present second edition a number of minor errors encountered in the first edition have been corrected 
and furthermore it has been expanded especially to incorporate terms related to (photoinduced) electron 
transfer processes. The draft of this second edition was completed by the commission May 1993, and the 
commission is pleased to acknowledge the contributions of many external experts who helped to realize the 
inclusion of terms related to electron transfer in this second revised and enhanced edition of the Glossary, 
the following have contributed: 
V. Balzani 
I.P. Beletskaya 
J.R. Bolton 
M. Chanon 
A.K. Chibisov 
L. Eberson 
M.A. Fox 
D. Gust 
A.B.P. Lever 
N.A. Lewis 
R.A. Marcus 
N. Mataga 
K.A. Zachariasse 
In the final approval stage corrections and additions were made on the suggestions of: 
H. Bouas-Laurent, D. De Keukeleire, H. Favre (IDCNS), 
K. Kuchitsu (IDCNS), P. Kratochvil (IDCNS), K. 
Tsujimoto, W.E. van der Linden (IDCNS), T. Vid6czy and F. Weber (IDCNS). 
which is to provide definitions of terms and symbols commonly used in the field of 
photochemistry in order to achieve consensus on the adoption of some definitions and on the abandonment 
of inadequate terms. 
The Commission wants to emphasize, however, that it is not the purpose of this compilation to impose 
terms or rules which would hinder the freedom of choice in the use of terminology. Photochemistry being 
an interdisciplinary area of science which involves, in addition to chemistry, such different fields as laser 
technology, spectroscopy, polymer science, solid state physics, biology, and medicine, just to name some 
of them, it has been necessary to reach compromises and, in some cases, to include alternative definitions 
used in different areas.The general criterion adopted for the inclusion of a term has been: 
It is trusted that in this revised and enhanced form the Glossary will continue to serve its purpose, 
(i) its wide use in the present or past literature, and 
(ii) ambiguity or uncertainty in its usage. 
With very few exceptions concerning widely accepted terms, name reactions have been omitted. 
2224 
0 1996 IUPAC 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2225 
The arrangement of entries is alphabetical and the criterion adopted by the Physical Organic Chemistry 
Commission of IUPAC has been followed for the type of lettering used: italicized words in a definition or 
at the end of it indicate a relevant cross reference, a term in quotation marks indicates that it is not defined 
in this Glossary (see "Glossary of Terms Used in Physical Organic Chemistry", Pure & Appl. Chem. (1983) 
55,1281-1371). In addition, an underlined word marks its importance in the definition under consideration. 
It is expected that many of the definitions provided will be subject to change. The Commission welcomes 
all suggestions for improvement and updating of the Glossary and commits itself to revise it in the future. 
The terms pertaining to Physical Organic Chemistry are defined in the "Glossary of Terms Used in 
Physical Organic Chemistry", Pure & Appl. Chem. (1983) 55,1281-1371. Cross checking for consistency 
has been performed with this Glossary as well as with its provisional second edition. 
Internationally agreed upon terms were taken from: 
"Manual of Symbols and Terminology for Physicochemical Quantities and Units", Pure & Appl. Chem. 
(1979) 51, 1-41.(Latest version: "Quantities, Units and Symbols in Physical Chemistry", I. Mills, T. Cvitas, 
K. Homann, N Kallay and K. Kuchitsu, Blackwell Science Ltd, 1993) 
"Quantities and units of light and related electromagnetic radiations" International Standard IS0 3 1/6 
(1 980/1992), International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 
See also the Recommendations 1983, "Molecular Luminescence Spectroscopy", Pure & Appl. Chem. 
(1984) 56,231-245. 
Other sources: 
"The Vocabulary of Photochemistry", J. N. Pitts, Jr., F. Wilkinson, G. S. Hammond, Advances in 
Photochemistry (1 963) 1, 1-22. 
"Optical Radiation Physics and Illuminating Engineering; Quantities, Symbols and Units of Radiation 
Physics", DIN (Deutsches Institut Air Normung) 5031 (1982), F.R.G. 
"Radiometric and Photometric Properties of Materials; Definitions Characteristics", DIN 5036, Part 1 
(1979), F.R.G. 
"Radiometric and Photometric Characteristics of Materials and their Measurement", International 
Commission on Illumination (CIE) (1977) 38. 
Jan W. Verhoeven 
Amsterdam, March 1996 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2226 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
ALPHABETIC LIST OF TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 
ABSORBANCE (A) 
essentially monochromatic, radiation (I = IadA ) to the radiant power of transmitted radiation 
( Pa ): 
a 
The logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the spectral radiantpower of incident , 
A = log(Pi / P a )  = -1ogT 
In practice, absorbance is the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the spectral radiantpower 
of light transmitted through the reference sample to that of the light transmitted through the 
solution, both observed in identical cells. T is the (internal) transmittance. This definition 
supposes that all the incident light is either transmitted or absorbed, reflection or scattering 
being negligible. Traditionally (spectral )radiant intensity, I, was used instead of spectral radiant 
power, Pa, which is now the accepted form. (The terms: absorbancy, extinction, and optical 
density should no longer be used.) 
See absorption coeficient, absorptance, attenuance, Beer-Larnbert law, depth of 
penetration, internal transmittance, Lambert law, molar absorption coeficient. 
ABSORPTANCE 
The fraction of light absorbed, equal to one minus the transmittance (T). 
See absorbance. 
ABSORPTION (of electromagnetic radiation ) 
The transfer of energy from an electromagnetic field to a molecular entity. 
ABSORPTION COEFFICIENT (decadic-a or Napierian-a) 
Absorbance divided by the optical pathlength, 1 : 
a = A / 1 = (1 / l)log(P; / Pa) 
Physicists usually use natural logarithms. In this case: 
where a is the Napierian absorption coefficient. Since absorbance is a dimensionless quantity, 
the coherent SI unit for a and a is m-1. Also cm-1 is often used. 
See also absorptivity, molar absorption coeficient. 
ABSORPTION CROSS SECTION (0) 
molecular entities contained in a unit volume of the absorbing medium along the light path: 
Operationally, it can be calculated as the absorption coeficient divided by the number of 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2227 
where N is the number of molecular entities per unit volume, 1 is the optical pathlength, and 01 is 
the Napierian absorption coefficient. 
The relation between the absorption cross section and the molar (decadic) absorption co- 
efficient, E, (units M-km-1) is 
o= 
( ~ N A )  
0.1 In 10 = 0.2303 ( ~ N A )  
= 3.825 x 
where oin in m2 and NA is the Avogadro constant. 
See attenuance, Beer-Lambert law. 
ABSORPTIVITY 
mates the absorption coeficient (within the approximation (1 - e-A) - A). The use of this term 
is not recommended. 
Absorptance divided by the optical pathlength. For very low attenuance it approxi- 
A CTINOMETER 
A chemical system or physical device which determines the number of photons in a 
beam integrally or per unit time. This name is commonly applied to devices used in the 
ultraviolet and visible wavelength ranges. For example, solutions of iron(lII) oxalate can be 
used as a chemical actinometer, while bolometers, thermopiles, and photodiodes are physical 
devices giving a reading that can be correlated to the number of photons detected. 
ACTION SPECTRUM 
A plot of a relative biological or chemical photoresponse (= Ay) per number of incident 
photons, against wavelength or energy of radiation under the same radiantpower of light. This 
form of presentation is frequently used in the studies of biological or solid state systems, where 
the nature of the absorbing species is unknown. The action spectrum is sometimes called 
spectral responsivity or sensitivity spectrum. The precise action spectrum is a plot of the spectral 
(photon or quantum) efectiveness. By contrast, a plot of the biological or chemical change or 
response per absorbed photon (quantum eficiency) versus wavelength is the eficiency 
spectrum. 
See also excitation spectrum., efficiency spectrum. 
ADIABATIC ELECTRON TRANSFER 
face in passing from reactants to products. For adiabatic electron transfer the electronic trans- 
mission factor is close to unity (see Marcus equation.) 
Electron transfer process in which the reacting system remains on a single electronic sur- 
See also diabatic electron transfer. 
ADIABATIC PHOTOREACTION 
that occurs on a single "potential-energy surface". 
Within the "Born-Oppenheimer approximation", a reaction of an excited state species 
Compare diabatic photoreaction. 
ADMR 
See ODMR. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2228 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
ALPHA-CLEAVAGE (a-Cleavage) 
applied to a bond connected to a carbonyl group, in which case it is called a Norrish type Ipho- 
toreaction. This reaction should be distinguished from an alpha-(&)expulsion. 
Homolytic cleavage of a bond connecting an atom or group to a specified group. Often 
ALPHA- EXP ULSION (a-Expulsion) 
A general reaction by which a group attached to the alpha carbon of an excited chro- 
mophore is expelled either as an odd electron species or as an anionic species. This reaction 
should be distinguished from an alpha-(a-)cleavage. 
AM (0) SUNLIGHT 
called extraterrestrial global irradiance. 
The solar irradiance in space just above the earth atmosphere (air mass, AM, zero). Also 
AM ( I  SUNLIGHT 
lar to the earth surface. Also called terrestrial global irradiance. 
The solar irradiance traversing the atmosphere when the sun is in a position perpendicu- 
See also AM (0) sunlight. 
ANNIHILATION 
Two atoms or molecular entities both in an excited electronic state interact often (usually 
upon collision) to produce one atom or molecular entity in an excited electronic state and another 
in its ground electronic state. This phenomenon is sometimes referred to as energy pooling. 
See singlet-singlet annihilation, spin-conservation rule, triplet-triplet annihilation. 
ANTIMONY-XENON LAMP (Arc) 
electrical discharge in a mixture of antimony vapour and xenon under high pressure. Its output 
in the ultraviolet region is higher than that of the mercury-xenon arc. 
An intense source of ultraviolet, visible, and near infra-red radiation produced by an 
See lamp. 
ANTI-STOKES SHIFT 
See Stokes shifi. 
APPARENT LIFETIME 
See lifetime. 
ARGON ION LASER 
Principal emissions are at 488.0 and 514.5 nm. 
A CW or pulsed laser emitting lines from 334 to 529 nm from singly ionized argon. 
See laser, gas lasers. 
ATTENUANCE (D) 
The logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the transmittance (T): 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chernistry68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2229 
Attenuance reduces to absorbance if the incident beam is only either transmitted or absorbed, but 
not reflected or scattered. 
See Beer-Lambert law, depth of penetration. 
ATTENUANCE FILTER 
factor over all wavelengths within its operating range. Sometimes called attenuator or neutral 
density filter. 
An optical device (filter) which reduces the radiantpower of a light beam by a constant 
AUXOCHROME 
bathochromic shift andor a hyperchromic effect in a given band of the chromophore, usually in 
that of lowest frequency. This term is obsolete. 
An atom or group which, when added to or introduced into a chromophore, causes a 
AVOIDED CROSSING (of potential-energy surfaces) 
I 
t 
Frequently, two Born-Oppenheimer electronic states (A,B) change their energy order as 
molecular geometry (x) is changed continuously along a path. In the process their energies may 
become equal at some points (the surfaces are said to cross, dotted lines in the figure), or only 
come relatively close (the crossing of the surfaces is said to be avoided). If the electronic states 
are of the same symmetry, the su$ace crossing is always avoided in diatomics and usually 
avoided in polyatomics. 
Same as intended crossing. 
BACK ELECTRON TRANSFER 
A term often used to indicate thermal reversal of excited state electron trumfer restoring 
the donor and acceptor in their original oxidation level. In using this term one should also spec- 
ify the resulting electronic state of the donor and acceptor. 
BANDGAP ENERGY (Eg) 
lence band in a semiconductor or an insulator. 
The energy difference between the bottom of the conduction band and the top of the va- 
See conduction band, Fermi level. 
BANDPASS FILTER 
length range and does not permit transmission of radiation at higher or lower wavelengths. It 
can be an interferencefilter. 
An optical device which permits the transmission of radiation within a specified wave- 
See also cut-offfilter. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2230 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
BARTON REACTION 
a homolytic RO-NO cleavage, followed by &hydrogen abstraction and radical coupling. 
O N O ,  0’ 
0 
( P H  
NO 
Photolysis of a nitrite to form a &nitroso alcohol. The mechanism is believed to involve 
*NO 
*NO 
- __t 
__t 
BATHOCHROMIC SHIFT (Effect) 
of substitution or a change in environment (e.g., solvent). It is informally referred to as a red 
ship and is opposite to hypsochromic ship. 
Shift of a spectral band to lowerfrequencies (longer wavelength) owing to the influence 
BEER-LAMBERT LA W (or Beer-Lambert-Bouguer Law) 
isotropic medium is proportional to the absorption pathlength, 1, and to the concentration, c, or - 
in the gas phase - to the pressure of the absorbing species. This law holds only under the 
limitations of the Lambert law and for absorbing species exhibiting no concentration or pressure 
dependent aggregation. The law can be expressed as 
The absorbance of a beam of collimated monochromatic radiation in a homogeneous 
A = log(Pi I PA) = ECI 
or 
PA = p,10-e”’ 
where the proportionality constant, E, is called the molar (kcadic) absolption coeficient. For 1 in cm and 
c in mol dm-3 or M, E will result in dm3 mol-l cm-l or M-l cm-l , which is a commonly used unit. The SI 
unit of E is m2 mol-1. Note that spectral radiant power must be used because the Beer-Lambert law holds 
only if the spectral bandwidth of the light is narrow compared to spectral linewidths in the spectrum. 
See absorbance, attenuance, extinction coeficient, Lambert law. 
BIOLUMINESCENCE 
Luminescence produced by living systems. 
See luminescence. 
BIPHOTONIC EXCITATION 
photons (either same or different wavelength) the energy of excitation being the sum of the en- 
ergies of the two photons. 
Also called two-photon excitation. The simultaneous (coherent) absorption of two 
BIPHOTONIC PROCESS 
A process resulting from biphotonic excitation. 
See multiphoton process 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2231 
BIRADICAL (Synonymous with diradical) 
act nearly independently of each other. 
biradicaloida. If the two radical centres are located on the same atom, they always interact 
strongly, and such species are called carbenes, nitrenes, etc. 
The lowest-energy triplet state of a biradical lies below or at most only a little above its 
lowest singlet state (usually judged relative to kT, the product of the BolOann constant k and 
the absolute temperature 7). The states of those biradicals whose radical centres interact particu- 
larly weakly are most easily understood in terms of a pair of local doublets. 
Theoretical descriptions of low-energy states of a biradical display the presence of two 
unsaturated valences (biradicals contain one fewer bond than permitted by the rules of valence): 
the dominant valence bond structures have two dots, the low energy molecular orbital confgu- 
rations have only two electrons in two approximately nonbonding molecular orbitals, two of the 
natural orbitals have occupancies close to one, etc. 
An even-electron molecular entity with two (possibly delocalized) radical centres which 
Species in which the two radical centres interact significantly are often referred to as 
BIRADICALOID 
Biradical-like. 
BLEACHING 
In photochemistry this term refers to the loss of absorption or emission intensity. 
BLUE SHIFT 
Informal expression for hypsochromic shift. 
CADMIUM- HELIUM LASER 
See Helium-Cadmium laser. 
CAVITY DUMPING 
Periodic removal of coherent radiation from a laser cavity. 
CHARGE HOPPING 
Electron or hole transport between equivalent sites. 
CHARGE RECOMBINATION 
electronic state of the donor and acceptor. 
Reverse of charge separation. In using this term it is important to specify the resulting 
CHARGE SEPARATION 
photoexcitation), electronic charge moves in a direction that increases the difference in local 
charges between donor and acceptor sites. Electron tran@er between neutral species is one of the 
most important examples. 
A process in which, under the influence of a suitable driving force (e.g. provided by 
CHARGE SHIFT 
photoexcitation) electronic charge moves without changing the difference in local charges be- 
tween donor and acceptor sites. Electron transfer reversing the charges in a system composed of 
A process in which under the influence of a suitable driving force (e.g. provided by 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2232 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
a neutral donor and a cationic acceptor or of a neutral acceptor and an anionic donor provide 
prominent examples. 
CHARGE-TRANSFER (CT) STATE 
A state related to the ground state by a charge t r d e r  transition. 
CHARGE-TRANSFER (CT) TRANSITION 
An electronic transition in which a large fraction of an electronic charge is transferred 
from one region of a molecular entity, called the electron donor, to another, called the electron 
acceptor (intramolecular CT) or from one molecular entity to another (intermolecular CT). 
Typical for donor-acceptor complexes or multichromophoric molecular entities. In some cases 
the charge transfer absorption band may be obscured by the absorption of the partners. 
CHARGE-TRANSFER (CT) COMPLEX 
A ground-state complex which exhibits an observable charge transfer absorption band. 
See charge-tr&er 
transition. 
CHARGE-TRANSFER TRANSITION TO SOLVENT (CTTS] 
Electronic transition which is adequately described by single electron transfer between a 
solute and the solvent, as opposed to excitation followed by electron transfer to solvent. 
See also charge-transfer (CT) transition 
CHEMICAL LASER 
species results from a chemical reaction. Typical examples are HF and DF lasers emitting many 
lines in the IR region. 
A CW or pulsed laser in which the excitation and population inversion of the emitting 
CHEMIEXCITA TION 
tants in their ground electronic states. 
Generation, by a chemical reaction, of electronically excited molecular entities from reac- 
CHEMIL UMINESCENCE 
Luminescence arising from chemiexcitation. 
CHROMOPHORE 
electronic transition responsible for a given spectral band is approximately localized. 
That part of a molecular entity consisting of an atom or group of atoms in which the 
CIDEP (chemically Induced Qynamic Electron Polarization) 
actions, either from a combination of radical pairs (called radical-pair mechanism), or directly 
from the triplet state (called triplet mechanism), and detected by ESR spectroscopy. 
Non-Boltzmann electron spin state population produced in thermal or photochemical re- 
CIDNP (chemically Iaduced Qynamic Nuclear Polarization) 
actions, usually from a combination of radical pairs, and detected by NMR spectroscopy. 
Non-Boltzmann nuclear spin state distribution produced in thermal or photochemical re- 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2233 
CIEEL (Chemically Initiated Electron Exchange Luminescence) 
A type of luminescence resulting from a thermal electron-transfer reaction. 
Also called catalyzed chemiluminescence. 
COLLISION COMPLEX 
Van der Waals radii. As such it constitutes a subclass of the species indicated as encounter 
complex. 
An ensemble formed by two reaction partners for which the distance is the sum of their 
See also encounter complex. 
€Q&AsEE 
A continuous or pulsed source of coherent radiation normally tunable through the COz 
vibration-rotation band centered near 10.6 pm. 
See gas lasers, laser. 
COHERENT RADIATION 
phase difference constant in space and time. 
A source is said to emit coherent radiation when all the elementary waves emitted have a 
COND UCTlON BAND 
from an array of a large number of atoms forming a system in which the electrons can move 
freely or nearly so. This term is usually used to describe the properties of metals and semicon- 
ductors. 
A vacant or only partially occupied set of many closely spaced electronic levels resulting 
See bandgap energy, Fermi level, valence band. 
CONFIGURA TION (Electronic Configuration) 
A distribution of the electrons of an atom or a molecular entity over a set of one-electron 
wavefunctions called orbitals, according to the Pauli principle. From one configuration several 
states with different multiplicities may result. For example, the ground electronic configuration 
of the oxygen molecule (02) is 14, lo:, 2obf, 2 4 ,  lx:, 3obf, ' x i ,  resulting in the 'X;, 
'As, and 'Xi states of different energy. 
CONFIGURATION INTERACTION (Cl) 
an improved wavefunction for a many-electron state. 
The mixing of wavefunctions representing different electronic configurations to obtain 
CONTACT ION PAIR 
Pair of ions in direct contact and not separated by an intervening solvent or other neutral 
molecule. One mode of formation for a (geminate) contact ion pair is electron transjer between 
precursor species in an encounter complex (cf. collision complex ). If one of the precursors in 
the encounter complex is electronically excited the contact ion pair formed by electron t r d e r  
is equivalent to a polar exciplex. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2234 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
CONVERSION SPECT RUM 
by the quantum yield for the considered process against a suitable measure of photon energy, 
such as frequency, V, wavenumber, 0, or wavelength, A.. E.g., the conversion cross section, 
d, 
has the SI unit m2. 
A plot of a quantity related to the absorption (absorbance, cross section, etc.) multiplied 
See also action spectrum, efSiciency spectrum, spectral effectiveness. 
COPPER VAPOUR LASER 
per atoms. 
A pulsed source of coherent radiation emitting at 578.2 and 510.5 nm from excited cop- 
See gas lasers, laser. 
CORRELATION DIAGRAM 
structures, or states of reactants and products of a reaction, as a function of the molecular ge- 
ometry, or another suitable parameter. An example involves the interpolation between the ener- 
gies obtained for the united atoms and the values for the separated atoms limits. 
A diagram which shows the relative energies of orbitals, conjgurations, valence bond 
CORRELATION ENERGY 
nonrelativistic energy of that system. The correlation energy arises from the approximate repre- 
sentation of the electron-electron repulsions in the Hartree-Fock method. 
The difference between the Hartree-Fock energy calculated for a system and the exact 
CRITICAL OUENCHING RADIUS ( ro ) 
See Forster excitation transfer. 
CRYSTAL FIELD SPLITTING 
lower site symmetry created by a crystalline environment. This term is sometimes incorrectly 
used synonymously with the term ligandjeld splitting. 
The removal of a degeneracy of the energy levels of molecular entities or ions due to the 
CT 
Abbreviation for charge-transjer. 
CURRENT YIELD 
See photocurrent yield. 
CUT-OFF FILTER 
An optical device which only permits the transmission of radiation of wavelengths that 
are longer than or shorter than a specified wavelength. Usually, the term refers to devices which 
transmit radiation of wavelengths longer than the specified wavelength. 
See filter. 
CW (Continuous Wave) 
Nonpulsed source of electromagnetic radiation. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2235 
DARK PHOTOCHEMISTRY (photochemistry without light) 
Chemical reactions involving electronically excited molecular entities which are 
generated thermally rather than by absorption of electromagnetic radiation. The use of this term 
is discouraged. 
DAVYDOV SPLIKYNG Cfactor-group splitting) 
ence of more than one (interacting) equivalent molecular entity in the unit cell. 
The splitting of bands in the electronic or vibrational spectra of crystals due to the pres- 
DEACTIVATION 
Any loss of energy by an excited molecular entity. 
See emission, energy transfer, internal conversion, radiationless deactivation and transi- 
tion, radiative transition. 
DELAYED FLUORESCENCE 
See delayed luminescence. 
DELAYED LUMINESCENCE 
emitting state. The following mechanisms of luminescence provide examples: 
another molecular entity in its electronic ground state (sometimes referred to as P type), 
(sometimes referred to as E type), and 
to be referred to in this case as delayed luminescence at least one of the two reaction partners 
must be generated in a photochemical process. 
Luminescence decaying more slowly than that expected from the rate of decay of the 
(1) triplet-triplet annihilation to form one molecular entity in its excited singlet state g d  
(2) thermally activated delayedflmrescence involving reversible intersystem crossing 
(3) combination of oppositely charged ions or of an electron and a cation. For emission 
DEDMR 
See ODMR. 
DEPTH OF PENETRATION (of light) 
efficient, a, is used, the depth of penetration (1 fa) is the distance at which the spectral radiant 
power, P 1 decreases to one tenth of its incident value, Pi. If the Napierian absorption 
coefficient, a, is used, the depth of penetration (l/a = p in this case) is the distance at which the 
spectral radiantpower decreases to l/e of its incident value. 
The inverse of the absorption coeficient. The SI unit is m. If the decadic absorption co- 
See absorbance, attenuance. 
DEXTER EXCITATION TRANSFER (Electron Exchange Excitation Transfer) 
an overlap of the wavefunctions of the energy donor and the energy acceptor. It is the dominant 
mechanism in rripler-triplet energy transfer. 
The transfer rate constant, ~ E T ,  is given by 
Excitation transfer occurring as a result of an electron exchange mechanism. It requires 
~ E T  
Dc [h / ( 2 ~ ) 1  
P2 J exp [-2rL], 
where r is the distance between donor (D) and acceptor (A), L and P are constants not easily re- 
@ 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2236 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
lated to experimentally determinable quantities, and J is the spectral overlap integral. For this 
mechanism the spin conservation rules are obeyed. 
See also radiative energy trader. 
DFDMR 
See ODMR. 
DIABATIC ELECTRON TRANSFER 
ent electronic surfaces in passing from reactants to products. For diabatic electron transfer the 
electronic transmission factor is << 1 (see Marcus equation.) The term non-adiabatic electron 
transfer has also been used and is in fact more widespread, but should be discouraged because it 
contains a double negation. 
Electron transfer process in which the reacting system has to cross over between differ- 
See also adiabatic electron t r d e r  
DIABATIC PHOTOREACTION 
"potential-energy surface'' and ending, as a result of radiationless transition, on another surface, 
usually that of the ground state. Also called non-adiabatic. 
Within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, a reaction beginning on one excited state 
Compare with adiabatic photoreaction. 
DIODE LASERS 
lasers are semiconductor devices of small dimensions. Also called semiconductor lasers. 
Sources of CW or pulsed coherent radiation in the visible and infrared regions. These 
DI- II- METHANE REARRANGEMENT 
A photochemical reaction of a molecular entity comprising two n-systems, separated by 
a saturated carbon atom (a 1,4-diene or an allyl-substituted aromatic analog), to form an ene- (or 
aryl-) substituted cyclopropane. The rearrangement formally amounts to a 1,2 shift of one ene 
group (in the diene) or the aryl group (in the allyl-aromatic analog) and "bond formation" be- 
tween the lateral carbons of the nonmigrating moiety. 
3 
3 
1 
See also om-di-mnethane rearrangement. 
DIPOLAR MECHANISM (of energy transfer) 
Same as Forster excitation t r d e r .  
See also energy transfer. 
DIPOLE-DIPOLE EXCITATION TRANSFER 
Same as Forster excitation transfer. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
See also energy transfer. 
2237 
DIRADICAL 
This term, synonymous with biradical, is no longer recommended. 
DOSE 
object during a partkular exposure time. 
dling through irradiation) dose is used in the sense offluence, i.e. the energy or amount of 
photons per unit area or unit volume received by an irradiated object during a particular exposure 
time. The SI units are J m-2 or J m-3 and mol m-2 or mol m-3, respectively. 
The energy or amount of photons absorbed per unit area or unit volume by an irradiated 
In medicine and in some other research areas (e.g. photopolymerization and water han- 
See d S 0  UV-dose. 
DOUBLET STATE 
A state having a total electron spin quantum number equal to 1/2. 
See mult@licity. 
DRIVING FORCE Cfor electron transfer) 
for (photoinduced) outer-sphere electron transfer . 
This quantity can often be calculated rather accurately from independently determined properties 
of the donor and acceptor species involved. Thus e.g. for photoinduced electron transfer 
between a neutral acceptor (A) and a neutral donor (D) (either one of them may be the 
electronically excited molecular entity) to form an ion pair, the driving force in a solvent with 
static dielectric constant & can be approximated as (see: A. Weller, Z. Phys. Chem. Neue Folge 
Term widely used to indicate the negative of the standard Gibbs energy change (AGO) 
- 
133,93-98 (1982)): 
-AGO =e[ Eo(D/D+) - EO(ALA-) ] - e2/(4nf&p) - Allo,, 
with EO(D/D+) the standard oxidation potential of the donor, Eo(ALA-) the standard reduction 
potential of the acceptor, e2/(4n@&p) the change in Gibbs energy for bringing the two radical 
ions to an encounter distance p, and AE,,, the electronic excitation energy of the excited 
partner, all data referring to the same solvent. 
DYE U S E R  
solution of afluorescent organic molecule (the dye) pumped with a suitable pump laser or with a 
flash lamp. These lasers can be tuned over a large part of the fluorescence band of the dye. 
A CW or pulsed source of coherent radiation in which the active medium is usually a 
DYNAMIC OUENCHING 
See quenching. 
EFFECTIVENESS 
See spectral effectiveness. 
EFFICIENCY (of a step; q) 
The ratio between the useful energy delivered or bound and the energy supplied, i.e., 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2238 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
energy outpudenergy input. It is also used in the sense of a quantitative measure of the relative 
rate of a given step involving a species with respect to the sum of the rates of all of the parallel 
steps which depopulate that species. 
See also quantum yield. 
EFFICIENCY SPECTRUM 
A plot of the efficiency of a step (q) against wavelength or photon energy. 
See action spectrum, conversion spectrum. 
Compare spectral effectiveness. 
EINSTEIN 
sometimes defined as the energy of one mole of photons. This use is discouraged. 
One mole of photons. Although widely used, it is not an IUPAC sanctioned unit. It is 
ELECTROCHEMIL UMINESCENCE 
See electrogenerated chemiluminescence. 
ELECTROCHROMIC EFFECT 
See Stark effect. 
ELECTROGENERATED LUMINESCENCE (ECL) 
trochemiluminescence. 
Luminescence produced by electrode reactions. Also called electroluminescence or elec- 
ELECTROLUMINESCENCE 
See electrogenerated cherniluminescence. 
ELECTRON CORRELATION 
positions of all the electrons in a molecular entity. 
The adjustment of electron motion to the instantaneous (as opposed to time-averaged) 
See also correlation energy. 
ELECTRON EXCHANGE EXCITATION TRANSFER 
Same as Dexter excitation tranger. 
See also energy transfer. 
ELECTRONIC CONFIGURATION 
See configuration. 
ELECTRONIC ENERGY MIGRATION (or Hopping) 
same species, or from one part of a molecular entity to another of the same kind (e.g. excitation 
migration between the chromophores of an aromatic polymer). The migration can happen via 
radiative or radiationless processes. 
The movement of electronic excitation energy from one molecular entity to another of the 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2239 
ELECTRONICALLY EXCITED STATE 
ground state of the same entity. 
A state of an atom or molecular entity which has greater electronic energy than the 
ELECTRON TRANSFER 
sites in the same molecular entity. 
The transfer of an electron from one molecular entity to another or between two localized 
See also inner-sphere electron transfer, outer-sphere electron transfer, Marcus equation. 
ELECTRON TRANSFER PHOTOSENSITIZ4TION 
electron transfer (not energy transfer) with an excited light-absorbing sensitizer. The overall pro- 
cess must be such that the sensitizer is recycled. Depending on the action of the excited 
sensitizer as electron donor or acceptor the sensitization is called reductive or oxidative. 
Photochemical process in which a reaction of a non-absorbing substrate is induced by 
See also photosensitization. 
ELECTROPHOTOGRA PHY 
(photo-conductive or photo-electrostatic effects). 
Processes of photoimaging which are based on photo-induced changes of electric fields 
EL-SAYED RULES 
The rate of intersystem crossing, e.g.from the lowest singlet state to the triplet manifold, 
is relatively large if the radiationless transition involves a change of orbital type.E.g. 
17c,7c*+3n,7c* is faster than 1 ~ , ~ *  
+3x,7c* and 1n,~*+37c,7c* is faster than ln,7c* +3n,x*. 
See multiplicity. 
EMISSION 
electromagnetic field. 
Radiative deactivation of an excited state; transfer of energy from a molecular entity to an 
See also fluorescence, luminescence, phosphorescence. 
EMISSION SPECTRUM 
spectral photon irradiunce (spectral photon exitance) against a quantity related to photon energy, 
such as frequency, V, wavenumber, 0, or wavelength, A. When corrected for wavelength de- 
pendent variations in the equipment response, it is called a corrected emission spectrum. 
Plot of the emitted spectral radiantpower (spectral radiant exitance) or of the emitted 
EMITTANCE 
See radiant exitance. 
ENCOUNTER COMPLEX 
distance small compared to the diameter of solvent molecules and surrounded by several shells 
of solvent molecules; the innermost shell is the solvent "cage". If one of the species is excited, 
the excitation usually takes place prior to formation of the encounter complex. During the life- 
An intermolecular ensemble formed by molecular entities in contact or separated by a 
@ 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2240 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
time of the encounter complex the reactants can collide several times to form collision com- 
plexes, and then undergo structural and electronic changes. If the interaction between the reac- 
tants leads to a minimum in the potential energy and one of the entities is electronically excited, 
the encounter complex may represent an exciplex or excimer. 
See also contact ion pair and collision complex. 
ENERGY MIGRATION 
See electronic energy migration. 
ENERGY POOLING 
See annihilation. 
ENERGY STORAGE EFFICIENCY (77) 
by the incident irradiance. 
The rate of the Gibbs energy storage in an endothermic photochemical reaction divided 
See also eflciency. 
ENERGY TRANSFER 
From a phenomenological point of view, the term is used to describe the process by 
which a molecular entity absorbs light and a phenomenon originates from the excited state of 
another molecular entity. In mechanistic photochemistry the term has been reserved for the 
photophysical process in which an excited state of one molecular entity (the donor) is 
deactivated to a lower-lying state by transferring energy to a second molecular entity (the 
acceptor), which is thereby raised to a higher energy state. The excitation may be electronic, 
vibrational, rotational or translational. The donor and acceptor may be two parts of the same 
molecular entity, in which case the process is called intramolecular energy transfer. 
See also Dexter excitation transfer, Forster excitation transfer, radiative energy tran@er, 
and spectral overlap. 
ENERGY TRANSFER PLOT 
A plot of the quenching rate constant of an excited molecular entity by a series of 
quenchers versus the excited state energy of the quenchers. Alternatively, a plot of the rate con- 
stant for the sensitization of a reaction versus the excited state energy of different sensitizers. 
This type of plot is used to estimate the energy of the excited molecular entity quenched (in the 
former case) or produced (in the latter case). Also known as Hammond-Herkstroeter plot. 
See also Stem-Volmer kinetic relationships. 
ENHANCER 
Afluorescent compound which accepts energy and thus enhances or promotes the emis- 
sion from a sample containing a chemically or enzymatically generated excited molecular entity. 
ESCA 
See photoelectron spectroscopy. 
EXCIMER 
An electronically excited dimer, "nonbonding" in the ground state, a complex formed by 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
the interaction of an excited molecular entity with a ground state partner of the same structure. 
2241 
See also exciplex. 
EXCIMER LASER 
A source of pulsed coherent radiation obtained from an exciplex. The proper name 
should be exciplex laser. Typical lasing species are noble gas halides (XeCl, KrF, etc.) emitting 
in the UV domain. 
See laser, gas lasers. 
EXCIPLEX 
ground state. For example, a complex formed by the interaction of an excited molecular entity 
with a ground state partner of a different structure. 
If the partners have pronounced electron-donor and -acceptor character their exciplex attains ion- 
pair character. The terms compact exciplex and loose exciplex have sometimes been used to in- 
dicate that such polar exciplexes may have structures closely related to a contact ion pair or a 
solvent-separated ion pair. 
An electronically excited complex, of definite stoichiometry, "nonbonding" in the 
EXCITATION SPECTRUM 
Plot of the spectral radiant exitance or of the spectral photon exitance against the fre- 
quency (or wavenumber, or wavelength) of excitation. When corrected for wavelength depen- 
dent variations in the excitation radiantpower this is called a corrected excitation spectrum. 
See also emission spectrum. 
EXCITATION TRANSFER 
Same as energy transfer. 
EXCITED STATE 
electronically excited state is usually meant. 
A state of higher energy than the ground state of a chemical entity. In photochemistry an 
EXCITON 
In some applications it is useful to consider electronic excitation as if a quasi-particle ca- 
pable of migrating, were involved. In organic materials two models are used: the band or 
wave model (low temperature, high crystalline order) and the hopping model (higher tempera- 
ture, low crystalline order or amorphous state). Energy transfer in the hopping limit is identical 
with energy migration. 
See electronic energy migration. 
EXITANCE 
See radiant exitance. 
EXTERNAL HEAVY ATOM EFFECT 
See heavy atom effect. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2242 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
EXTERPLEX 
Termolecular analogue of an exciplex. Use of this term is discouraged. 
See also : exciplex 
EXTINCTION 
This term, equivalent to absorbance, is no longer recommended. 
EXTINCTION COEFFICIENT 
mended. 
This term, equivalent to molar (decadic) absorption coeficient, is no longer recom- 
See Beer-Lambert law. 
FACTOR-GROUP SPLITTING 
See Davydov splitting. 
FERMI LEVEL (EF) 
The chemical potential of electrons in a solid (metals, semiconductors or insulators) or in 
an electrolyte solution. 
See bandgap energy, conduction band, valence band. 
FILTER (optical) 
radiant power of incident radiation (neutral density or attenuancefilter) upon transmission of 
radiation. 
A device which reduces the spectral range (bandpass, cut-off, and interference filter) or 
FLASH PHOTOLYSIS 
is used to produce transient species. Commonly, an intense pulse of short duratiog is used to 
produce a sufficient concentration of a transient species suitable for spectroscopic observation. 
A technique of transient spectroscopy and transient kinetic studies in which a light pulse 
FLUENCE (Ho) 
When applied to energy, it is the total radiant energy traversing a small transparent 
imaginary spherical target containing the point under consideration, divided by the cross section 
of this target. The product of thefluence rate and the duration of the irradiation (IEodt, simpli- 
fied expression: Ho = Eo t when the fluence rate is constant over the time considered). The SI 
unit is J m-2. Energy fluence is identical to spherical radiant exposure and reduces to radiant ex- 
posure (H) for a parallel and normally incident beam, not scattered or reflected by the target or 
its surroundings. 
See also dose, photonfluence. 
FLUENCE RATE (Eo) 
The rate offluence, NO. 
Four times the ratio of the radiant power, P, incident on a small trans- 
parent imaginary spherical volume element containing the point under consideration, divided by 
the surface area of that sphere, SK. (I4,& 
dw, simplified expression: EO = 4 P/SK when the radi- 
ant power is constant over the solid angle considered). For energy fluence rate the SI unit is 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2243 
Wm-2. It reduces to irradiance, E, for a parallel and perpendicularly incident beam not scattered 
or reflected by the target or its surroundings. 
See intensity, radiance. 
See also photonfluence rate. 
FLUORESCENCE 
the formation of a molecular entity of the same spin multiplicity . 
Spontaneous emission of radiation (luminescence) from an excited molecular entity with 
FLUX (energy flux) 
See radiant energy flux, radiant power. 
f NUMBER 
See oscillator strength. 
FORSTER EXCITATION TRANSFER (Dipole-Dipole Excitation Transfer) 
by distances considerably exceeding the sum of their van der Waals radii. It is described in 
terms of an interaction between the transition dipole moments, (a dipolar mechanism). The 
transfer rate constant (k D+A) is given by 
A mechanism of excitation transfer which can occur between molecular entities separated 
K2J8. 8x10-= mol 
n4z,,r6 
D+A = 
where K is an orientation factor, n the refractive index of the medium, q) the radiative lifetime of 
the donor, r the distance (cm) between donor (D) and acceptor (A), and J the spectral overlap (in 
coherent units cm6 mol-1) between the absorption spectrum of the acceptor and thefluorescence 
spectrum of the donor. The critical quenching radius, ‘0, is that distance at which k D+A is 
equal to the inverse of the radiative lifetime. 
See also Dexter excitation transfer, energy transfer, radiative energy transfer. 
FORSTER CYCLE 
Indirect method of determination of excited state equilibria, such as pP7a values, based 
on ground state thermodynamics and electronic transition energies. This cycle considers only 
the difference in molar enthalpy change (MH) of reaction of ground and excited states, 
neglecting the difference in molar entropy change of reaction of those states (4. 
FOURIER TRANSFORM SPECTROMETER 
A scanning interferometer, containing no principal dispersive element, which first splits 
a beam into two or more components, then recombines these with a phase difference. The spec- 
trum is obtained by a Fourier transformation of the output of the interferometer. 
FRANCK-CONDON PRINCIPLE 
Classically, the Franck-Condon principle is the approximation that an electronic transi- 
tion is most likely to occur without changes in the positions of the nuclei in the molecular entity 
and its environment. The resulting state is called a Franck-Condon state, and the transition in- 
volved, a vertical transition. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2244 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
The quantum mechanical formulation of this principle is that the intensity of a vibronic 
transition is proportional to the square of the overlap integral between the vibrational wavefunc- 
tions of the two states that are involved in the transition. 
FRANCK-CONDON STATE 
See Franck-Condon principle. 
FREE ELECTRON LASER 
speeds close to the speed of light in the spatially periodic magnetic field produced by an array of 
magnets (the wiggler). The emitted wavelength, AL, is approximately given by ;10/<4@ ), with 
& being the wiggler period and E the kinetic energy of the electrons in MeV. 
Source of coherent radiation in which the active medium is an electron beam moving at 
See laser. 
FREE-RUNNING LASER 
It applies to a pulsed laser and means that the laser emission lasts as long as the pumping 
process is sufficient to sustain lasing conditions. Typical pulse durations are in the p-ms range, 
depending on the pumping source. When the operation mode of a pulsed laser is not specified as 
Q-switched, mode-locked, or anything else, it must be considered as free-running. 
FREOUENCY (v or o ) 
cles per u+t time. The SI unit is Hz = s-l. For the angular frequency, the symbol o (= 2nv) is 
used, with rad s-l as the SI unit. 
The number of waveperiods per unit time. The linear frequency, v, is the number of cy- 
FREOUENCY DOUBLING 
See harmonic frequency generation, nonlinear optical efsects. 
FWHM (ZuU Yidth at Half Maximum) 
See half-(band)width. 
GAS LASERS 
of a buffer gas (He for instance) and an active medium consisting of: 
CW or pulsed lasers in which the active medium is a gaseous mixture usually composed 
- neutral atoms (e. g., Ne, Cu, Au, etc.) or molecules (e.g., Nz, CO2, CO, 12, 
etc.), or 
- ionized atoms (e. g., Ar, JSr, Cd, etc.) 
These lasers are not tunable but most of them can emit several lines which in many cases may be 
selected from a single apparatus. 
be mode-locked. 
Pulsed lasers may be free-running, Q-switched, or mode-locked. Some CW lasers may 
See argon ion-, COz-, excimer, copper vapour-, helium-neon-, krypton-, nitrogen- 
lasers. 
GAUSSIAN BAND SHAPE 
A band shape described by the Gaussian function 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chernistry68.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2245 
In this equation, a-1 is proportional to the width of the band, and vo is the frequency of the band 
maximum. 
See also Lorentzian band shape. 
GEMINATE ION PAIR 
Ion pair, formed from a precursor that constitutes a single kinetic entity. 1.e. by electron 
transfer or ion transfer in an encounter complex (cf. collision complex) or by ionic dissociation 
of a single molecular entity. 
GEMINATE PAIR 
Pair of molecular (or atomic) species in close proximity in liquid solution with a solvent 
cage and resulting from reaction (e.g. bond scission, electron transfer, group transfer) of a pre- 
cursor that constitutes a single kinetic entity. 
GEMINATE RECOMBINATION 
transfer that restores the donor and acceptor species in their ground-state, from which the pair 
was created via electron transfer, or a bond formation or bond reorganization. 
Recombination reaction of a geminate pair. The reaction can either be a back electron 
GROUND STATE 
usually meant. 
The lowest energy state of a chemical entity. In photochemistry ground electronic state is 
HALF- WIDTH (of a band) 
The full width of a spectral band at a height equal to half of the height at the band 
maximum. Also known asfull width at halfmaximum (FWHM). The dimension of band width 
should be either inverse length (wavenumbers) or inverse time (frequencies) so that the values 
give an indication of the energies. Note the hyphen in half-width. Half bandwidth has the 
meaning of half-width at half maximum. 
HAMMOND-HERKSTROETER PLOT 
See energy transfer plot. 
HARMONIC FREOUENCY GENERATION 
of frequency v. In general, this effect is obtained through the interaction of laser light with a 
suitable optical medium with nonlinear polarizability. The case k = 2 is referred to as frequency 
doubling, k = 3 is frequency tripling, k = 4 is frequency quadrupling. Even higher integer val- 
ues of k are possible. 
Production of coherent radiation of frequency kv (k = 2,3,..) from coherent radiation 
HARPOON MECHANISM 
Reaction sequence (thermal or photoinduced) between neutral molecular or atomic enti- 
ties in which long-range electron transfer is followed by a considerable reduction of the distance 
between donor and acceptor sites as a result of the electrostatic attraction in the ion pair created. 
HEAVY ATOM EFFECT 
Enhancement of the rate of a spin-forbidden process by the presence of an atom of high 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2246 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
atomic number, which is either part of, or external to, the excited molecular entity. 
Mechanistically, it corresponds to a spin-orbit coupling enhancement produced by a heavy 
atom. 
HELIUM-CADMIUM LASER 
A CW laser emitting mainly at 325.0 and 441.6 nm from singly ionized cadmium. 
See gas lasers. 
HELIUM-NEON LASER 
A CW laser emitting mainly at 632.8, 1152.3, and 3391.3 nm from excited neutral Ne 
atoms. 
See gas lasers. 
HERKSTROETER PLOT 
See energy transfer plot. 
HETEROEXCIMER 
Same as exciplex. 
HIGH-PRESSURE MERCURY LAMP (Arc) 
which emits lines over a background continuum between about 200 and 1400 nm. 
Radiation source containing mercury at a pressure of ca. 8 MPa (ca. 80 bar) or higher 
See lamp. 
HOLE BURNING 
broader absorption or emission band. The holes are produced by the disappearance of 
resonantly excited molecules as a result of photophysical or photochemical processes. The 
resulting spectroscopic technique is site-selection spectroscopy. 
The photobleaching of a feature, normally a narrow range, within an inhomogeneous 
HOLE TRANSFER 
Charge migration process in which the majority carriers are positively charged. 
HOT GROUND STATE REACTION 
A hot state reaction of the ground electronic state. 
HOT O U A R Z  LAMP 
is not recommended. 
A term sometimes used to describe a high-pressure mercury lamp. The use of this term 
HOT STATE REACTION 
age vibrational, rotational or translational energy than they would at thermal equilibrium with the 
surrounding medium. 
HUND RULES 
degenerate orbitals of an atom those with greatest multiplicity have the lowest energy 
(multiplicity rule). 
A reaction proceeding from an ensemble of molecular entities possessing a higher aver- 
(1) Of the different multiplets resulting from different con$gurations of electrons in 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2247 
(2) Among multiplets having the same multiplicity, the lowest-energy one is that with the 
largest total orbital angular momentum (angular momentum rule) (valid if the total orbital angular 
momentum is a constant of motion). 
(3) In configurations containing shells less than half full of electrons, the term having the 
lowest total angular momentum J lies lowest in energy, whereas in those with shells more than 
half filled, the term having the largest value of J lies lowest (fine structure rule). 
first rule is applied to molecules. 
Hund rules apply if the "Russell-Saunders" coupling scheme is valid. Sometimes the 
HUSH MODEL 
See: Marcus-Hush relationship 
HYPERCHROMIC EFFECT 
molecular environment. 
Increase in the intensity of a spectral band due to substituents or interactions with the 
See also auxochrome. 
HYPERFINE 
Due to nuclear spin. 
HYPOCHROMIC EFFECT 
Opposite of hyperchromic effect. 
HYPSOCHROMIC SHIFT 
Shift of a spectral band to higherfrequency or shorter wavelength u F n  substitution or 
change in medium (e.g., solvent). It is informally referred to as a blue ship, and is opposite to 
bathochromic shif. 
IMAGING (Photoimaging) 
tion associated with an object using electromagnetic energy. 
The use of a photosensitive system for the capture, recording, and retrieval of informa- 
INCOHERENT RADIATION 
Not having the properties of the coherent radiation. 
INNER FILTER EFFECT 
ent decrease in emission quantum yield and/or distortion of bandshape as a result of 
reabsorption of emitted radiation. During a light irradiation experiment, absorption of incident 
radiation by a species other than the intended primary absorber is also described as an inner filter 
effect. 
This term is used in two different ways. In an emission experiment, it refers to an appar- 
INNER-SPHERE ELECTRON TRANSFER 
their respective coordination shells. The definition has more recently been extended to any situa- 
tion in which the interaction between the donor and acceptor centers in the transition state is sig- 
nificant (> 20 kT mol-1). 
Historically an electron transfer between two metal centers sharing a ligand or atom in 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68,2223-2286 

2248 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
Compare outer-sphere electron transfer 
INTEGRATING SPHERE 
with very high efficiency, light scattered or emitted from a sample contained in it or located out- 
side and near one of the ports. Small ports allow the entrance of light and access to a detector. 
A hollow sphere having a highly reflecting inside surface used as a device to collect, 
INTENDED CROSSING (of "Potential-Energy Surfaces") 
is an anthropomorphic term. 
Same as avoided crossing. The term 'intended should not be used in this context since it 
INTENSITY 
Traditional term for photon flux, jlwnce rate, irradiance or radiant power (radiant flux). 
In terms of an object exposed to radiation, the term should now be used only for aualitative de- 
scriptions. 
INTENSITY (I) (of a light source) 
Same as radiunt intensity. 
INTENSITY (of a spectral feature) 
Describes the magnitude of the particular feature in the spectrum. 
INTERFERENCE FILTER 
See filter. 
INTERFEROMETER 
See Fourier transform spectrometer. 
INTERNAL CONVERSION 
A photophysical process. Isoenergetic radiationless transition between two electronic 
states of the same multiplicity. When the transition results in a vibrationally excited molecular 
entity in the lower electronic state, this usually undergoes deactivation to its lowest vibrational 
level, provided the final state is not unstable to dissociation. 
INTERNAL TRANSMITTANCE 
See transmittance. 
INTERSYSTEM CROSSING 
states having different multiplicities. It often results in a vibrationally excited molecular entity in 
the lower electronic state, which then usually deactivates to its lowest vibrational level. 
A photophysical process. Isoenergetic radiationless transition between two electronic 
INTERVALENCE CHARGE TRANSFER 
oxidation state. Quite often such electron transfer reverses the oxidation states of the sites. The 
term is frequently extended to the case of metal-to-metal charge transfer between nonequivalent 
metal centers. 
Electron transfer (thermal or photoinduced) between two metal sites differing only in 
INTIMATE ION PAIR 
See contact ion pair 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2249 
INVERTED REGION (for electron transfer) 
transfer a region may occur in which the rate constants decrease as the exergonicity of the reac- 
tion increases. This region is often referred to as the inverted region and its presence is predicted 
by the theory developed for outer sphere electron transfer for the case -AGO > A in the Marcus 
equation, A being the reorganization energy. 
Note the similarity to the energy gap law for radiationless conversion of an excited state. 
In plots relating rate constants to changes in standard Gibbs energy (AGO) for electron 
Compare nonnal region. 
IRRA D IANCE (E) 
element of surface containing the point under consideration divided by the area of the element 
(WIdS, simplified expression: E = P/S when the radiant power is constant over the surface area 
considered). The SI unit is W m-2. Note that E = E,dA , where En is the spectral hadiance at 
wavelength A. For a parallel and perpendicularly idcident beam not scattered or reflected by the 
target or its surroundingsfluence rate (Eo) is an equivalent term. 
The radiantflu or radiantpower, P, of all wavelengths incident on an infinitesimal 
See also photon irradiance, spectral irradiance. 
ISOABSORPTION POINT 
The use of this term, equivalent to isosbestic point, is not recommended, 
ISOCLINIC POINT 
A wavelength, wavenumber, orfrequency at which the fist derivative of an absorption 
spectrum of a sample does not change upon a chemical reaction or physical change of the sam- 
ple. 
ISOEMISSIVE POINT 
Same as isostilbic point. 
ISOOPTOACOUS TIC POINT 
A wavelength, wavenumber, or frequency at which the total energy emitted by a sample 
as heat does not change upon a chemical reaction or physical change of the sample. Its position 
depends on the experimental conditions. The spectral differences between the isosbestic points 
and the isooptoacoustic points are the result of the nonlinear relationship between the molar ab- 
sorption coeficient and the photoacoustic signal. 
See photoacoustic spectroscopy. 
ISOSBESTIC POINT 
does not change during a chemical reaction or a physical change of the sample.The term derives 
from the Greek word for 'same attenuance'. A simple example occurs when one molecular 
entity is converted into another which has the same molar absorption coeficient at a given 
wavelength. As long as the sum of the concentrations of the two molecular entities in the 
solution is held constant, there will be no change in absorbance at this wavelength as the ratio of 
the two entities is varied. In general, A(A)l-'(= Cf'&,!ci)must 
remain constant during the 
reaction or physical change in order to observe an isosbestic point. The use of the term 
isoabsorption point is not recommended. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 
A wavelength, wavenumber, or frequency at which the total absorbance of a sample 

2250 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
ISOSTILBIC POINT 
chemical reaction or physical change. The term derives from the Greek word for 'same 
luminescence'. The terms isoemissive and isolampsic are sometimes used. 
The wavelength at which the intensity of emission of a sample does not change during a 
See isosbestic point. 
JABLONSKI DIAGRAM 
Originally, a diagram showing that thefluorescent state of a molecular entity is the low- 
est excited state from which the transition to the ground state is allowed, whereas the phospho- 
rescent state is a metastable state below the fluorescent state, which is reached by radiationless 
transition. In the most typical cases the fluorescent state is the lowest singlet excited state and the 
phosphorescent state the lowest triplet state, the ground state being a singlet. Presently, modi- 
fied Jablonski diagrams are frequently used and are actually state diagrams in which molecular 
electronic states, represented by horizontal lines displaced vertically to indicate relative energies, 
are grouped according to multiplicity into horizontally displaced columns. Excitation and re- 
laxation processes that interconvert states are indicated in the diagram by arrows. Radiative 
transitions are generally indicated with straight arrows (+), while radiationless transitions are 
generally indicated with wavy arrows (-1 
. 
JAHN- TELLER EFFECT 
For nonlinear molecular entities in a geometry described by a point symmetry group pos- 
sessing degenerate irreducible representations there always exists at least one nontotally sym- 
metric vibration that makes electronically degenerate states unstable at this geometry. The nuclei 
are displaced to new equilibrium positions of lower symmetry causing a splitting of the origi- 
nally degenerate states. This effect is due to the odd terms in the vibronic perturbation expan- 
sion. 
See also Renner-Teller effect. 
KAPTEIN-CLOSS RULES 
Rules used to predict the sign of CIDNP effects. 
KASHA RULE 
cited state of a given multiplicity. There are exceptions to this rule. 
Polyatomic molecular entities luminesce with appreciable yield only from the lowest ex- 
KASHA- VA VILOV RULE 
The quantum yield of luminescence is independent of the wavelength of exciting radia- 
tion. There are exceptions to this rule. 
KOOPMANS' THEOREM 
See photoelectron spectroscopy. 
KRYPTON ION LASER 
Principal emissions are at 530.9, 568.2, 647.1, and 752.5 nm. 
A CW or pulsed laser emitting lines from 337 to 859 nm from singly ionized krypton. 
See gas lasers. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2251 
LAMBERT LAW 
power ( P i ) .  This law holds only if Pi is small, scattering is negligible, and multiphoton 
processes, excited state populations, and photochemical reactions are negligible. 
The fraction of light absorbed by a system is independent of the incident spectral radiant 
See absorbance, Beer-Lambert law. 
LAMP 
A source of incoherent radiation. 
See high-pressure, medium-pressure, and low-pressure mercury lamp (arc), and an- 
timony -xenon, mercury-xenon, quartz-iodine, tungsten-halogen, resonance, and xenon lamp. 
LAPORTE RULE 
For monophotonic radiative transitions in centro-symmetric systems, the only nonvan- 
ishing electric-dipole transition moments are those which connect an even term (g) with an odd 
term (u). 
LASER 
A source of ultraviolet, visible, or infrared radiation which produces light -mplification 
by stimulated gmission of radiation from which the acronym is derived. The light emitted is co- 
herent except for superradiance emission. 
See argon ion, helium-cadmium, chemical, COz copper vapour, diode, dye, excimer, 
free electron, free-running, gas, helium-neon, krypton ion, mode-locked, neodymium, nitro- 
gen, Q-switched, solid state, and ruby laser. 
See also lasing. 
LASING 
The process of light -gnplification by stimulated cmission of radiation (laser). 
LATENT IMAGE 
ble to development. 
The primary result of radiation absorption in a photo-imaging system which is suscepti- 
LIFETIME (z) 
for a concentration of the entity to decrease to lle of its original value. Statistically, it represents 
the life expectation of the entity. It is equal to the reciprocal of the sum of the 
(pseudo)unimolecular rate constants of all processes which cause the decay. Lifetime is used 
sometimes for processes which are not first order. However, in such cases, the lifetime depends 
on the initial concentration of the entity, or of a quencher and therefore only an initial or a mean 
lifetime can be defined. In this case it should be called apparent lifetime, instead. Occasionally, 
the term half-life ( q ~ )  
is used, representing the time needed for the concentration of an entity to 
decrease to one half of its original value. 
The lifetime of a molecular entity which decays in a first-order process is the time needed 
LIGAND FIELD SPLITTING 
The removal of a degeneracy of atomic or molecular levels in a molecule or ion with a 
given symmetry induced by the attachment or removal of ligands to produce reduced symme- 
tries. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2252 
See crystal field splitting. 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
LIGAND TO LIGAND CHARGE TRANSFER (LLCT) TRANSITION 
electronic state in which considerable electron transfer between two ligands has occurred. 
An electronic transition of a metal complex that corresponds to excitation populating an 
LIGAND TO METAL CHARGE TRANSFER (LMCT) TRANSITION 
electronic state in which considerable electron transfer from a ligand to a metal center has oc- 
curred. 
An electronic transition in a metal complex that corresponds to excitation populating an 
See also metal to ligand charge traqfer transition 
LIGHT POLARIZATION 
rection of light propagation, it moves along a straight line if the light is linearly polarized, along 
a circle if it is circularly polarized, and along an ellipse if it is elliptically polarized. 
When the end point of the electric vector of a polarized light beam is viewed along the di- 
LIGHT SOURCE 
See lamp, laser. 
LORENTZIAN BAND SHAPE 
This band shape is described by the function 
F(v- vo) = ( I h )  y[(v- Vo)2+ 721-1, 
where vo is the mean band position, yis the half band width at half maximum, and F(v - VO) is 
the frequency distribution function. 
See also Gaussian band shape. 
LO W-PRESSURE MERCURY LAMP (Arc) 
A type of resonance lamp which contains mercury vapour at pressures of about 0.1 Pa 
(0.75 x 10-3 TOK; 1 Ton = 133.3 Pa). At 25 OC, such a lamp emits mainly at 253.7 and 
184.9 nm. Other terms used for such a lamp are germicidal, cold and hot cathode, Wood lamp. 
See lamp. 
LUMINESCENCE 
not in thermal equilibrium with its environment. 
Spontaneous emission of radiation from an electronically or vibrationally excited species 
See also bioluminescence, chemiluminescence, electro-generated chemiluminescence, 
fluorescence, phosphorescence, photoluminescence, radioluminescence, sono luminescence, 
thermoluminescence, triboluminescence. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2253 
LUMIPHORE (Luminophore) 
associated with a given emission band is approximately localized. (Analogous to chromophore 
for absorption spectra.) 
A part of a molecular entity (or atom or group of atoms) in which electronic excitation 
MARCUS EOUATION Cfor electron transfer) 
Equation proposed by R.A. Marcus to relate the rate of outer-sphere electron transfer 
with the thermodynamics of this process (see: R.A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys. 24,966-978 
(1956)). Essentially the rate constant within the encounter complex (or the rate constant of in- 
tramolecular transfer ) is given by the Eyring equation: 
ket = (&lkTnt )exp(-AG#LRT ) 
where k represents Boltzmann’s constant and IQ is the so called electronic transmission factor 
( GI- 1 for adiabatic and cc 1 for diabatic electron transfer ). It was shown by Marcus that for 
outer-sphere electron transfer the barrier height can then be expressed as: 
where AGO represents the standard Gibbs energy change accompanying the reaction and A the 
total reorganization energy. 
It should be noted that whereas the classical Marcus equation has been found to be quite ade- 
quate in the normul region, it is now generally accepted that in the inverted region a more elabo- 
rate formulation, taking into account explicitly the Franck-Condon factor due to quantum me- 
chanical vibration modes, should be employed 
MARCUS INVERTED REGION (for electron transfer) 
See inverted region 
MARCUS-HUSH RELATIONSHIP 
Relationship between the barrier (A@ ) to thermal electron transfer, the energy of a cor- 
responding optical charge transfer transition (mop 
), and the overall change in standard Gibbs 
energy accompanying thermal electron transfer (AGO ). Assuming a quadratic relation between 
the energy of the system and its distortions from equilibrium (harmonic oscillator model) the ex- 
pression obtained is: 
AG* = 
I4(AE0,, -AGO) 
The simplest form of this expression obtains for degenerate electron transfer (AGO ) in e.g. 
symmetrical mixed valence systems: 
Note that for this situation the Marcus equation reads A@ = 24. 
See Marcus equation 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2254 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
MEDIUM-PRESSURE MERCURY LAMP (Arc) 
hundred Wa (1 atm = 101.325 Wa). Emits mostly from 310 to 10oO nm with most intense lines 
at 300, 303, 313, 334,366,405,436,546, 
and 578 nm. 
Radiation source containing mercury vapour at pressures ranging from 100 to several 
See lamp. 
MERCURY-XENON LAMP (Arc) 
trical discharge in a mixture of mercury vapour and xenon under high pressure. 
An intense source of ultraviolet, visible, and near infrared radiation produced by an elec- 
See lamp. 
MERRY-GO-ROUND REACTOR (Turntable Reactor) 
expose each to equal amounts of radiation. 
An apparatus in which several samples are rotated around a radiation source in order to 
METAL TO LIGAND CHARGE TRANSFER (MLCT) TRANSITION 
An electronic transition of a metal complex that corresponds to excitation populating an 
electronic state in which considerable electron transfer from the metal to a ligand has occurred. 
Compare ligand to metal charge t r d e r  transition 
METAL TO METAL CHARGE TRANSFER (MMCT) TRANSITION 
tation populating an electronic state in which considerable electron transfer between two metal 
centres has occurred. 
An electronic transition of a bi- or poly-nuclear metal complex that corresponds to exci- 
See also intervalence charge trander. 
MLCT 
See metal to ligand charge transfer. 
MODE-LOCKED LASER 
A laser in which many resonant modes are coupled in phase, to yield a train of very 
short pulses (e. g. ps pulses). The coupling of the modes is obtained by modulation of the gain 
in the resonator, and can be active (electro-optic modulation of the losses or of the pump 
intensity), or passive (with a saturable absorber). 
See alsofree-running laser. 
MOLAR ABSORPTION COEFFICIENT. MOLAR DECADIC ABSORPTION 
COEFFICIENT 
Absorbance divided by the absorption pathlength, 1 and the concentration, c: 
E = [1/ (cl)]l~g(P; / PA) = A /  (cl) 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chernistry68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2255 
In common usage for 1 in cm and c in mol dm-3 or M, &results in dm3 mol-1 cm-1 or M-1 cm-1, 
which equals 0.1 m2 mol-1 (coherent SI units) = 103 cm2 mol-1 = cm2 mmol-l= 
dm3 cm-l mol-1. The term molar absorptivity for molar absorption coefficient should be 
avoided. 
See absorbance, absorption coeficient, Beer-Lambert law. 
MULTIPHOTON ABSORPTION 
See multiphoton process. 
See also biphotonic excitation. 
MULTIPHOTON PROCESS 
A process involving interaction of two or more photons with a molecular entity. 
See biphotonic process, two-photon process. 
MULTIPLICITY (Spin Multiplicity) 
The number of possible orientations, calculated as 2 s  + 1, of the spin angular momen- 
tum corresponding to a given total spin quantum number (9, 
for the same spatial electronic 
wavefunction. A state of singlet multiplicity has S = 0 and 2S+ 1 = 1. A doublet state has S = 
1/2,2S + 1 = 2, etc. Note that when S > L (the total orbital angular momentum quantum num- 
ber) there are only 2L + 1 orientations of total angular momentum possible. 
NON-ADIABATIC ELECTRON TRANSFER 
See diabatic electron transfer 
NORMAL REGION (for electron transfer) 
standard Gibbs energy for the reaction (AGO ), the region for which the rate constants increase 
with increasing exergonicity of the reaction is called the normal region. This region is predicted 
by the Marcus theory for outer-sphere electron transfer for the case of AGO I A in the Marcus 
equation. 
In plots relating rate constants for electron transfer, or quantities related to it, with the 
n -+ n* TRANSITION 
"nonbonding" (lone-pair) n orbital to an "antibonding" K orbital designated as K*. 
An electronic transition described approximately as promotion of an electron from a 
n-z* STATE 
An excited state related to the ground state by a n + K* transition. 
n -+ CT* TRANSITION 
"nonbonding" (lone-pair) n orbital to an "antibonding" (T orbital designated as (T*. Such transi- 
tions generally involve high transition energies and appear close to or mixed with Rydberg 
transitions. 
An electronic transition described approximately as promotion of an electron from a 
NATURAL LIFETIME 
Same as radiative lifetime. The use of this term is discouraged. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2256 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
NEODYMIUM LASER 
1.06 pm (the precise position depends on the matrix). The Nd+3 is present as a dopant in suit- 
able crystals (e.g., yttrium-aluminium garnet, YAG) or in suitable glasses (phosphate, silicate, 
etc.). 
A CW or pulsed laser emitting radiation from excited Nd+3 principally occumng around 
See solid state lasers. 
NEUTRAL- DENSITY FILTER 
See attenuance3lter. 
NITROGEN LASER 
species is molecular nitrogen. 
A source of pulsed semi-coherent superradiance mainly around 337 nm. The lasing 
See gas lasers. 
NON-ADIABATIC PHOTOREACTION 
Same as diabatic photoreaction. Use of double negative is discouraged. 
Compare adiabatic photoreaction. 
NON-LINEAR OPTICAL EFFECT 
An effect brought about by electromagnetic radiation the magnitude of which is not pro- 
portional to the irradiance. Non-linear optical effects of importance to photochemists are har- 
monic jj-equency generation, lasers, Raman shifting, upconversion, and others. 
NON-RA DIA TIVE DECA Y 
Disappearance of an excited species due to a radiationless transition. 
NON- VERTICAL ENERGY TRANSFER 
An energy transfer process which has a low Franck-Condon factor. 
See Franck-Condon principle. 
NORRISH TYPE I PHOTOREACTION 
a-Cleavage of an excited carbonyl compound leading to an acyl-alkyl radical pair (from 
an acyclic carbonyl compound) or an acyl-alkyl biradical (from a cyclic carbonyl compound) as 
aprimary photoproduct; e.g., 
NORRISH TYPE II PHOTOREACTION 
a 1 ,Cbiradical as a primary photoproduct; e.g., 
Intramolecular abstraction of a 'y-hydrogen by an excited carbonyl compound to produce 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry08.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2257 
ODMR (Qptically Detected Magnetic B e s o m e )  
A double resonance technique in which transitions between spin sublevels are detected 
by optical means. Usually these are sublevels of a triplet and the transitions are induced by mi- 
crowaves. For different types of optical detection (as explained) the following expressions are 
used: ADMR (absorption), DEDMR (delayed emission, nonspecified), DFDMR (delayed jluo- 
rescence), FDMR (fluorescence), PDMR (phosphorescence). If a reaction yield is monitored the 
expression RYDMR (reaction yield detected magnetic resonance) is used. 
OPTICAL DENSITY 
Synonymous with absorbance. The use of the term optical density is discouraged. 
OPTOACOUS TIC SPECTROSCO PY 
Same as photoacoustic spectroscopy. 
ORBITAL (Atomic or Molecular) 
A wavefunction which depends explicitly on the spatial coordinates of only one electron. 
OSCILLATOR STRENGTH (f Number) 
number of electrons taking part in a certain transition) adapted to wave mechanics. For a transi- 
tion between state i and statej, 
A measure of the intensity of a spectral band: a classical concept (giving the effective 
where m is the mass of the electron, c the velocity of light, v thefrequency, h the Planck con- 
stant, G the degeneracy of the final state. Rii is the transition moment calculated omitting e, the 
electron charge, in the integral; better called the transition length. Experimentally,fij is deter- 
mined by integration of the absorption band, using the equation 
fii = ( k  / n)j&(o)do, 
where E(o> is the molar absorption coefficient at wavenumber oand n the average refractive in- 
dex of the medium. k = 4.32 x 10-9 L-1 mol cm (for & in the common units L mol-1 cm-1); k = 
4.32 x 10-8 mol m-1 (for &in SI unit m*mol-l). The oscillator strength,fij, is a dimensionless 
quantity. 
See also transition (dipole) moment. 
OUTER-SPHERE ELECTRON TRANSFER 
Electron transfer between redox centers which do not share a common atom or group, 
i.e. , the interaction between the relevant electronic orbitals of the two centers in the transition 
state is weak (< 20 kT mol-1). 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2258 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
Compare inner-sphere electron transfer 
OXA -DI- Z-METHANE REARRANGEMENT 
A photochemical reaction of a P,y-unsaturated ketone to form a saturated a-cyclopropyl 
ketone. The rearrangement formally amounts to a 1 ,Zacyl shift and "bond formation" between 
the former a and y carbon atoms. 
a 
a 
See also di-nmethane rearrangement. 
PATERNO- B UCHI REACTION 
olefin yielding an oxetane. 
The photocycloaddition of an electronically excited carbonyl group to a ground state 
Abbreviation for photoelectrochemistry. 
PDMR 
See ODMR. 
PENETRATION DEPTH 
See depth of penetration. 
PES 
Abbreviation for photoelectron spectroscopy. 
PHONON 
tice. 
Elementary excitation in the quantum mechanical treatment of vibrations in a crystal lat- 
PHOSPHORESCENCE 
luminescence. In mechanistic photochemistry, the term designates luminescence involving 
change in spin multiplici@ typically from triplet to singlet or vice versa. The luminescence 
from a quartet state to a doublet state is also phosphorescence. 
From a phenomenological point of view, the term has been used to describe long-lived 
PHOTOACOUSTIC EFFECT 
chemical reaction. 
Generation of heat after absorption of radiation, due to radiationless deactivation or 
See also photoacoustic spectroscopy. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2222-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2259 
PHOTOACOUS TIC SPECTROSCO PY 
A spectroscopic technique based on the photoacoustic effect. A photoacoustic spectrum 
consists of a plot of the intensity of the acoustic signal detected by a microphone or a "piezoelec- 
tric" detector, against the excitation wavelength or another quantity related to the photon energy 
of the modulated excitation. 
See also isooptoacoustic point. 
PHOTOAFFINITY LABELLING 
with a biomolecule, is photoexcited in order to covalently attach a label to the biomolecule, 
usually via intermediates. 
A technique in which aphotochemically reactive molecular entity, specifically associated 
PHOTO-ASSISTED CATALYSIS 
Catalytic reaction involving production of a catalyst by absorption of light. 
See photocatalysis. 
PHOTO CA TAL YSIS 
Catalytic reaction involving light absorption by a catalyst or by a substrate. 
PHOTOCHEMICAL HOLE BURNING 
See hole burning. 
PHOTOCHEMICAL REACTION 
traviolet, visible, or infrared radiation. There are many ground state reactions which have photo- 
chemical counterparts. Among these are photoadditions, photocycloadditions, photoelimina- 
tions, photoenolizations, photo-Fries rearrangements, photoisomerizations, photooxidations, 
photoreductions, photosubstitutions, etc. 
This term is generally used to describe a chemical reaction caused by absorption of ul- 
PHOTOCHEMICAL SMOG 
air. 
Product of photochemical reactions caused by solar radiation and occumng in polluted 
PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
The branch of chemistry concerned with the chemical effects of light (far W to IR). 
See photochemical reaction. 
PHOTOCHROMISM 
photochemically and/or thermally reversible, that produces a spectral change, typically, but not 
necessarily, of visible color. 
A photoinduced transformation of a molecular structure (e.g. of a solution), 
PHOTOCONDUCTIVITY 
Increase in electrical conductivity resulting from photoproduction of charge carriers. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2260 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
PHOTOCROSS LINKING 
two different parts of one macromolecule. 
Photoinduced formation of a covalent linkage between two macromolecules or between 
PHOTO CURING 
polymeric substrate normally in the form of a film. 
Technical expressions for the photoinduced hardening of a monomeric, oligomeric or 
PHOTOCURRENT YIELD 
photovoltaic cell or a photoelectrochemical cell. 
The quantum ejjiciency of charge photo-generation between the two electrodes of a 
PHOTODEGRADATION 
usually in an oxidation process. This term is widely used in the destruction (oxidation) of 
pollutants by UV-based processes. 
The photochemical transformation of a molecule into lower molecular weight fragments, 
PHOTODETACHMENT (of electrons) 
Ejection of an electron from a negative ion upon photoexcitation. 
PHOTODYNAMIC EFFECT 
presence of light, photosensitizer and molecular oxygen. A sensitized photooxidation which in- 
volves molecular oxygen. 
A term used in photobiology to refer to photoinduced damage requiring the simultaneous 
PHOTOELECTRICAL EFFECT 
The ejection of an electron from a solid or a liquid by a photon. 
PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL CELL. 
absorption of light by one or more of the electrodes. Usually at least one of the electrodes is a 
semiconductor. 
An electrochemical cell in which current and a voltage are simultaneously produced upon 
PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL ETCHING 
Used in the photopatterning of semiconductor surfaces. 
The dissolution of a semiconductor in an electrolytic solution upon exposure to light. 
PHOTOELECTROCHEMISTRY 
A term applied to a hybrid field of chemistry employing techniques which combine pho- 
tochemical and electrochemical methods for the study of the oxidation-reduction chemistry of the 
ground or excited states of molecules or ions. In general, it is the chemistry resulting from the 
interaction of light with electrochemical systems. 
See also photoelectrochemical, photogalvanic, photovoltaic cell. 
PHOTOELECTRON SPECTROSCO PY 
the ionization of a substance by high energy monochromatic photons. A photoelectron spectrum 
is a plot of the number of electrons emitted versus their kinetic energy. The spectrum consists of 
A spectroscopic technique which measures the kinetic energy of electrons emitted upon 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2261 
bands due to transitions from the ground state of an atom or molecular entity to the ground and 
excited states of the corresponding radical cation. Approximate interpretations are usually based 
on “Koopmans‘ theorem” relating ionisation potentials to orbital energies. PES and UPS is the 
spectroscopy using vacuum ultraviolet sources, while ESCA (electron spectroscopy for 
- 
chemical analysis) and XPS use X-ray sources. 
PHOTOEXCITATION 
radiation. 
The production of an excited state by the absorption of ultraviolet, visible, or infrared 
PHOTO-FRIES REARRANGEMENT 
A photorearrangement of 0-acyl phenols or N-acyl anilines to give the [ Id]-rearranged 
product (as well as the [ 1,5] rearranged product). 
O,Xy 
hv 
~ 
(JXH 
0 
CR 
X = 0, NH, etc. 
II 0 
PHOTOGALVANIC CELL 
An electrochemical cell in which current or voltage changes result from photochemically 
generated changes in the relative concentrations of reactants in a solution phase oxidation-reduc- 
tion couple. 
Compare photovoltaic cell. 
PHOTOIMAGING 
See imaging. 
PHOTOINDUCED ELECTRON TRANSFER 
tion of electromagnetic radiation with matter. 
An electron transfer resulting from an electronic state produced by the resonant interac- 
PHOTOINDUCED POLYMERIZATION 
toexcitation. 
Polymerization of a monomer by a free radical or ionic chain reaction initiated by pho- 
See photoinitiation. 
PHOTOINITIATION 
polymerization. 
Photoproduction of a free radical or ion capable of initiating a chain reaction such as a 
See photoinduced polymerization. 
PHOTOIONIZA TION 
magnetic radiation, from a neutral or positively charged molecular entity. 
Ejection of an electron into a surrounding medium induced by the absorption of electro- 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68,2223-2286 

2262 
See also photodetachment. 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
PHOTOLUMINESCENC E 
Luminescence arising from photoexcitation. 
PHOTOLYSIS 
of a sample, although in the combinationflashphotolysis this usage is accepted. 
A light-induced bond cleavage. This term is often used incorrectly to describe irradiation 
PHOTON 
the product of the Planck constant (h) and the frequency of the radiation (v). 
The quantum of electromagnetic energy at a given frequency. This energy, E = hv, is 
See also quantum. 
PHOTON COUNTING 
counted by way of recording the electron emission events from a photosensitive layer 
(photocathode) and multiplied by means of a "dynode" arrangement (photomultiplier). This 
technique is used for two purposes: 
Also called single photon counting. The recording of sequential single photon pulses 
(1) the sensitive measurement of low levels of radiation and 
(2) the recording of emission decays. 
See time-correlated single photon counting. 
PHOTON EMITTANCE 
See photon exitance. 
PHOTON EXITANCE (Mp) 
The photon flow, aP, 
emitted by an element of the surface containing the source point 
under consideration divided by the area (S ) of that element. (d@+dS, simplified expression: 
Mp = 04s when the photon flow is constant over the surface area considered). The SI unit is 
s-1 m-2 . Alternatively, the term can be used with the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent 
einstein), the SI unit then being mol s-l m-2. Also called specific photon emission. Formerly 
called photon emittance. 
See spectral photon exitance. 
See also radiant exitance. 
PHOTON EXPOSURE (Hp) 
pression: Hp = EPt when the photon irradiance is constant over the time considered). The SI 
unit is m-2. Alternatively, the term can be used with the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent 
einstein), the SI unit then being mol m-2. For a parallel and perpendicularly incident beam not 
scattered or reflected by the target or its surroundings photonflwnce (q) 
is an equivalent 
term. 
The photon irradiance, Ep, integrated over the time of irradiation (jEpdt, simplified ex- 
See alsofluence, radiant exposure. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2263 
PHOTON FLOW ( QP) 
The number of photons (quanta, N) per unit time. (dN/dt , simplified expression: 
OP = N/t when the number of photons is constant over the time considered). The SI unit is s-1. 
Alternatively, the term can be used with the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent einstein), 
the SI unit then being mol s-1. 
See spectral photon flow. 
See also radiantpower. 
PHOTON FLUENCE ( H:) 
imaginary spherical target, divided by the cross-sectional area of this target. The photonfluence 
rate, Ei , integrated over the duration of the irradiation (I Ep" dt , simplified expression: Hi= 
Eit when Eiis constant over the time considered). Photons per unit area (quanta m-2). The SI 
unit is m-2. Alternatively, the term can be used with the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent 
einstein), the SI unit then being mol m-2. 
The integral of the amount of all photons (quanta) which traverse a small, transparent, 
See alsofluence. 
PHOTON FLUENCE RATE ( E ; )  
small, transparent, imaginary spherical volume element containing the point under consideration 
divided by the surface of that sphere, SK. &.Lpdu, simplified expression: EP= 4 @ ~ S K  
when 
the photon flow is constant over the solid angle considered). The SI unit is m-2 s-1. 
Alternatively, the term can be used with the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent einstein), 
the SI unit then being mol m-2 s-1. It reduces to photon irradiance for a parallel and normally 
incident beam not scattered or reflected by the target or its surroundings. 
The rate of photonjluence. Four times the ratio of the photon flow, QZp, incident on a 
See photon radiance. 
See alsofluence rate. 
PHOTON FLUX 
Same as photon irradhce. 
PHOTON IRRADIANCE (Ep) 
under consideration divided by the area (S) of that element (d@ddS, simplified expression: 
Ep = @dS when the photon flow is constant over the surface considered). The SI unit is m-2 s- 
1. Alternatively, the term can be used with the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent 
einstein), the SI unit then being mol m-2 s-l. For a parallel and perpendicularly incident beam 
not scattered or reflected by the target or its surroundings photonfluence rate ( E:) is an 
equivalent term. 
The photonflow, QP, jncident on an infinitesimal element of surface containing the point 
See spectral photon irradiance. 
See also irradiance. 
PHOTON RADIANCE (Lp) 
transparent element of surface in a given direction from the source divided by the orthogonally 
For a parallel beam it is the photonflow, 
leaving or passing through an infinitesimal 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2264 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
projected area of the element in a plane normal to the given direction of the beam, 6, [(d@+dS)l 
cos 6, simplified expression: Lp = @+(S cos 0) when the photon flow is constant over the 
surface area considered]. The SI unit is m-2 s-l. For a divergent beam propagating in an elemen- 
tary cone of the solid angle d o  containing the direction 6, the photon radiance is d2@,,/(do dS 
cos e), with SI unit m-2 s-* srl. Alternatively, the term can be used with the amount of photons 
(mol or its equivalent einstein), the SI unit then being mol m-2 s-1 and mol m-2 s-1 sr-1, respec- 
tively. 
See spectral photon radiance. 
See also radiance. 
PHOTOOXIDATION 
Oxidation reactions induced by light. Common processes are: 
(1) The loss of one or more electrons from a chemical species as a result of photoexcita- 
(2) The reaction of a substance with oxygen under the influence of light. When oxygen 
tion of that species; 
remains in the product this latter process is also called photooxygenation. Reactions in which 
neither the substrate nor the oxygen are electronically excited are sometimes called photoinitiated 
oxidations. 
Compare photoreduction. 
PHOTOOXYGENATION 
mechanisms: 
Incorporation of molecular oxygen into a molecular entity. There are three common 
Type I: the reaction of triplet molecular oxygen with radicals formed photochemically. 
Type II: the reaction of photochemically produced singlet molecular oxygen with 
The third mechanism proceeds by electron transfer producing superoxide anion as the re- 
molecular entities to give rise to oxygen containing molecular entities. 
active species. 
Compare photooxidation. 
PHOTOPHYSICAL PROCESSES 
lar entity through radiation and radiationless transitions. No chemical change results. 
Photoexcitation and subsequent events which lead from one to another state of a molecu- 
PHOTOPOLYMERIZA TION 
Polymerization processes requiring a photon for the propagation step. 
See also photoinduced polymerization. 
PHOTOREACTION 
See photochemical reaction. 
PHOTOREDUCTION 
Reduction reactions induced by light. Common processes are: 
(1) Addition of one or more electrons to aphotoexcited species; 
(2) The photochemical hydrogenation of a substance. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chernistry68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2265 
Reactions in which the substrate is not electronically excited are sometimes called pho- 
toinitiated reductions. 
Compare photooxidation. 
PHOTORESIST 
A photoimaging material, generally applied as a thin film, whose local solubility proper- 
ties can be altered photochemically. A subsequent development step produces an image which is 
useful for the fabrication of microelectronic devices (e.g.. integrated circuits). 
PHOTOSENSITIZATION 
lar entity as a result of initial absorption of radiation by another molecular entity called aphoto- 
sensitizer. In mechanistic photochemistry the term is limited to cases in which the photosensi- 
tizer is not consumed in the reaction. 
The process by which a photochemical or photophysical alteration occurs in one molecu- 
See energy transfer. 
PHOTOSENSITIZER 
See photosensitization. 
PHOTOSTATIONARY STATE 
A steady state reached by a reacting chemical system when light has been absorbed by at 
least one of the components. At this state the rates of formation and disappearance are equal for 
each of the transient molecular entities formed. 
PHO TOTHERMAL EFFECT 
heat. 
An effect produced by photoexcitation resulting partially or totally in the production of 
PHOTOTHERMOGRAPHY 
recording. 
A process utilizing both light and heat, simultaneously or sequentially, for image 
PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL 
A solid state device, usually a semiconductor, such as silicon, which absorbs photons 
with energies higher than or equal to the bandgap energy and simultaneously produces electric 
power. 
Compare photogalvanic cell. 
PIEZOLUMINESCENCE 
Luminescence observed when certain solids are subjected to a change in pressure, 
See triboluminescence. 
POLARIZATION 
See light polarization, transition polarization. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2206 

2266 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
POPULATION I N V E m  
N 
A situation in which a higher energy state is more populated than a lower energy state. 
PRECURSOR COMPLEX 
implies that this complex undergoes a reaction (e.g. electron transfer). 
May either indicate an encounter complex or a collision complex, but furthermore 
PREDISSOCIATION 
In an absorption spectrum of a molecular entity, the appearance of a diffuse band region within a 
series of sharp bands, is called predissociation, since irradiation withfrequencies within the dif- 
fuse region leads to effective dissociation. The energy of the band is smaller than that of the dis- 
sociation continuum of the bound state. 
Dissociation occurring by tunnelling from a "bound" to an "unbound" rovibronic state. 
PRIMARY (PHOT0)PROCESS 
See primary photochemical process. The term primary (photo)process for photophysical 
processes is apt to lead to inconsistencies, and its use is therefore discouraged. 
PRIMARY PHOTOCHEMICAL PROCESS (Primary Photoreaction} 
and yielding a primary photoproduct. 
Any elementary chemical process undergone by an electronically excited molecular entity 
See primary (ph0to)process. 
PRIMARY (PHOTO )PRODUCT 
process and which is chemically different from the reactant. 
The fist observable chemical entity which is produced in the primary photochemical 
See primary (photo}process. 
PUMP-PROBE TECHNIOUE 
Aflash photolysis technique in which the light beam (probe) used for spectral analysis is 
generated from a portion of the excitation (pump) beam. A time delay in the latter allows the ob- 
tention of kinetic data. 
z+ z* TRANSITION 
"bonding" K orbital to an "antibonding" K orbital designated as K*. 
An electronic transition described approximately as a promotion of an electron from a 
z-P 
STATE 
An excited state related to the ground state by a n + K* transition. 
z + o* TRANSITION 
An electronic transition described approximately as a promotion of an electron from a 
"bonding" K orbital to an "antibonding" d orbital designated as (T*. Such transitions generally 
involve high transition energies and appear close to or mixed with Rydberg transitions. 
Q-SWITCHED LASER 
A laser in which the state of the device introducing important losses in the resonant cav- 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2267 
ity and preventing lasing operation is suddenly switched to a state where the device introduces 
very low losses. This increases rapidly the Quality factor of the cavity, allowing the build-up of 
a short and very intense laser pulse. Typical pulse durations are in the ns range. The Q-switch- 
ing may be active (a rotating mirror or electro-optic device) or passive (a saturable absorber). 
See alsofree-running laser. 
QUANTUM (of radiation) 
ity. 
An elementary particle of electromagnetic energy in the sense of the wave-particle dual- 
See photon. 
QUANTUM COU NTER 
A medium emitting with a quantum yield independent of the excitation energy over a de- 
fined spectral range (e.g., concentrated rhodamine 6G solutions between 300 and 600 nm). 
Also used for devices producing an electrical signal proportional to the photonflux absorbed in 
a medium. 
OUANTUM EFFICIENCY 
quantum yield. 
See efficiency. For a primary photochemical process, quantum efficiency is identical to 
QUANTUM YIELD (@) 
tegral quantum yield is 
The number of defined events which occur per photon absorbed by the system. The in- 
number of events 
number of photons absorbed 
@= 
For a photochemical reaction, 
amount of reactant consumed or product formed 
amount of photons absorbed 
@ =  
The differential quantum yield is 
d[x] I dt 
n 
@=-, 
where d[x]ldt is the rate of change of a measurable quantity, and n the amount of photons (mol 
or its equivalent einstein) absorbed per unit time. @can be used for photophysical processes or 
photochemical reactions. 
See also efsicciency. 
QUARTET STATE 
A state having a total electron spin quantum number equal to 312. 
See multiplicity. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2268 
COM M l SSl ON ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
QUARTZ-IODINE LAMP 
A tungsten filament high-intensity incandescent lamp which contains iodine in a quartz 
envelope. Used primarily as a source of visible light. 
QUENCHER 
tity, either by energy trander, electron transfer, or by a chemical mechanism. 
A molecular entity that deactivates (quenches) an excited state of another molecular en- 
See quenching, Stem-Volmer kinetic relationships. 
QUENCHING 
The deactivation of an excited molecular entity intermolecularly by an external environ- 
mental influence (such as a quencher) or intramolecularly by a substituent through a nonradiative 
process. When the external environmental influence (quencher) interferes with the behavior of 
the excited state after its formation, the process is referred to as dynamic quenching. Common 
mechanisms include energy transfer, charge transfer, etc. When the environmental influence in- 
hibits the excited state formation the process is referred to as static quenching. 
See Stem-Volmer kinetic relationships. 
QUENCHING CO NSTANT 
See quencher, quenching, Stem- Volmer kinetic relationships. 
RADIANCE (L) 
through an infinitesimal element of surface in a given direction from the source divided by the 
orthogonally projected area of the element in a plane normal to the given direction of the beam, 
0, [(dP/dS)l cos 0, simplified expression: L = P/(S cos e) when the radiant power is constant 
over the surface area considered]. The SI unit is W m-2. Note that L = L,dA , where La is the 
spectral radiance at wavelength A. For a divergent beam propagating inhn elementary cone of 
the solid angle d o  containing the given direction 0, the radiance is d2P/(dodS cos e), with SI 
units w m-2 sr-1. 
For a parallel beam it is the radiant power, P, of all wavelengths leaving or passing 
See also photon flow, 
photon radiance, spectral radiance, spherical radiance. 
RADIANT EMITTANCE 
See radiant exitance. 
RADIANT ENERGY (Q) 
defined period of time (Q = lQhdA). It is the product of radiant power, P, and time, t: Q = P t 
when the radiant power is constant over the time considered. The SI unit is J. 
The total energy emitted, transferred or received as radiation of all wavelengths in a 
See also spectral r a d h t  power. 
RADIANT (ENERGY) FLUX (P,@) 
Although flux is generally used in the sense of the 'rate of transfer of fluid, particles or 
energy across a given surface', the radiant energy flux has been adopted by IUPAC as equiva- 
lent to radiant power, P. (P = Qi = dQ/dT, simplified expression: P = @ = e/t when the radiant 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2269 
energy, Q. is constant over the time considered). In photochemistry @is reserved for quantum 
yield. 
See also photon flow, photon radiance, radiant energy, spectral radiantflux. 
RADIANT EXITANCE (M) 
the source point under consideration divided by the surface area (5') of that element. (dP/dS, 
simplified expression: M = P/S when the radiant power is constant over the surface area 
considered). It is the integration of the radiant power leaving a source over the solid angle and 
over the whole wavelength range. The SI unit is W m-2. Note that M = jMAdA, where Ma is 
the spectral radiant exitance at wavelength A. Formerly called radiant edttance. Same as 
spherical radiant exitance. 
The radiant power, P, Gmitted at all wavelengths by an element of the surface containing 
See also photon exitance, spectral radiant exitance. 
RADIANT EXPOSURE (H) 
The irradiance, E, integrated over the time of irradiation (IEdt, simplified expression H = 
E t when the irradiance is constant over the time considered). The SI unit is J m-2. For a parallel 
and perpendicularly incident beam not scattered or reflected by the target or its surroundingsflu- 
ence (Ho) is an equivalent term. 
RADIANT INTENSITY ( I )  
The radiant power emitted in a given direction by a source or an element of the source in an 
infinitesimal cone containing the given direction divided by the solid angle of the cone (dP/do, 
simplified expression: I = P/S when the radiant power is constant over the surface area 
considered). The SI unit is W sr .Note that I = ZAdA , where Za is the spectral radiant 
Radiant (energy)flux or radiant power, P, at all wavelenghts per unit solid angle, o. 
intensity at wavelength A. 
I 
See also spectral radiant intensity. 
RADIANT POWER (P) 
The SI unit is J s-l = W. 
Same as radiant (energy)flux, @. Power emitted, transferred or received as radiation. 
See spectral radiant power. 
RADIATIONLESS DEACTIVATION (Decay) 
Loss of electronic excitation energy without photon emission or chemical change. 
See energy transfer, internal conversion, intersystem crossing. 
RADIATIONLESS TRANSITION 
A transition between two states of a system without photon emission or absorption. 
Compare radiative transition. 
RADIATIVE ENERGY TRANSFER 
Transfer of excitation energy by radiative deactivation of a donor molecular entity and re- 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68,2223-2286 

2270 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
absorption of the emitted light by an acceptor molecular entity. The probability of transfer is 
given approximately by 
where J is the spectral overlap integral, [A] is the concentration of the acceptor, and x is the 
specimen thickness. This type of energy transfer depends on the shape and size of the vessel 
utilized. Same as trivial energy tramfer. 
See also Dexter excitation transfer, energy tr&er, 
Forster excitation transfer. 
RADIATIVE LIFETIME (20) 
The lifetime of an excited molecular entity in the absence of radiationless transitions. It is 
the reciprocal of the first-order rate constant for the radiative step, or of the sum of these rate 
constants if there is more than one such step. The equivalent term, natural lifetime, is discour- 
aged. Approximate expressions exist relating % to the oscillator strength of the emitting transi- 
tion. 
RADIATIVE TRANSITION 
or absorbed as a photon. 
A transition between two states of a molecular entity, the energy difference being emitted 
See luminescence. 
Compare radiationless deactivation, radiationless transition. 
RADICAL PAIR 
Two radicals in close proximity, usually within a solvent "cage" or at least sufficiently 
close to allow spin correlation. The radicals may be formed simultaneously by some unimolecu- 
lar process, e.g., photochemical bond breaking, or they may have come together by diffusion. 
A radical pair is called geminate radical pair provided that each radical partner is a descendant of 
the same parental pair. 
RADIOLUMINESCENCE 
Luminescence arising from excitation by high energy particles or radiation. 
RADIOLYSB 
any chemical process brought about by high-energy radiation. The term has also been used to 
refer to the irradiation technique itself ("pulse radiolysis"). 
Bond cleavage induced by high-energy radiation. The term is also more loosely used for 
RED SHIFT 
Informal term for bathochromic shij?. 
RELATIVE SPECTRAL RESPONSIVITY (SL) 
See action spectrum. 
RELAXATION 
with its environment. 
Passage of an excited or otherwise perturbed system towards or into thermal equilibrium 
See radiationless deactivation, radiationless transition, radiative transition. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure end Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2271 
RENNER-TELLER EFFECT 
Splittings in the vibrational levels of molecular entities due to even terms in the vibronic 
perturbation expansion. This is generally a minor effect for nonlinear molecular entities com- 
pared to the Jahn-Teller efSect which is due to the odd terms. For linear molecular entities it is 
the only possible vibronic effect characteristic of degenerate electronic states. 
REORGANIZATION ENERGY (in electron transfer) 
Defined as the Gibbs energy dissipated when a system that has undergone "vertical" 
electron transfer (i.e. electron transfer obeying the Franck Condon principle ) relaxes to the 
equilibrium state for its new charge distribution. Commonly the total reorganization energy (A) 
is written as the sum of an inner contribution (&,, ) and an outer contribution (;lout) attributed to 
nuclear reorganizations of the redox partners and their environment (solvent) respectively. 
RESONANCE ABSORPTION TECHNIOUE 
tion of the radiation from a lamp emitting the characteristic resonance radiation of the observed 
species. 
The monitoring of atoms or radicals generated in the gas phase by observing the attenua- 
RESONANCE FLUORESCENCE 
Fluorescence from the primary excited atomic or molecular species at the wavelength of 
the exciting radiation (no relaxation within the excited manifold). 
This term is also used to designate the radiation emitted by an atom of the same wave- 
length as the longest one capable of exciting its fluorescence, e.g. 122.6 nm in the case of the 
hydrogen atom, and 253.7 nm in the case of the mercury atom. 
See also resonance line. 
RESONANCE FLUORESCENCE TECHNIOUE 
The monitoring of atoms or radicals generated in the gas phase by observing the 
intensity offluorescence (exitance) emitted by the species after excitation with radiation of the 
same wavelength. 
RESONANCE LAMP 
ments the lamp is filled either with pure vapour of the element or with a mixture of it and other 
gases. E.g., Hg (253.7 nm), Cd (228.8 and 643.8 nm), Na (589.0 nm), Zn (213.8, 330.0, 
334.5, and 636.2 nm), Kr (116.5 and 123.6 nm), Xe (129.6 and 147.0 nm). 
A lamp emitting resonance radiation of atoms and their ions. Depending on the require- 
RESONANCE LINE 
The longest wavelength capable of exciting fluorescence in an atom. 
See also resonance fluorescence. 
RESONANCE RADIATION 
Same as resonance fluorescence. 
ROVIBRONIC STATE 
a particular electronic state. 
A state corresponding to a particular rotational sublevel of a particular vibrational level of 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68,2223-2286 

2272 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
RUBY LASER 
(Cr+3) in aluminum oxide. 
A pulsed source of coherent radiation emitting mainly at 694.3 nm from chromium ions 
See laser, solid state laser. 
RYDBERG ORBITAL 
For an atom, an orbital with principal quantum number greater than that of any occupied 
orbital of the ground state. For a molecular entity, a molecular orbital which correlates with a 
Rydberg atomic orbital in an atomic fragment produced by dissociation. Typically, the extension 
of the Rydberg orbital is large compared to the size of the atom or molecular entity. 
RYDBERG TRANSITION 
"bonding" orbital to a Rydberg orbital. Spectral bands corresponding to Rydberg transitions ap- 
proximately fit the Rydberg formula 
An electronic transition described approximately as promotion of an electron from a 
o= 
I - W(n - A)2, 
where c i s  the wavenumber, I the ionization potential of the atom or molecular entity, n a prin- 
cipal quantum number, R the Rydberg constant, and A the quantum defect which differentiates 
between s, p, d, etc., orbitals. The notation used is, e.g., R + ns. 
RYDMR 
See ODMR. 
SACRIFICIAL ACCEPTOR 
cess and is not restored in a subsequent oxidation process but is destroyed by irreversible 
chemical conversion. 
Molecular entity that acts as the electron acceptor in a photoinduced electron transfer pro- 
SACRIFICIAL DONOR 
cess and is not restored in a subsequent reduction process but is destroyed by irreversible 
chemical conversion. 
Molecular entity that acts as the electron donor in a photoinduced electron transfer pro- 
SEMICONDUCTOR LASER 
See diode laser 
SCHENCK SENSITIZATION MECHANISM 
tation of a sensitizer which undergoes temporary covalent bond formation with the molecular 
entity. 
The mechanism of chemical transformation of one molecular entity caused by photoexci- 
SCINTILLA TORS 
They contain compounds (chromophores) which combine a highfluorescence quantum efl- 
ciency, a shortfluorescence lifetime, and a high solubility. These compounds are employed as 
solutes in aromatic liquids and polymers to form organic liquid and plastic scintillators, respec- 
tively. 
Materials used for the measurement of radioactivity, by recording the radiolwninescence. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2273 
SELECTION RULE 
the symmetry or spin of the wavefunctions of the initial and final states. 
A selection rule states whether a given transition is allowed or forbidden, on the basis of 
SELF-ABSORPTION 
Absorption of part of thefluorescence from excited molecular entities by molecular enti- 
ties of the same species in the ground state. The mechanism operating is a radiative energy trans- 
fer. 
SELF-OUENCHING 
Quenching of an excited atom or molecular entity by interaction with another atom or 
molecular entity of the same species in the ground state. 
See also Stem-Volmer kinetic relationships. 
SENSITIZER 
See photosensitizer. 
SENSITIZA TION 
See photosensitization. 
SIMULTANEOUS PAIR TRANS ITIONS 
Simultaneous electronic transitions in two coupled absorbers or emitters. Because of the 
coupling, transitions which are spin-forbidden in one of the centres might become spin allowed 
(spin flip). 
SINGLE PHOTON COUNTING 
See photon counting. 
SINGLE PHOTO N TIMING 
See time-correlated single photon counting. 
SINGLET MOLECULAR OXYGEN 
is a triplet 3 ~ ; ) .  The two metastable singlet states derived from the ground state configuration 
are I& 
and 'xi. 
The term singlet oxygen alone, without mention of the chemical species is discouraged 
since it can also refer to an oxygen atom in a ' S  or 1D excited state. While the oxygen atom 
ground state is a triplet 3P state, the lS and lD states are also derived from the ground state con- 
figuration. 
The oxygen molecule (dioxygen), 0 2 ,  in an excited singlet state. The ground state of 0 2  
SINGLET-SINGLET ANNIHILATION 
See annihilation, spin conservation rule. 
SINGLET-SINGLET ENERGY TRANSFER 
Transfer of excitation from an electronically excited donor in a singlet state to produce an 
See electron exchange excitation tr&er, 
Forster excitation transfer, radiative energy 
electronically excited acceptor in a singlet state. 
transfer. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

2274 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
SINGLET STATE 
A state having a total electron spin quantum number equal to 0. 
See multiplicity. 
SINGLET- TRIPLET ENERGY TRANSFER 
Transfer of excitation from an electronically excited donor in a singlet state to produce an 
electronically excited acceptor in a triplet state. 
See energy transfer, spin conservation rule. 
SOLAR CONVERSION EFFICIENCY 
and the solar irradiance, E., integrated between = 0 and = . 
The ratio of the Gibbs energy gain per unit time per m2 of surface exposed to the sun to 
SOLID STATE LASERS 
CW or pulsed lasers in which the active medium is a solid matrix (crystal or glass) 
doped with an ion (e. g., Nd3+, Cr3+, Er3+). The emitted wavelength depends on the active ion, 
the selected optical transition, and the matrix. Some of these lasers are tunable within a very 
broad range (e. g., from 700 to lo00 nm for Ti3+ doped sapphire). 
be mode-locked. 
Pulsed lasers may be free-running, Q-switched, or mode-locked. Some CW lasers may 
SOLVATOCHROMISM 
companying a change in solvent polarity. 
The (pronounced) change in position of an electronic absorption or emission band, ac- 
SOLVENT-SEPARATED ION PAIR 
Pair of ions separated by at least one solvent molecule. During electron-transfer pro- 
cesses between neutral molecular species, solvent separated ion pairs may form either directly or 
via solvation-induced separation of contact ion pairs. 
See also contact ion pair. 
SOLVENT SHIFT 
with its solvent environment. 
A shift in the frequency of a spectral band of a chemical species arising from interaction 
See bathochromic shtft, hypsochromic shij?, solvatochromism 
SONOLUMINESCENCE 
Luminescence induced by sound waves. 
See triboluminescence. 
SPECIFIC PHOTON EMISSION 
Same as photon exitance. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,222S2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2275 
SPECTRAL (PHOTON) EFFECTIVENESS 
toresponse, Ay, per unit time (Ay/At). The effectiveness spectrum is directly proportional to the 
conversion spectrum of the sensory pigment, if spectral attenuance is negligible. 
The reciprocal of the photonpuence rate, g, at wavelength A, causing identical pho- 
SPECTRAL ZRRADIANCE ( E d  
commonly used unit is w m-2 nm-1. 
Zrradhce, E, at wavelength A per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is W m-3, but a 
SPECTRAL OV- 
measures the overlap of the emission spectrum of the excited donor, D, and the absorption 
spectrum of the ground state acceptor, A. f 'D is the measured normalized emission of D, 
f 'D = f D(cF) / 6 f D( o)dofD(o) is the photon exitance of the donor at wavenumber 6, and 
&A(@ is the decadic molar absorption coeficient of A at wavenumber o. 
In the context of Forster excitation transfer J is given by: 
In the context of radiative energy transfer, it is the integral, J = f b( o)~, 
(o)do, which 
In the context of Dexter excitation transfer J is given by 
- 
= I f  D ( o)EA ( 
0 
In this case f D  and &A, the emission spectrum of donor and absorption spectrum of ac- 
ceptor, respectively, are both normalized to unity, so that the rate constant for energy transfer, 
km , is independent of the oscillator strength of both transitions (contrast to Forster mecha- 
nism). For the units of J, see the list of symbols. 
See energy transfer. 
SPECTRAL PHOTON EXITANCE (Mpd 
The photon exitance, Mp, at wavelength il per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is 
s-1 m-3, but a commonly used unit is is s-l m-2 nm-l. Alternatively, the term can be used with 
the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent einstein), the SI unit then being mol s-1 m-3 and the 
common unit mol s-1 m-2 nm-1. 
SPECTRAL PHOTON FLOW ( Qpd 
The photon flow, Qp, at wavelength h per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is 
s-l m-l, but a commonly used unit is s-l nm-l. Alternatively, the term can be used with the 
amount of photons (mol or its equivalent einstein), the SI unit then being mol s-1 m-1 and the 
common unit mol s-1 nm-1. 
SPECTRAL PHOTON FLUX (PHOTON IRRtWIANCEl (EPA) 
The photon irradiance, Ep, at wavelength il per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is 
s-1 m-3, but a commonly used unit is s-1 m-2 nm-l. Alternatively, the term can be used with the 
amount of photons (mol or its equivalent einstein), the SI unit then being mol s-l m-3 and the 
common unit mol s-1 m-2 nm-1. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2276 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
SPECTRAL PHOTON RADIANCE (Lph) 
s-1 m-3 srl, but a commonly used unit is s-l m-2 sr1 nm-1. Alternatively, the term can be used 
with the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent einsfein), the SI unit then being 
mol s-1 m-3 sr1 and the common unit mol s-1 m-2 sr1 nm-l. 
The photon radiance, $, at wavelength A per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is 
SPECTRAL RADIANCE ( L d  
but a commonly used unit is W m-2 s r l  nm-l. 
The radiance, L, at wavelength A per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is W m-3 srl, 
SPECTRAL RADIANT EXITANCE (Md 
W m-3, but a commonly used unit is W m-2 nm-l. 
The radiant exitance, M, 
at wavelength A per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is 
SPECTRAL RADIANT FLUX 
Same as spectral radiant power. 
SPECTRAL RADIANT INTENSITY (Id 
W m-1 sr-1, but a commonly used unit is W nm-I sr I. 
The radiant intensity, I, at wavelength A per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is 
SPECTRAL RADIANT POWER ( P d  
but a commonly used unit is W nm-l. 
The radiant power at wavelength A per unit wavelength interval. The SI unit is W m-l, 
SPECTRAL RESPONSIVITY 
toimaging device, or biological unit divided by the spectral irradiance s(A) = dy(A)/dE(A), 
simplified expression: s(A) = Y I E  a, where Ya is the magnitude of the output signal for 
irradiation at wavelength A and En is the spectral irradiance of parallel and perpendicular incident 
beam at the same wavelength. 
The spectral output quantity of a system such as a photomultiplier, diode array, pho- 
SPECTRAL SENSITIVITY 
See spectral responsivity. 
SPECTRAL SENSITIZATION 
tain wavelength region. 
The process of increasing the spectral responsivity of a (photoimging) system in a cer- 
SPHERICAL RADIANCE 
source over the solid angle and over the whole wavelength range. The SI unit is W m-2. 
Same as radiant exifance, M. It is the integration of the radiant power, P, leaving a 
SPHERICAL RADIANT EXPOSURE 
Same asfluenee. 
SPIN-ALL0 WED ELECTRONIC TRANSITION 
An electronic transition which does not involve a change in the spin part of the wave- 
function. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2277 
SPIN CONSERVATION RULE (Wigner rule) 
Upon transfer of electronic energy between an excited atom or molecular entity and other 
atom or molecular entity in its ground or excited state, the overall spin angular momentum of the 
system, a vector quantity, should not change. 
See annihilation. 
SPIN FLIP 
See simultaneous pair transitions. 
SPIN-ORBIT COU PLING 
The interaction of the electron spin magnetic moment with the magnetic moment due to 
the orbital motion of the electron. One consequence of spin-orbit coupling is the mixing of zero- 
order states of different multiplicity. This effect may result in fine structure called spin-orbit 
splitting. 
SPIN-ORBIT SPLITTING 
Removal of state degeneracy by spin-orbit coupling. 
SPIN-SPIN COW PLING 
It causes, e.g. the multiplet pattern in nuclear magnetic resonance spectra. 
The interaction between the spin magnetic moments of different electrons and/or nuclei. 
SPONTANEOUS EMISSION 
tromagnetic field. The transition between states, n and m, is governed by the Einstein coefficient 
of spontaneous emission, Anm. 
That mode of emission which occurs even in the absence of a perturbing external elec- 
See also stimulated emission. 
STARK EFFECT 
Splitting or shifts of spectral lines in an electric field. Also called electrochromic effect. 
STA TE CROSSING 
See avoided crossing, surface crossing. 
STATE DIAGRAM 
See Jablonski diagram. 
STATIC OU ENCHING 
See quenching. 
STERN- VOLMER KINETIC RELATIONSHIPS 
This term applies broadly to variations of quantum yields of photophysical processes 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2278 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
(e.g., fluorescence or phosphorescence) or photochemical reaction (usually reaction quantum 
yield) with the concentration of a given reagent which may be a substrate or a quencher. In the 
simplest case, a plot of @/@ (or @/M for emission) vs. concentration of quencher, [Q], is lin- 
ear, obeying the equation 
@/@or @/M = 1 + K,, [Q]. 
(1) 
Inequation (1) K,, is referred to as the Stern-Volmer constant. Equation (1) applies 
when a quencher inhibits either a photochemical reaction or a photophysical process by a single 
reaction. @ and A@ are the quantum yield and emission intensity (radiant exitance), 
respectively, in the absence of the quencher Q, while @ and Mare the same quantities in the 
presence of the different concentrations of Q. In the case of dynamic quenching the constant K,, 
is the product of the true quenching constant kq and the excited sfafe lifefine, $, in the absence 
of quencher. kq is the bimolecular reaction rate constant for the elementary reaction of the excited 
state with the particular quencher Q. Equation (1) can therefore be replaced by the expression (2) 
@/@ or @/M = 1 + kq$ [Q]. 
(2) 
When an excited state undergoes a bimolecular reaction with rate constant 4 to form a 
product, a double-reciprocal relationship is observed according to the equation 
1/Op = (1 + l/k, 6’ 
[S]) [l/(A.B)] 
(3) 
where @,, 
is the quantum eficiency of product formation, A the efficiency of forming the reac- 
tive excited state, B the fraction of reactions of the excited state with substrate S which leads to 
product, and [S] is the concentration of reactive ground-state substrate. The interceptlslope ratio 
gives k *$. If [ S ]  = [Q], and if a photophysical process is monitored, plots of equations (2) and 
(3) should provide independent determinations of the product-forming rate constant k r‘ When 
the lifetime of an excited state is observed as a function of the concentration of S or Q, a linear 
relationship should be observed according to the equation 
where $ is the lifetime of the excited state in the absence of the quencher Q. 
See also self-quenching. 
STIMULATED EMISSION 
field. The transition between states, n and m, is governed by the Einstein coefficient of stimu- 
lated emission, B,,,,,. CIDNP emission and lasing action are examples of processes which re- 
quire stimulated emission. 
That part of the emission which is induced by a resonant perturbing electromagnetic 
See also spontaneous emission. 
STOKES SHIFT 
maxima (or the band origin) of the absorption and luminescence arising from the same electronic 
The difference (usually infrequency units) between the spectral positions of the band 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,22212286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2279 
transition. Generally, the luminescence occurring at a longer wavelength than the absorption is 
stronger than the opposite. The latter may be called an anti-Stokes shift. 
SUPEREXCHANGE INTERACTION 
molecules or ions. 
Electronic interaction between two molecular entities mediated by one or more different 
SUPERRADIANCE 
It is distinguished from true laser action by its lack of coherence. The term supe~adian~e 
is fre- 
quently used in laser technology. 
Spontaneous emission amplified by a single pass through a population inverted medium. 
See coherent radiation. 
SURFACE CROSSING 
two states of different symmetry may be equal at certain geometrical parameters. At this point 
(unidimensional representation), line or surface (more than one dimension), the two potential- 
energy surfaces are said tq cross one another. 
In a diagram of electronic energy versus molecular geometry, the electronic energies of 
See avoided crossing. 
(T ?, (T* TRANSITION 
"bonding" (J orbital to an "antibonding" (J orbital designated as (J*. Such transitions generally 
involve high transition energies, and appear close to or mixed with Rydberg transitions. 
An electronic transition described approximately as promotion of an electron from a 
THERMAL LENSING 
A technique that determines the alteration in the refractive index of a medium as a result 
of the temperature rise in the path of a laser beam absorbed by the medium. The lens produced 
(usually divergent) causes a change (usually a decrease) in the irradiance measured along the 
laser beam axis. 
See also photothermal effects. 
THERMALLY ACTIVATED DELAYED FLUORESCENCE 
See delayed fluorescence. 
THERMOCHROMISM 
solution), thermally reversible, that produces a spectral change, typically, but not necessarily, of 
visible color. 
A thermally induced transformation of a molecular structure or of a system (e.g. of a 
THERMOLUMINESCENCE 
released as a result of an increase in temperature. 
Luminescence arising from a reaction between species trapped in a rigid matrix and 
See luminescence. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

2280 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
THROUGH-BOND ELECTRON TRANSFER 
Intramolecular electron transfer for which the relevant electronic interaction between the 
donor and acceptor sites is mediated by through-bond interaction, i.e. via the covalent bonds in- 
terconnecting these sites, as opposed to through-space interaction. 
See also through-space electron transfer 
THROUGH-SPACE ELECTRON TRANSFER 
Electron transfer for which the relevant electronic interaction between the donor and ac- 
ceptor sites is mediated either by direct orbital overlap or by superexchange interaction via inter- 
vening molecular entities not covalently bound to the donor or acceptor sites. 
See also through-bond electron transfer 
TICT EMISSION 
Electronic emission emanating from a TICT state. 
See also TICT state, twisted internal charge transfer. 
TICT STATE 
sponsible for strongly Stokes-shifted fluorescence from certain aromatics, particularly in polar 
medium. 
The acronym derives from Twisted Lnternal Charge Transfer State, proposed to be re- 
See Twisted Internal Charge Transfer 
TIGHT ION PAIR 
See: contact ion pair 
TIME-CORRELATED SINGLE PHOTON COUNTING 
spect to a periodic event, e.g. a flash from a repetitive nanosecond lamp or a CWoperated laser 
(mode-locked laser). The essential part is a time-to-amplitude-converter (TAC) which 
transforms the arrival time between a start and a stop pulse into a voltage. Sometimes called 
single photon timing. 
A technique for the measurement of the time histogram of a sequence of photons with re- 
TIME-RESOLVED MICRO WAVE CONDUCTIVITY (TRMC) 
separation by time-resolved measurement of the changes in microwave absorption resulting 
from the production and decay of charged and dipolar molecular entities. 
Technique allowing the quantitative and qualitative detection of radiation-induced charge 
TIME-RESOLVED SPECTROSCO PY 
with a light pulse (or other perturbation) of appropriately short duration. 
The recording of spectra at a series of time intervals after the excitation of the system 
TRANSIENT SPECTROSCO PY 
lar entities or reactive intermediates) generated by a pulse of short duration. 
A technique for the spectroscopic observation of transient species (excited-state molecu- 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chernistry68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
See also flash photolysis, time-resolved spectroscopy. 
2281 
TRANSITION (DIPOLE) MOMENT (M,,,) 
An oscillating electric or magnetic moment can be induced in an atom or molecular entity by an 
electromagnetic wave. Its interaction with the electromagnetic field is resonant if the frequency 
of the latter corresponds to the energy difference between the initial and final states of a transi- 
tion (M = hv). The amplitude of this moment is referred to as the transition moment. It can be 
calculated from an integral taken over the product of the wavefunctions of the initiaj (m) and fi- 
nal (n) states of a spectral transition and the appropriate dipole moment operator ( D)of the elec- 
tromagnetic radiation. 
M,,, = e j Y : C Z , ? ,  Y,,,dr 
where the summation is over the coordinates of all charged particles (electrons and nuclei). Its 
sign is arbitrary, its direction in the molecular framework defines the direction of transition po- 
larization, and its square determines the strength of the transition. If e is omitted one obtains 
R,, in the sense used in oscillator strength. The SI unit of the transition dipole moment is C m. 
The common unit is debye (D). 
TRANSITION POLARIZATION 
The direction of the transition moment in the molecular framework. 
TRANSMITTANCE (T) 
The ratio of the transmitted spectral radiantpower ( P A  to that incident on the sample 
( P i > :  
Internal transmittance refers to energy loss by absorption, whereas the total transmittance is that 
due to absorption, reflection, scatter, etc. 
See absorbance, attenuunce, Beer-Lumbert law. 
TRIBOLUMINESCENCE 
be produced, for example, when solids are crushed. 
Luminescence resulting from the rubbing together of the surface of certain solids. It can 
See sonoluminescenee. 
TRIPLET STATE 
A state having a total electron spin quantum number of 1. 
See multiplicity. 
TRIPLET- TRIPLET ANNIHILATION 
Two atoms or molecular entities both in a triplet state often interact (usually upon colli- 
sion) to produce one atom or molecular entity in an excited singlet state and another in its ground 
singlet state. This is often, but not always, followed by delayedfluorescence. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 08,2223-2286 

2282 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
See also annihilation, spin conservation rule. 
TRIPLET-TRIPLET ENERGY TRANSFER 
Energy transfer from an electronically excited triplet donor to produce an electronically 
excited acceptor in its triplet state. 
See spin conservation rule. 
TRIPLET-TRIPLET TRANSITIONS 
Electronic transitions in which both the initial and final states are triplet states. 
TRIVIAL ENERGY TRANSFE R 
Same as radiative energy transfer. 
TUNGSTEN-HALOGEN LAMP 
See quartz-iodine lamp. Other halogens may fill the lamp. 
TUNNELLING 
The passage of a particle through a potentialenergy barrier the height of which is larger 
than the energy of that particle. This effect is important for some processes involving the trans- 
fer of electrons and light atoms, particularly H atoms. 
TURNTABLE REACTOR 
See merry-go-round reactor. 
TWISTED INTERNAL CHARGE TRANSFER (TICT) 
single bond leading to an excited state (a TZCT state) in which the chromophores interact only 
weakly because of a considerable twist about the interconnecting bond. 
Intramolecular, photoinduced charge transfer between chromophores interconnected by a 
TWO-PHOTON EXCITATION 
Excitation resulting from successive or simultaneous absorption of two photons by an 
atom or molecular entity. This term is used for successive absorption & if some of the excita- 
tion energy of the first photon remains in the atom or molecular entity before absorption of the 
second photon. The simultaneous two-photon absorption can also be called biphotonic excita- 
tion. 
See two-photon process. 
TWO-PHOTON PROCESS 
A photophysical or photochemical event triggered by a two-photon excitation. 
UPCONVERSION 
A nonlinear optical eflect in which light frequency is increased. 
ups 
See photoelectron spectroscopy. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2283 
UV DOSE 
A dose of ultraviolet (UV) radiation. 
UV STABILIZER 
A substance added to a sample to prevent photodeterioration by ultraviolet (W) light. 
See photochemical reaction. 
VALENCE BAND 
by electrons at 0 K. 
The highest energy continuum of energy levels in a semiconductor that is fully occupied 
See bandgap, conduction band, Fermi level. 
VA VILO V RULE 
See Kasha-Vavilov rule. 
VERTICAL TRANSITION 
See Franck-Condon principle. 
VIBRATIONAL REDISTRIBUTION 
statistical distribution of their populations, characterized by the "vibrational temperature". For 
large molecules, this process does not require collisions. 
Intramolecular redistribution of energy among the vibrational modes usually giving a 
VIBRATIONAL RELAXATION 
the environment caused by collisions. The molecular entity relaxes into vibrational equilibrium 
with its environment. 
The loss of vibrational excitation energy by a molecular entity through energy transfer to 
See relawtion. 
VIBRONIC COW PLING 
Interaction between electronic and vibrational motions in a molecular entity. 
See Jahn-Teller and Renner-Teller effects. 
VIBRONIC TRANSITIONS 
numbers of a molecular entity, as opposed to purely electronic or purely vibrational transition. 
The transition occurs between two states, just as in a purely electronic transition, but involves a 
change in both electronic and vibrational energy. 
A transition which involves a change in both the electronic and vibrational quantum 
WAVELENGTH (a) 
The distance, measured along the line of propagation, between two corresponding points 
on adjacent waves. The wavelength depends on the medium in which the wave propagates. 
WAVENUMBER (6, F) 
direction of propagation. The SI unit is m-l, but a commonly used unit is cm-l. 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry08.2223-2286 
The reciprocal of the wavelength, 5 or the number of waves per unit length along the 

2284 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
WELLER CORRELATION 
ground-state in n-hexane as a function of the electrochemical one electron oxidation and reduc- 
tion potentials measured in a polar solvent for the donor (D) and the acceptor (A) involved (see 
e.g.: A. Weller, in "The Exciplex", Gordon and Ware eds., Academic Press Inc., N. Y., 1975): 
Empirical correlation for the energy of full charge-transfer exciplexes relative to the 
AH(D+A-)hexme = @(D/D+) - @(MA-) + (0.15 f 0.10) eV 
WIGNER RULE 
See spin conservation rule. 
WOOD HORN 
A mechanical device that acts by absorption as a perfect photon trap. 
WOOD LAMP 
A term used to describe a low-pressure mercury arc. 
See lamp. 
XENON LAMP 
discharge in xenon under high pressure. 
An intense source of ultraviolet, visible and near-infrared light produced by electrical 
See also antimony-xenon, lamp, mercury-xenon lamp (arc). 
xps 
See photoelectron spectroscopy. 
YAG 
See neodymium laser. 
ZEEMAN EFFECT 
The splitting or shift of spectral lines due to the presence of external magnetic field. 
ZERO FIELD SPLITTING 
The separation of multiplet sublevels in the absence of external magnetic field. 
ZERO-ZERO (0-0) 
ABSORPTION OR EMISSION 
A purely electronic transition occurring between the lowest vibrational levels of two 
electronic states. 
SYMBOLS DEFINED IN THE GLOSSARY 
Common units are mentioned if different from SI units 
~ 
~~ 
Symbol 
Name 
units 
SI 
common 
A 
Absorbance 
___ a 
a 
Absorption coefficient 
m-1 
(decadic) 
cm-1 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chernistry68.2223-2286 

Glossary of terms used in photochemistry 
2285 
Absorption coefficient 
(Napierian) 
Absorption cross 
section 
Attenuance 
Bandgap energy 
Critical quenching 
radius 
Depth of penetration 
(of light, Napierian) 
Efficiency (of a step) 
Fermi level 
Fluence 
Fluence rate 
Frequency (linear) 
Frequency (angular) 
Irradiance 
Lifetime 
Molar (decadic) 
absorption coefficient 
Oscillator strength 
Photon exitance, 
Specific photon emission 
Photon exposure 
Photon flowc 
Photon fluence 
Photon fluence rate 
Photon irradiance, 
Photon flux 
Photon radiance 
m-1 
cm-1 
m2 
nm2, pm2 
m 
m 
J mol-1 
J m-2 
Hz 
rad s-1 
W m-2 
S 
m2 mol- 1 
s-1 m-2 
s-1 mol m-2 
m-2 
mol m-2 
S- 1 
mol s-ld 
m-2 
mol m-2 
m-2 s-1 
mol m-2 s-ld 
m-2 s-1 
mol m-2 s-ld 
s-1 m-2 sx-1 
mol s-1 m-2 srld 
nm 
ms, ms, ns, ps 
cm-1 dm3 mol-1 or 
cm2 mmol-1 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 68,2223-2286 

Quantum yield 
Radiance 
Radiant energy 
Radiant exitance, 
Spherical radiance 
Radiant exposure 
Radiant intensity 
Radiant power 
Radiative lifetime 
Spectral irradiance 
Spectral overlap 
integral(F0rster) 
(Dexter) 
Spectral photon 
exitance 
Spectral photon flowc 
Spectral photon flux, 
Photon irradiance 
Spectral photon 
radiance 
Spectral radiance 
Spectral radiant 
exitance 
Spectral radiant 
intensity 
COMMISSION ON PHOTOCHEMISTRY 
J m-2 
W sr1 
W 
S 
W m-3 
m6 mol- 1 
rnz mol-1 
s-1 m-3 
mol s-1 m-3d 
s-1 m-1 
mol-1 s-1 ,-ld 
s-1 m-3 
mol s-1 m-3d 
s-1 m-3 sr1 
mol s-1m-3srld 
W m-3 sr1 
W m-3 
W sr1 m-1 
Spectral radiant power, 
W m-1 
Spectral responsivity 
___ a 
Transition dipole moment 
C m  
Transmittance 
--- a 
Wavelength 
m 
Wavenumber 
m-1 
a Dimensionless quantity. 
Recognized unit. 
In photochemistry 0 is reserved for quantum yield. 
d If amount of photons is used. 
ms, ms, ns, ps 
w m-2 nm-1 
dm3 cm3 mol-1 
dm3 cm-1 mol-1 
W sr1 nm-1 
W nm-' 
Db 
nm 
cm-1 
0 1996 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry68.2223-2286