© 1994 Nature Publishing Group
SCIENTIFIC CORRESPONDENCE 
Purification of nanotubes 
SIR -
Carbon nanotubes can now be 
produced in large quantities, either as 
multi-shell1•2 or as single-layer3.4 tubes. 
But together with the growth of the tubu-
lar material, other carbonaceous mat-
erials are always formed and their pre-
sence has hampered the accurate charac-
terization of the bulk properties of nano-
tubes. We report here a simple method to 
purify nanotubes which should be useful 
for further studies. 
In the case of the arc-discharge process 
yielding multi-shelled nanotubesl. , nano-
particles are the main by-product and 
compose about one-third of the sample in 
the best preparations. To purify the nano-
tubes and eliminate the nanoparticles, we 
first tried various standard techniques 
such as filtration, chromatography and 
centrifugation of sonicated solutions of 
the raw material. Although these techni-
ques will separate to some extent large 
clumps of material from individual nano-
tubes and nanoparticles, they did not 
separate the nanotubes from the nano-
particles. 
Recently, we and others reported that 
nanotubes could be opened and thinned 
through oxidation5·6 . The significant dif-
ference in the oxidation reaction rates of 
the carbon nanotube caps as compared to 
the cylindrical surfaces results in the pro-
duction of open nanotubes during oxida-
tion. The enhanced reactivity of the caps 
results either from the strong local curva-
ture and imperfect geometry and/or from 
the presence of five-membered carbon 
rings as discussed previousll. The struc-
ture (number of pentagons in a closed 
shell) and geometry of nanoparticles very 
much resembles that of the tube caps, 
although they are comparatively larger7. 
So nanoparticles should be similarly con-
sumed by oxidation although at a slower 
rate than the highly curved (strained) 
nanotube tips. 
Once the nanotube caps are destroyed, 
the tubes essentially consist of a perfect 
hexagonal carbon network and the reac-
tion proceeds slowly. But in the case of 
nanoparticles all the concentric layers are 
similar in structure and etching of the 
layers should occur at a relatively constant 
rate. 
The above suggests that at some point 
during oxidation, all the caps and nano-
particles should be destroyed, leaving 
only open nanometre-sized cylinders of 
carbon in the sample. We observe just this 
if the oxidation is allowed to proceed for 
long durations. The figure shows the 
dramatic improvement in the nano-
tube-to-nanoparticle ratio after this treat-
ment. Note that to remove all the nano-
particles from the samples, one has to 
oxidize more than 99% of the material. 
When only about 95% of the sample is 
oxidized, just 10-20% of the remaining 
Low-magnification transmission electron microscope images of a, a typical nanotube sample 
produced by the carbon-arc method; and b, a purified open carbon nanotube sample. The 
purified sample was prepared as follows. Ground raw nanotube sample taken from the inner core 
of the carbon arc deposit1 ·2 was placed in an oven and then the temperature was raised to 750 oc 
(in air or oxygen). After about 30 min, about 1% remained with the quality shown in b. In most 
tubes, the length/diameter ratios exceed 100, although there are some open cylinders with the 
ratio as small as 20. 
NATURE · VOL 367 · 10 FEBRUARY 1994 
material comprises pure nanotubes, but 
this still represents a substantial reduction 
in the proportion of nanoparticles in the 
total sample. In samples oxidized to a 
degree of less than 85%, no change in the 
ratio of nanoparticles is apparent relative 
to the original sample. 
In the final purified sample, all the 
tubes are open and the partly removed 
outer layers contain reactive edges5. The 
average aspect ratios have decreased but 
not changed significantly (most are >100 
but there are a few open cylinders with 
aspect ratios >20) as the tubes were 
originally much longer than the particles. 
Why more than 99% of the weight has to 
be burnt off to produce pure nanotubes is 
not clear. One possible explanation is that 
the oxidative species are not able to reach 
evenly all the parts of the sample because 
the ground-up nanotubes and nann-
particles are intertwined. We have tested 
this possibility by better dispersal of the 
samples before oxidation and by using 
flowing oxygen during the reaction. But so 
far we have not noticed any significant 
change. A more likely reason why the 
sample must be consumed significantly 
for purification is that the difference in 
reactivity between the nanotubes and 
the nanoparticles is small. 
Whether this technique can be used to 
purify single-shell nanotubes, where soot 
and catalysts are major by-products3.4, 
will depend very much on their relative 
reactivity. The single-shell nanotubes, 
having diameters approaching those of 
fullerenes, might be much more reactive, 
as is the case with C00 (refs 6,8). 
T. W. Ebbesen 
P.M. Ajayant 
H. Hlura 
K. Tanigaki 
Fundamental Research Laboratory, 
NEG Corporation, 34 Miyukigaoka, 
Tsukuba 305, Japan 
tPresent address: Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, 
University of Paris-Sud. Bat. 510. Orsay 91405. France. 
1. Ebbesen. T. W. &Ajayan. P.M. Nature358. 220-222 
(1992). 
2. Ebbesen. T. W. eta!. Chem. phys. Lett. 209.83-90 
(1993). 
3. lijima. S. & lchihashi. T. Nature363. 603-605 
(1993). 
4. Bethune. D. S. eta!. Nature363. 605-607 (1993). 
5. Tsang. S.C .. Harris. P. F. J. &Green. M. L. H. Nature362. 
520-522 (1993). 
6. Ajayan. P.M. eta!. Nature362. 522-525 
(1993). 
7. Ajayan. P. M .. lchihashi. T. & lijima. S. Chem. phys. Lett. 
202.384-388 (1993). 
8. Pang. L. S. K .. Saxby. J.D. & Chatfield. S. P.J. phys. Chem 
97.6941-42 (1993). 
Scientific Correspondence 
Scientific Correspondence is intended to 
provide a forum in which readers may 
raise points of a scientific character. 
They need not arise out of anything 
published in Nature. In any case, priority 
will be given to letters of fewer than 500 
words and five references. 
519