COMMENT
ENVIRONMENT Worse than 
Deepwater would be an 
Arctic oil spill p.162
BIOTECHNOLOGY Biohackers 
take biology into the 
garage p.167
ECOLOGY Libyan revolution 
might protect bluefin tuna, 
with trawlers grounded p.169
OBITUARY Simon van der Meer, 
who enabled the discovery of 
W and Z particles p.170
outcome of the five-year European Nitrogen 
Assessment, which has drawn together 200 
experts, including ourselves, to understand 
the sources, processes and impacts of nitro­
gen as a basis to inform policy. 
Excess reactive nitrogen threatens the 
quality of air, soil and water. It affects 
ecosystems and biodiversity, and alters the 
balance of greenhouse gases. Existing cli­
mate and air-pollution policies that aim to 
reduce energy consumption and fossil-fuel 
burning, such as the Gothenburg Protocol, 
are helping to cap nitrogen emissions 
Too much of a good thing
Curbing nitrogen emissions is a central environmental challenge for the 
twenty-first century, argue Mark Sutton and his colleagues.
A
n analysis published this week 
calculates that excess nitrogen in 
the environment costs the Euro­
pean Union (EU) between €70 billion 
(US$100 billion) and €320 billion per year1. 
It is the first time that an economic value has 
been placed on the threats posed by nitrogen 
pollution, including contributions to climate 
change and biodiversity loss. To put that into 
perspective, this cost is more than double the 
value that nitrogen fertilizers are estimated 
to add to European farm income.
This economic valuation is just one 
SUMMARY
● Nitrogen pollution costs the European 
Union between €70 billion and €320 
billion per year.
● Policies should address farming, meat 
consumption, use of human sewage and 
fossil-fuel burning.
● The Gothenburg Protocol is an 
opportunity to further reduce emissions.
● A global inter-convention nitrogen 
protocol is needed.
Applying liquid manure more precisely than this would be cleaner, reduce odour and emit less ammonia.
J. EVESON/FLPA/PHOTOLIBRARY
1 4  A P R I L  2 0 1 1  |  V O L  4 7 2  |  N A T U R E  |  1 5 9
© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

from transport and industry. Together 
with policies on nitrates in drinking water 
and reductions in cattle numbers, these have 
led to a modest drop in European nitrogen 
pollution since the 1980s. 
But existing policies are piecemeal, and 
there has been little attempt to integrate 
the effects of the different nitrogen threats. 
Nitrogen pollution poses an even greater 
challenge than carbon, because the element 
has many complex effects as it cascades 
through many chemical forms. There is a 
need for new policies that cover these con­
cerns and encourage changes in farming, 
diet and even what we do with human waste.
THE DAMAGE DONE
Nitrogen can be divided into two classes. 
Unreactive nitrogen (N2) makes up 78% 
of Earth’s atmosphere. Reactive nitrogen 
includes every other form of the element, 
including nitrogen oxides (NOx), nitrous 
oxide (N2O), ammonia (NH3) and nitrate 
(NO3). All biological systems need reac­
tive nitrogen, but historically it has been in 
short supply. Until the end of the nineteenth 
century, the main agricultural source was 
fixation of N2 by symbiotic bacteria in leg­
umes planted for that purpose, combined 
with careful recycling of the limited amount 
of nitrogen in manure. 
By 1900, there was a worrying shortage of 
reactive nitrogen, as fertilizers were needed 
to feed a growing population and nitrogen-
based explosives were wanted for weaponry. 
The solution came in 1908 with the Haber–
Bosch process, allowing cheap ammonia to 
be made from N2 and energy on an industrial 
scale. This process was so successful that, 
within a century, human production of reac­
tive nitrogen had more than doubled global 
rates of nitrogen fixation. Without it, around 
half of humanity would not be alive2. As an 
intentional strategy to address the world’s 
shortage of reactive nitrogen, the Haber–
Bosch process is arguably the greatest single 
experiment ever made in geo­engineering.
But the mass production of reactive 
nitrogen has come with costs. Nitrogen-
based explosives killed 100 million people 
in armed conflicts during the twentieth 
century2. Their use in mining has opened 
up fossil-fuel reserves, the burning of which 
has released carbon dioxide and more reac­
tive nitrogen into the atmosphere. About 
half of the nitrogen added to farm fields in 
Europe ends up as pollution, or is wasted by 
denitrification back to N2
 (ref. 1).
In water, excess reactive nitrogen causes 
algal blooms that can kill fish, and nitrate 
in drinking water can harm human health, 
increasing the risk of bowel cancer. About 
80% of European fresh waters exceed a 
threshold for high risk to biodiversity of 
1.5 milligrams of nitrogen per litre. Com­
bined with the effects of too much phos­
phorus, the resulting proliferation of algae in 
coastal areas gives new meaning to the idea 
of ‘green’ bathing.
In the air, reactive nitrogen adds to par­
ticulate matter and ground-level ozone, 
created when nitrogen oxides react with 
organic compounds, causing respiratory 
and cardiovascular disease. The effects of 
airborne particles take six months off the life 
expectancy of at least half of all Europeans. 
In forests, ammonia pollution encourages 
the growth of algal slime that can suffocate 
tree-living plants such as mosses and lichens 
(see picture) to such an extent that it would 
be easy to think this were natural in agricul­
tural areas of northwest Europe. The assess­
ment estimates that NH3 and NOx emissions 
have reduced forest biodiversity by more 
than 10% over two-thirds of Europe. 
Nitrogen deposition also threatens the abil­
ity of peatlands to store carbon by killing the 
bog-building moss Sphagnum.
Importantly, we now have a first estimate 
of how the different climate warming and 
cooling effects of nitrogen add up across 
Europe. Nitrogen tends to warm the planet 
by forming N2O and ground-level ozone, 
both of which are powerful greenhouse gases. 
At the same time, nitrogen emissions tend to 
cool the planet: by reducing the atmospheric 
life-time of methane; by forming particulate 
matter that reflects light back into space; and 
by acting as a fertilizer, increasing the growth 
of forests. Overall, the assessment finds that 
these effects tend to balance out. Efforts need 
to focus on reducing the warming effects, 
while recognizing that the adverse effects of 
particulate matter and nitrogen deposition 
on human health and biodiversity may more 
than outweigh their climate benefits. 
COSTS AND BENEFITS
It is hard to tally up all the costs and benefits 
of reactive-nitrogen production. The direct 
and indirect effects influence everything 
from population growth and energy produc­
tion to the manufacture of nitrogen-based 
products such as nylon, polyurethane and 
hydrazine rocket fuel. 
The benefits of nitrogen can be seen from 
its largest use: agricultural fertilizers. Manu­
factured fertilizer adds 11 million tonnes of 
reactive nitrogen annually to fields in the EU. 
This produces a direct benefit to European 
farmers, in terms of crops grown, of €20 bil­
lion to €80 billion per year, when the long-
term benefits are included1. On top of that, 
biological fixation and recycled sources of 
nitrogen — including plant residues, animal 
manures and atmospheric deposition — add 
17 million tonnes, giving a total direct ben­
efit of €25 billion to €130 billion, even before 
value is added during the food-supply chain. 
But half of the nitrogen in fertilizers and 
manures is lost to the surrounding envi­
ronment. In economic terms, this amounts 
to a loss of potential 
benefits to farmers of 
€13 billion to €65 bil­
lion per year. On these 
grounds alone, there is 
a strong case for using 
nitrogen more effi­
ciently. 
These numbers, 
however, are much 
lower than the esti­
mated cost of the damage from reactive-
nitrogen emissions. The assessment gauges 
these costs by looking at society’s readiness 
to pay for longer and healthier life, for nature 
restoration, or for climate stability. The grand 
total of €70 billion to €320 billion per year is 
equivalent to 1–4% of the average disposable 
per capita income of European citizens. 
Of the total cost of damage from reactive-
nitrogen emissions, 75% comes from the 
effects of NOx and NH3 on human health 
and ecosystems. The effect of N2O emis­
sions on climate warming accounts for only 
around 5%. Although N2O has recently been 
heralded as the main cause of stratospheric 
ozone depletion3, this represents only 1% of 
the damage costs. Climate change and ozone 
“The effects 
of airborne 
particles take 
six months 
off the life 
expectancy 
of at least 
half of all 
Europeans.”
1 6 0  |  N A T U R E  |  V O L  4 7 2  |  1 4  A P R I L  2 0 1 1
COMMENT
Human health
Cost to European Union (billion €)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Ecosystems
Climate
Agriculture
Fossil-fuel burning
Industry
Sewage
Other
WATER
RUNOFF
N20
NH3
NO
Reactive nitrogen 
runoﬀ in water
NH3 released to air
NOx released to air
N2O released to air
x
DAMAGE COSTS OF NITROGEN POLLUTION
MAIN NITROGEN SOURCES
Agriculture and fossil-fuel burning load the environment 
with reactive nitrogen, aﬀecting water, soils and air.
© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

thinning are important, but the threats to 
health and ecosystems are an even stronger 
argument for taking action on nitrogen.
Clearly nitrogen is one of the major envi­
ronmental challenges of the twenty-first 
century. 
Although better combustion and energy 
technologies can reduce nitrogen emissions 
from fossil fuels, further efforts must curb 
the increasing use of energy and transport. 
We also need a radical rethink of sewage sys­
tems, which waste reactive nitrogen, using 
yet more energy to turn it back to 
N2. The technology is available to 
recycle sewage nitrogen, but it needs 
development4. Such a major change 
is certainly possible, as shown by 
nineteenth-century Paris, where 
more than half of the nitrogen in 
sewage was recycled, including in 
the manufacture of ammonium 
sulphate fertilizer on an industrial 
scale1. One approach would be to 
use sewage to make biogas, leaving 
a useful residue rich in nitrogen and 
phosphorus.
But the largest challenges are to 
manage nitrogen better in agricul­
ture and to moderate Europeans’ 
consumption of animal protein. 
Amazingly, livestock consume 
around 85% of the 14 million tonnes 
of nitrogen in crops harvested or imported 
into the EU; only 15% is used to feed humans 
directly1. European nitrogen use is therefore 
not primarily an issue of food security, but 
one of  luxury consumption. If Europeans 
obtained all their protein from plants, only 
30% of the crops grown currently would be 
needed, reducing nitrogen fertilizer inputs 
and the associated pollution by 70%.
DRIVING CHANGE
The average EU citizen now eats much more 
meat and milk than is needed for a healthy 
diet1. Reducing meat and dairy consump­
tion could therefore benefit the health of 
many people and help protect the environ­
ment at the same time. Recognizing this, 
in 2009 some of the authors of this piece 
developed the ‘Barsac Declaration’, through 
which many of the assessment authors have 
committed to fostering the ‘demitarian 
diet’5, making it easier to choose half-por­
tions of meat. Such initiatives have a huge 
potential to change dietary aspirations in a 
world where per-capita meat consumption 
is rapidly increasing.
There are many ways to reduce nitrogen 
losses from agriculture. Improving the pro­
duction potential of crops and livestock can 
help, and covers on manure storage tanks 
and low-emission techniques for spread­
ing fertilizers and manure are essential. At 
present, most liquid manure is spread with 
a crude spraying method that dirties the 
crop and maximizes NH3 emissions. Apply­
ing manure in bands cuts emissions by 
30–60%, decreases odours, leaves the crop 
clean and reduces the farmer’s fertilizer bill. 
By improving nitrogen-use efficiency in this 
way, measures to decrease NH3 emissions 
turn out to be central to reducing overall 
N2O emissions.
Experience shows that regulatory or 
financial drivers are needed to ensure such 
technologies are used. Changes need not be 
uneconomic. The Netherlands and Den­
mark have required low-emission tech­
niques for more than a decade, yet livestock 
farming in these countries remains among 
the most competitive in Europe.
At present, no single United Nations (UN) 
convention can handle all the threats posed 
by reactive nitrogen. An inter-convention 
protocol is needed. This could, for exam­
ple, link the UN Framework Convention 
on Climate Change and the Convention on 
Biological Diversity with the Air and Water 
Conventions of the United Nations Eco­
nomic Commission for Europe (UNECE).
In the short term, there are already oppor­
tunities on the table for Europe. The UNECE 
Air Convention — also known as the Con­
vention on Long-range Transboundary Air 
Pollution — is currently renegotiating its 
Gothenburg Protocol, which caps national 
emissions of air pollutants. Like the update of 
the Kyoto Protocol, this is happening slowly: 
talks began in 2007. Further reductions in 
NOx emissions will surely be agreed. The big 
question is how far the parties will commit to 
reducing NH3 emissions.
The air convention’s Task Force on Reac­
tive Nitrogen has recently shown that pre­
venting NH3 release is much cheaper than 
previously estimated, especially once the 
fertilizer savings are considered. Scaling 
up these numbers shows that cutting NH3 
emissions across the EU by 20% would 
cost less than €500 million per year6. On 
the basis of total NH3 damage costs of €15 
billion to €105 billion per year (see graphic), 
the environmental benefits of mitigation are 
therefore around 20 (range of 6 to 42) times 
the costs, even without counting the other 
benefits this gives in reducing N2O emis­
sions and nitrogen runoff. 
Given the political sensitivity of the agri­
cultural sector, however, the case for reducing 
NH3 emissions is likely to depend on demon­
strating the broader impact of better nitrogen 
management. This challenges the scientific 
community to continue quantifying the 
benefits of nitrogen mitigation. Now 
that a first effort has been made for 
Europe, a global assessment of nitro­
gen is urgently needed, as called for 
by the International Nitrogen Initia­
tive in their 2010 Delhi Declaration7.
At the same time, the policy 
community must develop more 
joined-up approaches. If parties 
to the Gothenburg Protocol, for 
example, are to agree serious com­
mitments to reducing NH3 and NOx 
emissions, they will need a motiva­
tion that can only come from seeing 
the bigger picture. They should be 
jumping at the chance that reducing 
NH3 and NOx emissions could help 
meet their existing N2O and NO3 
commitments. Such ideas point to 
a vision for better nitrogen man­
agement where air, soil, water, climate and 
biodiversity can all benefit. ■
Mark A. Sutton of the Centre for Ecology 
and Hydrology, Edinburgh EH26 0QB, UK, 
and Oene Oenema of Alterra, Wageningen 
6700 AA, the Netherlands, are the co-chairs 
of the UNECE Task Force on Reactive 
Nitrogen. They are contributors to the 
European Nitrogen Assessment with Jan 
Willem Erisman at the Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam, 1081 HV Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands; Adrian Leip at the European 
Commission-Joint Research Centre, Institute 
for Environment and Sustainability, I-21027 
Ispra, Italy; Hans van Grinsven at the PBL 
Netherlands Environmental Assessment 
Agency, 3720 AH Bilthoven; and Wilfried 
Winiwarter at the International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis, A-2361 
Laxenburg, Austria.
e-mail: ms@ceh.ac.uk
1.	 Sutton, M. A. et al. (eds) The European Nitrogen 
Assessment (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011); 
available at http://go.nature.com/5n9lsq 
2.	 Erisman, J. W. et al. Nature Geosci. 1, 
636–639 (2008).
3.	 Ravishankara, A. R. et al. Science 326, 
123–125 (2009).
4.	 Magid, J. et al. Ecol. Eng. 28, 44–54 (2006). 
5.	 The Barsac Declaration: Environmental 
Sustainability and the Demitarian Diet (2009); 
available at http://go.nature.com/f5e1lh 
6.	 Amann, M. et al. CIAM report 1/2011 (IIASA, 
Austria, 2011).
7.	 Delhi Declaration (2010); available at http://
go.nature.com/mauqpr
Ammonia can kill tree-living plants (left), replacing them with algal slime.
I. LEITH; M. SUTTON
1 4  A P R I L  2 0 1 1  |  V O L  4 7 2  |  N A T U R E  |  1 6 1
COMMENT
© 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved