2265
An overview of the synthetic routes to the best
selling drugs containing 6-membered heterocycles
Marcus Baumann* and Ian R. Baxendale*
Review
Open Access
Address:
Department of Chemistry, University of Durham, South Road,
Durham, DH1 3LE, UK
Email:
Marcus Baumann* - marcus.baumann@durham.ac.uk;
Ian R. Baxendale* - i.r.baxendale@durham.ac.uk
* Corresponding author
Keywords:
heterocycles; medicinal chemistry; pharmaceuticals; six-membered
rings; synthesis
Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
doi:10.3762/bjoc.9.265
Received: 12 July 2013
Accepted: 09 October 2013
Published: 30 October 2013
Associate Editor: P. R. Hanson
© 2013 Baumann and Baxendale; licensee Beilstein-Institut.
License and terms: see end of document.
Abstract
This review which is the second in this series summarises the most common synthetic routes as applied to the preparation of many
modern pharmaceutical compounds categorised as containing a six-membered heterocyclic ring. The reported examples are based
on the top retailing drug molecules combining synthetic information from both scientific journals and the wider patent literature. It
is hoped that this compilation, in combination with the previously published review on five-membered rings, will form a compre-
hensive foundation and reference source for individuals interested in medicinal, synthetic and preparative chemistry.
2265
Introduction
The commonality of six-membered heterocyclic rings in phar-
maceutical actives inevitably generates a substantial body of
reference material. Consequently this review has been broadly
partitioned into six consecutive sections categorised by analo-
gous groupings of heterocyclic rings.
The subsections are:
1. Pyridines and quinolines
2. Dihydropyridines and piperidines
3. Pyrimidines and quinazolines
4. Pyrazines and piperazines
5. Pyridazines and perhydropyridazines
6. Triazines and polyazacyclic systems
Synthetic chemistry can rightfully be considered a prerequisite
of our modern society [1]. This discipline supplies many valu-
able resources to our world enabling us to produce the quan-
tities of fertilizer needed to feed a growing world’s population
and produce the numerous customised materials without which
society could not progress. Importantly, synthetic chemistry has
had a huge impact on public health where treatments for almost
any disease can be developed resulting in a steady increase in
life expectancy [2]. All these advances have been enabled by
the curiosity of generations of scientists constantly searching for
new solutions to the assembly of functional molecules. Impor-
tantly this has required the development of several new methods
for selectively forming new chemical bonds allowing the gener-
ation of more complex drug candidates [3,4]. However, one

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2266
Table 1: Chemical structures of the heterocyclic compounds discussed in this review.
Name
Label
Structure
Heterocycle
Scheme
Nicotinic acid
1.12
pyridine
2,3
Niacin
1.18
pyridine
3
Clarinex
1.22
pyridine
5
Rabeprazole
1.33
pyridine
6,7
Pantoprazole
1.34
pyridine
6,7
Lansoprazole
1.35
pyridine
6,7
downside of drug research lies in the immense cost of the devel-
opment and regulatory processing of a new drug with only
15–20 years of commercial protection being granted to recoup
this initial outlay [5]. As a result pharmaceutical companies are
constantly seeking ways to accelerate this development process
by adopting new synthetic methodologies and enabling tech-
nologies in order to profitably generate new medications for
both old and new targets [6]. By reviewing the synthetic routes
used to construct modern pharmaceutical structures a general
overview of the most valuable synthetic techniques and best
working practices as used by the pharmaceutical industry can be
constructed.
Previously, we reviewed the most common synthetic routes to
the top-marketed drugs containing heterocyclic five-membered
rings, which allowed us to analyse how medicinal chemists
have addressed challenges over the past 30 years [7]. This work
not only represents an overview of the various chemical trans-
formations employed, but also allowed us to judge whether and
to what extent new ideas and concepts have been harvested to
enhance success rates and accelerate development times of
drugs. In this new review article we wish to present a comple-
mentary compilation of the synthesis routes of current drugs
containing six-membered heterocyclic rings. We believe
that the combination of aromatic as well as non-aromatic
six-membered structures will give a comprehensive
overview that will be of value to any student, academic or
future medicinal chemist interested in applied chemical syn-
thesis.
It should be noted that the heterocycles discussed are named
according to IUPAC recommendations wherever possible;
however, in some instances different names are commonly used
by the synthetic community (i.e. pyridone and pyridinone).
Furthermore, in most cases throughout this review only the
syntheses of the free-based form of the parent drugs is discussed
although these are commonly formulated in their prescription
form as salts.

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2267
Table 1: Chemical structures of the heterocyclic compounds discussed in this review. (continued)
Rosiglitazone
1.40
pyridine
8,11
Pioglitazone
1.41
pyridine
12–16
Etoricoxib
1.90
pyridine
17,18
Moxifloxacin
1.102
quinolone
19,20
Levofloxacin
1.103
quinolone
21,22
Nifedipine
2.1
dihydropyridine
23
Amlodipine
2.2
dihydropyridine
24,25
Clevidipine
2.3
dihydropyridine
26

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2268
Table 1: Chemical structures of the heterocyclic compounds discussed in this review. (continued)
Tiagabine
2.36
piperidine
27
Solifenacin
2.57
piperidine
28
Carmegliptine
2.70
piperidine
30
Lamivudine
3.1
pyrimidine
33
Raltegravir
3.18
pyrimidine
34
Imatinib
3.36
pyrimidine
37,38
Erlotinib
3.37
pyrimidine
39,40
Lapatinib
3.38
pyrimidine
41

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2269
Table 1: Chemical structures of the heterocyclic compounds discussed in this review. (continued)
Rosuvastatin
3.80
pyrimidine
42,43
Varenicline
4.1
pyrazine
44
Eszopiclone
4.26
pyrazine
45
Brimonidine
4.22
pyrazine
45
Bortezomib
4.27
pyrazine
46
Aplaviroc
4.37
piperazine
47
Azelastine
5.1
pyridazine
48
Cilazapril
5.12
perhydro-pyridazine
49
Lamotrigine
6.1
1,2,4-triazine
50,51

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2270
Table 1: Chemical structures of the heterocyclic compounds discussed in this review. (continued)
Imiquimod
6.11
imidazoquinoline
52–54
Abacavir
6.37
purine
55
Ocinaplon
6.48
pyrazolo-pyrimidine
56
Zaleplon
6.46
pyrazolo-pyrimidine
57
Indiplon
6.54
pyrazolo-pyrimidine
57
Sildenafil
6.61
pyrazolo-pyrimidone
58–61
Vardenafil
6.87
imidazotriazinone
62–65

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2271
Table 1: Chemical structures of the heterocyclic compounds discussed in this review. (continued)
Temozolomide
6.105
imidazo-tetrazinone
66–68
Scheme 1: Scaled industrial processes for the synthesis of simple pyridines.
Review
1. Pyridines and quinolines
The pyridine ring can be considered as one of the simplest yet
most important heteroaromatic structures. Naturally occurring
in many important compounds such as the vitamins niacin and
pyridoxine, the ubiquitous redox system NADP/NADPH and a
number of alkaloids including nicotine, pyridine, is thus impor-
tant for a wide range of biological activities [8]. Consequently,
the pyridine ring is utilised in many pharmaceutical actives and
possibly even more commonly found in agrochemical products.
This can be rationalised by the fact that simple pyridines readily
undergo metabolism via oxidation or methylation pathways
forming the corresponding pyridinium ions [9,10]. Although
many of these metabolites are potentially highly toxic to
humans they are conveniently and quickly excreted from the
body via the kidneys. With a good understanding of the phar-
macokinetics and distribution profile pyridines can therefore be
tolerated in the context of pharmaceuticals. Often pyridines can
be made more resilient to metabolic changes by increasing their
functionalisation or electronically biasing them against direct
oxidation. However, the modern trend in structural optimisa-
tion of pyridine containing lead compounds is to commonly
replace the ring with a bioisostere such as a methylisoxazole,
isothiazole, oxadiazole [11,12] or various diazines [13,14]. This
strategy is based mainly upon a desire to avoid potential late
stage toxicology issues which as indicated have arisen in the
pyridine structural class.
Pyridine itself is produced industrially by either the traditional
Chichibabin pyridine synthesis (Scheme 1, A), the Bönnemann
reaction, a cobalt-catalysed cyclotrimerisation of alkynes and
nitriles (Scheme 1, B) or the aerobic gas-phase condensation of
croton aldehyde, formaldehyde and ammonia (Scheme 1, C).
Likewise numerous methods of synthesising substituted
pyridines have been reported [15]. Much of this development
was stimulated by the discovery of pharmaceutically active
pyridine containing biogenic structures but mainly in an indus-
trial context by the drive for new polymeric materials such as
the vinylpyridine based latex in the first half of the 20th
century.

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2272
Scheme 2: Synthesis of nicotinic acid from 2-methyl-5-ethylpyridine (1.11).
An excellent summative review concerning the general syn-
thesis of pyridines has recently been published [16]. From this
source and several others it is evident that the most versatile
preparative method for substituted pyridines is the direct con-
densation of ammonia (or hydroxylamine) with a corres-
ponding 1,5-diketone. Alternatively, ammonia (or an ammon-
ium salt), an aldehyde and two equivalents of a 1,3-dicarbonyl
compound can react via a classical Hantzsch dihydropyridine
synthesis. Similarly unsymmetrical pyridines can be furnished
by employing an amino-enone or aminonitrile compound with a
1,3-dicarbonyl moiety. In both cases a subsequent oxidation
step is usually required to convert the initially formed dihy-
dropyridine intermediate into the desired aromatic pyridine.
Some additional but much less common methods utilising
cycloadditions of electron-rich oxazoles and acrylates [17,18]
tri- and tetrazines with alkenes/alkynes [19] or pyrones with
nitriles [20] have been used successfully to access specifically
functionalised pyridines which are difficult to prepare by the
more direct condensation routes.
A major synthetic obstacle to accessing diversely substituted
pyridines is that each preparation must start from a set of chem-
ically distinct building blocks that often require significant opti-
misation to determine the most appropriate reaction conditions
for their condensation. Despite this, combinatorial chemistry
techniques have been used to generate large compound libraries
in the hope that high-throughput screenings would identify new
structures worthy of further development [21]. Unfortunately,
these efforts have not resulted in a net increase in the number of
new pyridine containing drug candidates but have yielded struc-
turally useful data regarding many physical properties such as
pKb, and oxidation stability.
When examining the synthetic origins of pyridine substructures
represented in the top-market API’s (active pharmaceutical
ingredients) a distinct division can be easily recognised. Princi-
pally this pertains to those pyridine units installed from a
generic commercially available building block and pyridines
specifically prepared via de novo synthesis with the intent of
tailoring the physical or metabolic stability of the compound.
Often in the latter case the pyridine ring is an integral part of the
pharmacophore rather than simply imparting a modicum of
increased solubility or tuning a parameter such as LogP [22].
An important example of de novo synthesis of the pyridine core
can be found in the syntheses of nicotinic acid (1.12, vitamin
B3/niacin) and nicotinamide (1.18, constituent of coenzyme
NAD{P}). Although these entities are biogenic, the human
body is not capable of producing them, thus industrial processes
have had to be developed, Lonza and Reilly are historically the
key players in this area [23].
The molecule 2-methyl-5-ethylpyridine (1.11) can be prepared
directly via a condensation between acetaldehyde and ammonia,
nitric acid mediated oxidation then converts this to nicotinic
acid (1.12) [24]. Although the initial pyridine formation is high
yielding, this process is not without environmental issues due to
the large excess of nitric acid and high temperatures combined
with the liberation of large amounts of gases such as nitric
oxides and carbon dioxide which must be scrubbed from the
system (Scheme 2). Interestingly, despite these considerations
this method of synthesis is currently still run by the speciality
chemicals company Lonza but now as a continuous flow
process at their main plant in Visp, Switzerland.
An alternative process is based on the availability of 3-picoline
(1.15) which is generated as a major side product in the syn-
thesis of pyridine prepared from formaldehyde, acetaldehyde
and ammonia in a gas phase reaction (Scheme 3) [25]. The
3-picoline can be readily oxidised via another gas-phase
protocol using a fixed-bed reactor charged with vanadium
pentoxide on high surface titanium dioxide (5–50 wt % vana-
dium). A modification of the sequence utilises a dehydrative
amminolysis (ammoxidation) to furnish the corresponding
3-cyanopyridine, which can then be subsequently hydrolysed to
nicotinic acid. The catalyst systems most commonly used in this
high temperature ammoxidation are based on vanadium, molyb-
denum or antimony oxides supported on silica or alumina.
Since the initial Chichibabin type sequence (step 1; Scheme 3)
leading to 3-picoline is not an entirely selective process, alter-
native strategies starting from other bulk materials have been
devised. For example, taking a stream of 2-methylpentane-1,5-
diamine (1.20), a derivative of 2-methylglutaronitrile 1.19 (a
side product of adiponitrile production) can be cyclised to yield
3-methylpiperidine (1.21) using zeolites and easily aromatised
by catalytic dehydrogenation to 3-picoline in 78% overall yield

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2273
Scheme 3: Synthesis of 3-picoline and nicotinic acid.
Scheme 4: Synthesis of 3-picoline from 2-methylglutarodinitrile 1.19.
Scheme 5: Picoline-based synthesis of clarinex (no yields reported).
(Scheme 4) [26]. The overall processing sequence is highly
energy-efficient (coupling of the endothermic cyclisation with
the exothermic dehydration gives a reasonable energy balance).
In addition the ammonia liberated during the cyclisation step is
later consumed in the ammoxidation of the 3-picoline to the
corresponding 3-cyanopyridine (Scheme 3).
The value of substituted 3-picoline precursors is illustrated in
the synthesis of clarinex (1.22, Desloratadine, Scheme 5), a dual
antagonist of platelet activating factor (PAF) and of histamine
used in the treatment of allergies. This compound consists of a
highly functional tricyclic core with an unsaturated linkage to a
pendant piperidine ring. The picoline derivative 1.23 is first

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2274
Scheme 6: Mode of action of proton-pump inhibitors and structures of the API’s.
Scheme 7: Hantzsch-like route towards the pyridine rings in common proton pump inhibitors.
treated with two equivalents of n-butyllithium (n-BuLi) fol-
lowed by alkylation with benzyl chloride to give the chain
elongated adduct [27]. The tert-butylamide 1.24 is then dehy-
drated with phosphorous oxychloride at elevated temperatures
to yield the nitrile derivative 1.25. Introduction of the piperi-
dine ring is achieved by utilisation of the appropriately substi-
tuted Grignard reagent 1.26. A Friedel–Crafts type acylation
promoted by either triflic acid or polyphosphoric acid (PPA)
furnishes the tricyclic structure 1.28 which upon N-demethyla-
tion affords clarinex (1.22).
One of the top-selling classes of pharmaceuticals containing the
pyridine ring are the proton pump inhibitors; numerous exam-
ples such as omeprazole (1.29, Losec), rabeprazole (1.33,
Aciphex), pantoprazole (1.34, Protonix) and lansoprazole (1.35,
Prevacid) populate this area [28]. All these API’s contain the
characteristic benzimidazole unit bearing a sulfoxide substituent
at the 2-position. Interestingly all these compounds are actually
pro-drugs hence the common structural features can be ratio-
nalised as the molecules undergo an acid-catalysed Smiles-
rearrangement prior to bioconjugation to ATPases (Scheme 6).
Most of the synthetic routes towards the embedded pyridine
heterocycle in these molecules are not reported thoroughly as
the pyridine subunit is typically introduced as a commercially
available building block. Nevertheless we can assume that most
strategies likely employ a modification of the traditional
Hantzsch synthesis as outlined in Scheme 7 [29]. Here 1,3-

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2275
Scheme 8: Synthesis of rosiglitazone.
disubstituted ketone derivatives are treated with α,β-unsatu-
rated carbonyl compounds in the presence of ammonia to
initially form dihydropyridines 1.38, which can ultimately be
converted into the corresponding aromatic pyridine upon oxi-
dation with a variety of oxidants such as MnO2, HNO2, HNO3
or cerium ammonium nitrate (CAN). The mechanism of the
classical Hantzsch reaction has been studied extensively by
numerous groups and culminated in an article by Katrizky and
coworkers describing their findings based on 13C and 15N NMR
spectroscopic evidence. From this it can be concluded that an
enamine species 1.37 is initially formed and subsequently
undergoes cyclocondensation with the Michael acceptor 1.36 as
the rate determining step of this sequence [30].
Other important species containing a pyridine moiety are
rosiglitazone (1.40, Avandia) and pioglitazone (1.41, Actos),
which are members of the so called thiazolidinedione class of
type-2 diabetes drugs (Figure 1). These pharmaceutical agents
act as binders to the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors
that upon activation migrate to the DNA to regulate the tran-
scription of specific genes which control the metabolism of
carbohydrates and fatty acids. The structures of pioglitazone
and rosiglitazone show common structural features bearing a
distal pyridine ring linked to the thiazolidinedione pharma-
cophore.
In rosiglitazone the pyridine unit is introduced via an SNAr
reaction between N-methylethanolamine (1.44) and 2-chloro-
pyridine (1.43) which in turn is readily prepared by chlorina-
tion of 2-pyridone (1.42) with phosphorous oxychloride
(Scheme 8) [31,32]. The resulting primary alcohol 1.45 is then
Figure 1: Structures of rosiglitazone (1.40) and pioglitazone (1.41).
subjected to a second SNAr reaction with 4-fluorobenzaldehyde
[33]. A Knoevenagel condensation of the aldehyde function-
ality in compound 1.47 with thiazolidinedione 1.48 in the pres-
ence of a catalytic amount of piperidinium acetate reportedly
leads to the exclusive formation of the desired Z-isomer prod-
uct. Interestingly, the newly installed double bond was effi-
ciently reduced using magnesium in methanol thus circum-
venting catalyst poisoning issues pertaining to the thiazolidine-
dione moiety as experienced using other reducing systems.
As an aside the synthesis of 2-pyridones (i.e. 1.42) can be
achieved via a number of methods. For example the classical
Guareschi–Thorpe condensation in which cyanoacetamide
reacts with a 1,3-diketone delivers highly substituted 2-pyri-
dones (Scheme 9) [34,35]. This protocol is closely related to the
Hantzsch pyridine synthesis and offers access to a wide range of
products with well-defined regioselectivity. The simple undeco-
rated parent 2-pyridone (1.42) can be somewhat harder to
access but is obtained in a linear sequence via the corres-
ponding 2-pyrone (e.g. Scheme 9), which is converted to the
2-pyridone through an exchange with ammonia or an equiva-
lent nitrogen source (NH4X; X = Cl, Br, I, OAc, OH).

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2276
Scheme 10: Synthesis and mechanism of 2-pyrone from malic acid.
Scheme 9: Syntheses of 2-pyridones.
However, more conveniently the 2-pyrone precursor can be
generated via the vacuum pyrolysis of coumalic acid (1.56)
[36]. Cheap and readily available malic acid (1.57) undergoes
self-condensation to yield coumalic acid under strongly acidic
dehydrating conditions [37-40]. The mechanism is believed to
progress by initial dehydration/decarbonylation of malic acid to
give an aldehyde acid enol 1.60 which then condenses by
Michael addition of the enol to the corresponding enone to give
after further dehydration and lactonisation coumalic acid
(Scheme 10).
Returning to the main discussion, a recent synthesis of rosiglita-
zone [41] exemplifies the advantages of employing resin-bound
agents in order to increase yields and purities of intermediates
and products in the sequence (Scheme 11). Starting from
4-(hydroxymethyl)phenol (1.63) the common N-methylamine
intermediate 1.64 was obtained in a high yielding three step
sequence. First a phenolic alkylation reaction on ethyl 2-iodo-
acetate (1.65) promoted by the strong P1 base polymer-
supported BEMP gave the corresponding ether adduct which
was then converted to the desired secondary amine 1.64 via
direct amidation and borane-mediated reduction. Next an SNAr
reaction on 2-fluoropyridine (1.66) followed by oxidation of the
benzylic alcohol using immobilised chromium(VI) oxide
yielded the aldehyde 1.67 required for the previously described
Knoevenagel condensation. The five membered heterocycle
2,4-thiazolidinedione (1.68) is readily available commercially,
but can be easily prepared at scale via a simple cyclocondensa-
tion between thiourea and chloroacetic acid [42]. Finally,
hydrogenation of the double bond using Pearlmans catalyst
furnishes rosiglitazone (1.40).
In addition to the illustrated syntheses of rosiglitazone several
routes towards pioglitazone (1.41) and its key intermediates
have been reported. Pioglitazone is clearly related to rosiglita-
zone (1.40) with its structure only differing in the substitution
pattern of the parent pyridine ring. Its synthesis begins with the
hydroxymethylation of 2-methyl-5-ethylpyridine (1.11), a
commodity chemical obtained from the condensation of
acetaldehyde with ammonium acetate (Scheme 12) [43]. At
elevated temperatures and pressures 2-methyl-5-ethylpyridine
undergoes a condensation reaction with formaldehyde allowing
isolation of the chain extended hydroxyethylpyridine 1.70 upon
distillation although in poor yield [44]. Following subsequent

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2277
Scheme 11: Polymer-assisted synthesis of rosiglitazone.
Scheme 12: Synthesis of pioglitazone.
SNAr reaction aryl ether 1.71 is obtained, which is used as
crude material in the subsequent Knoevenagel condensation
with thiazolidinedione 1.68. In order to reduce the intermediate
benzylidene double bond in this example sodium borohydride is
used in the presence of cobalt chloride efficiently delivering
pioglitazone in high purity.
Other syntheses of pioglitazone use related pyridine building
blocks and aim to generate late stage intermediates that deliver
the target compound upon de novo synthesis of the thiazolidine-
dione ring system. For instance phenyl ether 1.73 can be
obtained via Williamson ether synthesis between mesylate 1.74
and phenol 1.75 (Scheme 13). Removal of the acetyl protecting
group under acidic conditions renders aniline 1.76 which is
subsequently subjected to a Meerwein arylation reaction which
occurs via diazotisation and subsequent treatment with acryloni-
trile in the presence of cuprous oxide [45-48].
Alternatively, an equivalent acid functional material can be
prepared starting from tyrosine (1.78) via a dual protection of
the amino acid unit as the methyl ester and the amine as the
benzaldehyde imine (Scheme 14). This is then followed by
analogous ether formation with the previously generated
mesylate 1.74. Intermediate 1.80 is then hydrolysed to reveal
once again the amino acid functionality, which upon diazotisa-
tion in the presence of hydrobromic acid selectively forms the
α-bromo ester 1.82.
A more direct SNAr approach utilising 4-fluorobenzonitrile as
the acceptor and the sodium alkoxide of hydroxyethylpyridine
1.84 as the nucleophile has been successfully conducted
(Scheme 15) [49]. The nitrile unit is partially reduced and
hydrolysed to the benzaldehyde 1.71 using Raney-Ni under
transfer hydrogenation conditions in wet formic acid. A
Darzens reaction between this aldehyde and ethyl chloroacetate

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2278
Scheme 13: Meerwein arylation reaction towards pioglitazone.
Scheme 14: Route towards pioglitazone utilising tyrosine.
Scheme 15: Route towards pioglitazone via Darzens ester formation.

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2279
Scheme 16: Syntheses of the thiazolidinedione moiety.
in the presence of sodium ethoxide delivers epoxide 1.87. The
material is next subjected to hydrogenolysis using Pd/C in
methanol with a 1 bar hydrogen pressure to reductively ring
open the epoxide. Finally, the transformation of the alcohol to
the mesylate 1.88 occurs under standard conditions.
In order to complete the syntheses of pioglitazone as outlined in
the previous schemes several procedures for the installation of
the thiazolidinedione ring system have been reported [50]. For
instance the α-bromoester of intermediate 1.82 will render the
desired heterocycle upon treatment with sodium isothiocyanate
(Scheme 16, A). Alternatively, the α-amino acid portion of 1.81
can be diazotised under standard conditions and will subse-
quently deliver the same product when treated with lithium
isothiocyanate (Scheme 16, B). Finally, α-bromonitrile 1.77 can
be condensed with thiourea to give pioglitazone after aqueous
work-up (Scheme 16, C).
Etoricoxib (1.90) is a member of a new class of NSAID (non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug) developed by Merck
possessing a simple pyridine core [51]. It is reported to show a
160-fold selectivity for COX-2 over COX-1 (cyclooxygenase 1
and 2) and so it is hoped that it will not display long term side
effects such as gastric ulceration, common to non-selective
COX inhibitors. In many syntheses the presence of aryl–aryl
linkages commands the use of Pd-mediated cross coupling reac-
tions which dictates access to functionalised pyridines as
starting materials. However, Knochel has recently reported an
approach to forming the first aryl–aryl C–C bond by a directed
lithiation of a pyridine 1.91 followed by conversion to its
organozinc derivative. This intermediate then undergoes a high-
yielding Negishi cross-coupling reaction with an arylbromide
(Scheme 17) [52]. After acidic hydrolysis of the phosphorami-
date directing group the resulting pyridone 1.93 is subjected to a
sequence of chlorinations rendering a suitably functionalised
coupling partner for a final Stille coupling to yield etoricoxib.
Although the synthesis of etoricoxib as depicted in Scheme 17
very efficiently forms the key aryl–aryl bonds and is suitable for
analogue synthesis the route is not considered feasible for large
scale synthesis due to the toxicity of the tin species and the
inherent costs of the specifically functionalised starting ma-
terials and palladium catalysts. For this reason a de novo syn-
thesis of the central pyridine ring was preferred [53]. Here, it
was found, that the union of an enolisable ketone 1.70 with a
vinamidinium species 1.97 reliably forms the desired hetero-
cycle in excellent yield via a one pot procedure (Scheme 18).
Moreover, the vinamidinium reagent can be formed in situ [54]
and neatly introduces the required chloride substituent at the
5-position.
While isolated pyridines are a vital component in numerous
drugs the related quinoline/quinolone scaffolds are becoming
increasingly common. One such example is nalidixic acid
(1.101, in fact a naphthyridone, Figure 2). Nalidixic acid is a
prototype quinolone antibiotic that has been used extensively as
an effective treatment against both gram positive and gram
negative bacteria. In general, quinolone antibiotics act by inter-
fering with the enzymes DNA-gyrase and/or topoisomerase of
bacteria [55]. Moxifloxacin (1.102, Avelox) and levofloxacin

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2280
Scheme 17: Synthesis of etoricoxib utilising Negishi and Stille cross-coupling reactions.
Scheme 18: Synthesis of etoricoxib via vinamidinium condensation.
Figure 2: Structures of nalidixic acid, levofloxacin and moxifloxacin.
(1.103, Levaquin) are two third-generation fluoroquinolone
antibiotics which also appear amongst the top selling drugs.
These compounds display similar SAR data [56]. For instance,
in the case of moxifloxacin the fluorine atom in the C6 position
enhances microbial activity while a methoxy group in the C8
position is reported to increase potency and decrease toxicity.
Furthermore, it was found that a cyclopropyl group was benefi-
cial for the enzyme–DNA binding complex while the bulky

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2281
Scheme 19: Synthesis of moxifloxacin.
Scheme 20: Synthesis of (S,S)-2,8-diazabicyclo[4.3.0]nonane 1.105.
nitrogen-based appendage at C7 helps to bind to DNA gyrase
and hinders the efflux of the drug from the bacterial cell.
Due to the elaborate substitution pattern of the parent quinolone
ring systems these compounds are usually prepared via a linear
consecutive sequence. In the case of moxifloxacin, an intramol-
ecular base catalysed nucleophilic aromatic substitution is used
to prepare the bicyclic ring system of the highly substituted aro-
matic 1.104 (Scheme 19). A SNAr reaction is then used to intro-
duce the saturated piperidinopyrrolidine appendage 1.105 to
furnish the desired structure [57-60]. In order to obtain a high
yield for the substitution reaction a one-pot procedure was
developed, initial masking of the acid (1.104) is achieved by
silylation with subsequent borane chelate formation. Addition
of the amine nucleophile 1.105 under basic conditions then
renders the desired product in high yield. The available patent
literature however does not comment on regioselectivity issues
of the SNAr reaction due to the presence of the second fluoride
substituent in the substrate, although not necessarily as electron-
ically favourable for displacement it is certainly more acces-
sible.
The saturated (S,S)-2,8-diazabicyclo[4.3.0]nonane (1.105) used
in the final step can be prepared by a double nucleophilic
substitution between tosylamine and 2,3-bis-chloromethylpyri-
dine (1.112) followed by catalytic reduction of the resulting
bicycle using palladium on carbon in acetic acid (Scheme 20).
As the corresponding sulfonamide 1.113 was found to be a
crystalline solid a resolution using (D)-(+)-O,O-dibenzoyltar-
taric acid was reported to separate the enantiomers [61].
By analogy to moxifloxacin the synthesis of levofloxacin
(1.103) can be accomplished using an intramolecular double
SNAr reaction sequence converting the tetrafluoroarene 1.116
into the required tricyclic fluoroquinolone product 1.117
(Scheme 21). A final intermolecular SNAr reaction then intro-
duces the methylpiperazine unit and thus completes the syn-
thesis of this antibiotic compound [62].
Alternatively, an elaborated benzoxazine substrate 1.118 may
be prepared via another linear sequence starting from phenol
1.119, which is first alkylated with epichlorohydrin (1.20) [63]
(Scheme 22). The resulting epoxide 1.121 can then be ring

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2282
Scheme 21: Synthesis of levofloxacin.
Scheme 22: Alternative approach to the levofloxacin core 1.125.
opened with methanol in the presence of a tin Lewis acid
yielding alcohol 1.122, which when subjected to Jones-oxi-
dation conditions and Raney-Ni-mediated hydrogenation
furnishes in moderate yield the benzoxazine 1.118; via the
imine intermediate. This material can then be condensed with
diethyl ethoxymethylenemalonate (1.123), and further cyclised
via an intramolecular Friedel–Crafts acylation promoted by
polyphosphate. Aluminium tribromide assisted demethylation
of the pendant methoxy group of this tricyclic structure gives
access to the corresponding alcohol 1.125 which is easily
converted to the final structure of levofloxacin via a further four
steps (i.e. introduction of the N-methylpiperazine unit via SNAr
reaction, activation and displacement of the primary alcohol and
ester hydrolysis).
2. Dihydropyridines and piperidines
The prevalence of dihydropyridines and their fully reduced
counterparts the piperidines is high in many drug substances
due to their high transport tolerance in many active processes
and their structural spacing especially in a 1,4-disposition. The
Hantzsch synthesis is the classical approach towards dihydropy-
ridines and consequently has been utilised in a large number of
drugs particularly those used as ion channel blockers. One of
the earliest examples, nifedipine (2.1, Adalat, Figure 3) was
introduced to the market in the 1970s as an antihypertensive and
antianginal compound, reducing high blood pressure and
addressing angina pectoris (acute chest pain) by increasing the
blood flow to the heart. Various analogues of this early calcium
ion channel blocker have been prepared. Amlodipine (2.2,

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2283
Figure 3: Structures of nifedipine, amlodipine and clevidipine.
Scheme 23: Mg3N2-mediated synthesis of nifedipine.
Norvasc) from Pfizer which is of the same class is a superior
long acting calcium channel blocker which possesses more
desirable properties than nifedipine as it can be taken once daily
as a tablet and comes with no dietary restrictions as well as elic-
iting less adverse side effects. The trend to base new ion
channel blockers on the dihydropyridine scaffold continues
even today with clevidipine (2.3, Cleviprex) which obtained
FDA approval in 2008. In contrast to the previous compounds
clevidipine is a very short acting calcium channel blocker and is
used as a single enantiomer being administered intravenously
rather than orally. Due to its labile hydroxymethylene ester
moiety clevidipine is readily hydrolysed by serum esterases
leading to rapid therapeutic action and subsequent clearance as
well as displaying very little renal or hepatical side effects.
The synthesis of nifedipine can be readily achieved using the
classical Hantzsch reaction condensing 2-nitrobenzaldehyde
(2.4) with methyl acetoacetate (2.5) in the presence of an
ammonia source. However, gaseous ammonia as well as
ammonia solutions are considered difficult reagents due to
handling issues, often giving problems due to corrosion as well
as the obvious associated stench. One interesting protocol
circumventing the problem describes the use of bench stable
magnesium nitride, a solid material which upon hydrolysis
liberates the required ammonia in situ (Scheme 23) [64].
However, there have been several reports on explosions caused
by runaway reactions so extreme care must be administrated
when using this reagent [65].
From a qualitative comparison of the structures of nifedipine,
amlodipine and clevidipine it becomes obvious that the non-
symmetrical nature of structures 2.2 and 2.3 impose additional
challenges to their synthesis routes. Amlodipine’s (2.2) syn-
thesis requires a more linear approach to install the different
ester groups as well as the aminoethanol appendage. In a
patented route to this compound the assembly is realised using a
stepwise condensation between enamine 2.6, which already
contains the masked aminoethanol unit, and the advanced
Michael acceptor 2.7 delivering dihydropyridine 2.8. Mild azide
reduction and subsequent formation of the besylate salt renders
the final formulation of amlodipine (Scheme 24) [66]. The
besylate salt of amlodipine has been introduced to the market as
the racemate, nevertheless, separation of both enantiomers on
semi-preparative scale has been demonstrated allowing bio-
logical evaluation of either enantiomer and comparison of the
obtained results. Through these studies it was found that the
S-(−)-enantiomer of amlodipine is the biologically active one
although there appears to be no significant difference in the
pharmacokinetic behaviour between the R-(+) form, the S-(−)
form or the racemate leading to the conclusion that an enantio-
selective synthesis leading to solely S-(−)-amlodipine would be
beneficial only if economically feasible [67].
An alternative strategy to this molecule begins with an interest-
ing aza-Diels–Alder reaction between the Knoevenagel adduct
2.12 and methyl butynoate 2.13 (Scheme 25) [68]. The reaction
is reported to progress in high regioselectivity (>50:1) albeit in

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2284
Scheme 24: Synthesis of rac-amlodipine as besylate salt.
Scheme 25: Aza Diels–Alder approach towards amlodipine.
moderate isolated yield. Following debenzylation of the
Diels–Alder product a selective allylic bromination was
achieved again in good selectivity (>80:20, mono:di) using a
buffered solution of pyridinium perbromide in methylene chlo-
ride/pyridine at low temperature. After purification of the
resulting intermediate by flash column chromatography the
direct displacement of the newly installed bromide by an
azidoethanol moiety yields the desymmetrised dihydropyridine.
This regioselective bromination reaction was studied in some
detail by the Warner–Lambert Company and is reported to give
superior outcomes when compared to the direct Hantzsch syn-
thesis of non-symmetrical dihydropyridines with respect to
product yield (70–90% vs 10–30%) and ease of purification
[69]. Finally, zinc-mediated reduction of the azide furnishes
racemic amlodipine (2.2).
The last mentioned dihydropyridine based pharmaceutical is
clevidipine (2.3), a third generation calcium channel blocker
used primarily to rapidly decrease and stabilise blood pressure
following cardiac surgery. The presence of the readily hydro-
lysed acyloxyl methyl ester accounts for much of its enhanced
potency acting as a rapid response vasodilator. It is reported that
both enantiomers undergo esterase-mediated hydrolysis with
short half-lifes of around two minutes and possessing similar
medical and physiological profiles, consequently this means
clevidipine can be safely administered in its racemic form [70].
There are two main routes described to this structure (2.3,
Scheme 26): A standard Hantzsch synthesis between 2,3-
dichlorobenzaldehyde (2.17), ammonia and methyl aceto-
acetate (2.5) furnishes the symmetric dihydropyridine 2.18,
which can be selectively mono-saponified and the resulting
carboxylic acid group alkylated by treatment with chloromethyl
butyrate (2.20) (Route A). Unfortunately, for this apparently
straightforward synthesis no commentary regarding why the
initial hydrolysis was so selective was made and the conditions
used do not readily contest to the observed selectivity.

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2285
Scheme 26: Routes towards clevidipine.
However, this route was not adopted, instead a second more
structured synthesis was eventually pursued (Scheme 26; Route
B). Thus, 2,3-dichlorobenzaldehyde (2.17) was treated with
methyl acetoacetate (2.5) resulting in the formation of enone
2.23, this material was subsequently condensed with enamide
2.22 to directly yield clevidipine (2.3, Route B, [71]). A final
strategy is depicted in Scheme 26 (Route C, [72]). This ap-
proach is similar to route B, however, it introduces the amine as
part of the readily available 3-aminocrotonate (2.27) which
subsequently undergoes the Hantzsch reaction with the elabo-
rate Michael acceptor 2.26.
The fully reduced pyridine unit, the piperidine ring system, is
one of the most frequently encountered heterocycles found in
pharmaceutical agents, typically acting either as a linker or in
order to improve the drugs pharmacokinetic profile (increased
solubility under physiological conditions and reduced logD
value). Such heterocyclic systems are often disubstituted at the
1,2- or 1,4-positions resulting in easy access from the corres-
ponding pyridone or piperidone precursors. Consequently, such
substructures feature in numerous market drugs like donepezil
(2.28), methylphenidate (2.29), fentanyl (2.30), raloxifene
(2.31), risperidone (2.32) and paliperidone (2.33, Figure 4).
Interestingly, a number of piperidine containing drugs (e.g.
cisapride (2.34), terfenadine (2.35)) have been found to interact
with hERG potassium ion channels resulting in a cardiac
arrhythmia that can lead to fainting or even sudden death. In
most of these cases this rare but severe side reaction cannot be
tolerated and has therefore lead to drug failure in preclinical
trials or even withdrawals of marketed drugs (e.g. cisapride,
terfenadine or astemizole). It therefore can be stated that careful
balancing is essential when incorporating basic sites into drug
molecules in order to avoid off-target binding to hERG chan-
nels. Structural data now available on these hERG channels
show the presence of two aromatic amino acid residues, Tyr652
and Phe656, that are located in an exposed area within the S6
domain pointing towards the possibility of cation π-interactions
explaining the affinity of drugs containing tertiary amines

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2286
Figure 4: Examples of piperidine containing drugs.
Figure 5: Discovery of tiagabine based on early leads.
towards hERG channels. Consequently, careful and early-stage
examination of hERG affinity is nowadays a vital part of
assessing preclinical risks of new drug candidates [73].
The piperidine unit is also incorporated into drugs in order to
fulfil more significant tasks, i.e. being part of the pharma-
cophore itself or providing extended H-bonding networks for
improved binding affinities. Furthermore, stereochemical issues
encountered when the piperidine ring comprises a part of more
strained bridged bicyclic system or a polycyclic scaffold are
becoming more common. In the next section selected examples
of these newer piperidine architectures will be discussed.
Tiagabine (2.36) is a GABA uptake inhibitor originally devel-
oped over 20 years ago by Novo Nordisk and Abbott and is
currently used as anticonvulsant in the treatment of epilepsy.
For a long time it has been recognised that the simple core alka-
loid structures as found in nipecotic acid (2.37), guvacine
(2.38), β-homoproline (2.39), muscimol (2.40), THPO (2.41) or
exo-THPO (2.42, Figure 5) are potent inhibitors of GABA

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2287
Scheme 27: Synthetic sequences to tiagabine.
receptors, however, their hydrophilic nature meant that they did
not cross the lipophilic blood-brain barrier. Therefore addition-
al non-polar biaryl-appendages have been attached to these
motifs separated by a short alkyl chain to moderate their
bioavailability resulting in the ultimate discovery of tiagabine
(2.36) which has an embedded (R)-nipecotate unit as the class
indicative pharmacophore.
The synthesis of tiagabine (2.36) is readily accomplished by the
union of ethyl nipecotate with the bis-thiophene containing
fragment 2.46, which itself can be accessed by various methods
(Scheme 27) [74]. For instance, 2-bromo-3-methylthiophene
(2.47) can be lithium-halogen exchanged using n-butyllithium.
Two equivalents of the resulting anion are reacted with ethyl
bromobutyrate 2.48 to give the unsaturated alkene subunit 2.46
upon elimination of water (Scheme 27, path A). Alternatively,
the same intermediate (2.46) can be obtained by an ingenious
acid catalysed ring opening of the cyclopropane derivate 2.50,
which is readily generated from Grignard-addition to the bis-
thiophenyl ketone 2.51 (Scheme 27, path B). The required (R)-
enantiomer of ethyl nipecotate can in turn be obtained by a
number of different methods including the resolution of the
racemate using L-(+)-tartaric acid obtained from full saturation
of ethyl nicotinate. More modern methods involve a two-step
process wherein ethyl nicotinate (2.52) is hydrogenated to the
vinylogous carbamate 2.53 in the presence of acetic anhydride.
Then the intermediate 2.53 can be subjected to an asymmetric
hydrogenation utilising rhodium-based catalyst systems at
elevated hydrogen pressures rendering the desired ethyl (R)-
nipecotate 2.54 [75]. Uniting the two fragments is affected by
nucleophilic substitution of the homoallylic bromide 2.46 by the
nucleophilic ethyl (R)-nipecotate yielding tiagabine (2.54) after
ester hydrolysis. Isolation of the final API requires careful
adjustment of the pH using HCl to ensure isolation of the
correct hydrochloric salt polymorph.
The piperidine scaffold also features in a recently discovered
pharmaceutical, namely solifenacin (2.57, Vesicare), a competi-
tive antagonist of the muscarinic acetylcholine receptor used in
the treatment of an overactive bladder. This species was
co-developed by Astellas and GSK scientists and consists of a
chiral hydroisoquinoline linked to a (R)-quinuclidinol unit
through a carbamate linkage (Figure 6). Upon protonation the
tertiary amine of the quinuclidine is expected to resemble the
ammonium substructure of muscarine (2.58) [76].
Figure 6: Structures of solifenacin (2.57) and muscarine (2.58).
This molecule can be prepared by direct coupling of the (R)-
quinuclidinol and tetrahydroisoquinoline carbamate partner
(Scheme 28). The (R)-quinuclidinol (2.59) itself can be
accessed from quinuclidone (2.60), and is most conveniently
prepared by alkylation of ethyl isonicotinate (2.61) with ethyl
bromoacetate (2.62) followed by full reduction of the pyridine
ring therefore yielding the corresponding piperidine 2.63. A
base-mediated Dieckmann cyclisation and Krapcho decarboxy-
lation [77] then furnishes 2.60. Traditionally, the reduction of

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2288
Scheme 28: Enantioselective synthesis of solifenacin.
Figure 7: Structures of DPP-4 inhibitors of the gliptin-type.
2.60 to prepare 2.59 can be carried out under fairly mild hydro-
genation conditions that ultimately produce racemic quinu-
clidinol. However, an improved approach makes use of a
Noyori-type asymmetric reduction employing a BINAP ligated
RuCl2 and a chiral diamine to yield the desired (R)-quinucli-
dine in high yield and enantioselectivity [78].
The enantioselective synthesis of the tetrahydroisoquinoline
fragment is achieved via an asymmetric addition of
phenylethylzinc to the imine N-oxide 2.66 yielding the corres-
ponding 3,4-dihydroisoquinoline-N-hydroxide 2.68. Further
reductive cleavage of the hydroxylamine moiety followed by
activation with 4-nitrophenyl chloroformate [79] yields the
intermediate 2.69. In the last step of the sequence the addition
of (R)-quinuclidinol generates solifenacin (2.57).
Carmegliptin (2.70) is an anti-diabetes drug which is currently
in late stage clinical trials. It represents a further structural
advancement from the other existing marketed drugs in this
class, sitagliptin (2.71, Januvia) and vildagliptin (2.72, Zomelis,
Figure 7). These compounds are all members of the dipeptidyl
peptidase 4 class (DPP-4), a transmembrane protein that is re-
sponsible for the degradation of incretins; hormones which
up-regulate the concentration of insulin excreted in a cell. As
DPP-4 specifically cleaves at proline residues, it is unsurprising
that the members of this drug class exhibit an embedded pyrro-
lidine ring (or mimic) and additional decoration (a nitrile or
fluorinated alkyl substituent is present in order to reach into a
local lipophilic pocket). One specific structural liability of the
2-cyano-N-acylpyrrolidinyl motif (2.73) is its inherent suscepti-
bility towards diketopiperazine formation (2.74, Scheme 29)

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2289
Scheme 29: Formation of inactive diketopiperazines from cis-rotameric precursors.
[80], however, one way to inhibit this transformation is to pos-
ition a bulky substituent on the secondary amine nucleophile as
is the case in vildagliptine (2.72).
A single crystal X-ray structure of carmegliptin bound in the
human DPP-4 active site has been published indicating how the
fluoromethylpyrrolidone moiety extends into an adjacent
lipophilic pocket [81]. Additional binding is provided by π–π
interaction between the aromatic substructure and an adjacent
phenylalanine residue as well as through several H-bonds facili-
tated by the adjacent polar substituents (Figure 8).
Figure 8: Co-crystal structure of carmegliptin bound in the human
DPP-4 active site (PDB 3kwf).
The reported synthesis of carmegliptin enlists a Bischler-
Napieralski reaction utilising the primary amine 2.76 and
methyl formate to yield the initial dihydroquinoline 2.77 as its
HCl salt (Scheme 30) [82]. This compound was next treated
with 3-oxoglutaric acid mono ethyl ester (2.78) in the presence
of sodium acetate. Decarboxylation then yields the resulting
aminoester 2.79 which was progressed through an intramolec-
ular Mannich-type transformation using aqueous formaldehyde
to allow isolation of enaminoester 2.80 after treatment of the
intermediate with ammonium acetate in methanol. The next step
involves a very efficient crystallisation-induced dynamic resolu-
tion of the racemic material using the non-natural (S,S)-diben-
zoyl-D-tartaric acid ((+)-DBTA). It is described that the desired
(S)-enantiomer of compound 2.81 can be isolated in greater than
99% ee and 93% overall yield. This approach is certainly supe-
rior to the original separation of the two enantiomers (at the
stage of the final product) by preparative chiral HPLC that was
used in the discovery route (albeit it should be noted that both
enantiomers were required for physiological profiling at the
discovery stage). Next, a 1,2-syn diastereoselective reduction of
enaminoester 2.81 occurs with high diastereocontrol imposed
by the convexed presentation of the substrate for the formal
conjugate addition and subsequent protonation steps. This is
followed by Boc-protection and interconversion of the ethyl
ester to its amide derivative 2.82 in 80% overall yield for this
telescoped process. The primary amide in 2.82 was then
oxidised via a modern variant of the classical Hoffmann
rearrangement using phenyliodine diacetate (PIDA). Following
extensive investigation it was found that slowly adding this
reagent in a mixture of acetonitrile/water to a suspension of
amide 2.82 and KOH gave clean conversion to the amine prod-
uct in high yield. This new procedure was also readily scalable
offering a cleaner, safer and more reliable transformation when
compared to other related rearrangement reactions. During a
further telescoped procedure amine 2.83 was treated with
lactone 2.84 to regenerate the corresponding lactam after
mesylate formation. Finally, removal of the Boc-group with
aqueous hydrochloric acid furnished carmegliptin as its HCl
salt.
3. Pyrimidines and quinazolines
Whilst pyridine rings and their partially or fully saturated
derivatives are very frequent components of pharmaceutical
species there are also a considerable number of compounds
based on diazine and triazine ring systems. Amongst the
diazines, pyrimidine-derived analogues (1,3-diazines) are the
most common. Pyridazines (1,2-diazines) and pyrazines (1,4-
diazines) are less prominent. The main reasons are most prob-
ably that pyrimidines are highly abundant in important biogenic

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2290
Scheme 30: Improved route to carmegliptin.
molecules such as the ribonucleotides and that this heterocycle
can be readily obtained through well-established condensation
chemistries.
In the next sections the most common syntheses of a number of
drugs containing the pyrimidine as well as pyridazine and
pyrazine scaffolds are presented. Furthermore, some non-aro-
matic derivatives including bicyclic analogues of these struc-
tures will be introduced.
The additional nitrogen atom in pyrimidine leads to a signifi-
cantly reduced basicity when compared to simple pyridine
(pKa[pyrimidine] = 1.1; pKa[pyridine] = 5.3) as well as a much
more electron-deficient ring system. However, owing to the
presence of two nitrogen atoms pyrimidines form very tight
hydrogen-bonding arrays as seen in DNA and RNA. Syntheti-
cally, the electron-poor nature of pyrimidines accounts for the
manifold functionalisation pathways using nucleophilic aro-
matic substitution chemistry. Electrophilic aromatic substitu-
tion reactions are more common during the preparation of
substituted pyridines.
Many antiviral agents show a close structural resemblance to
the nucleotides uracil, thymine and cytosine. Lamivudine (3.1)
or zidovudine (3.2) are typical examples of pyrimidines/pyrimi-
dones bound to a ribose-analogue (Figure 9) [83].
These molecules function by terminating biosynthesis of
nucleic acids eventually interrupting the division of virally
infected cells. Most commonly the pyrimidine/pyrimidone

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2291
Scheme 31: Typical routes accessing uracil, thymine and cytosine.
Scheme 32: Coupling between pyrimidones and riboses via the Vorbrüggen nucleosidation.
Figure 9: Structures of lamivudine and zidovudine.
substructure has been introduced as a preassembled unit.
Thymine (3.3), cytosine (3.4) and uracil (3.5) are all industri-
ally accessed on large scale utilising various robust routes
(Scheme 31) [84,85]. Most of these transformations use conden-
sation reactions between urea (3.6) and a bis-electrophile to
generate the desired structures. For instance, ester 3.7 furnishes
uracil (3.5), which in turn can be converted into cytosine (3.4)
by selective amination with ammonia/ammonium chloride
(Scheme 31). Alternatively, thymine (3.3) may be accessed by
reacting methyl formylpropionate (3.8) which acts as a bis-elec-
trophile with urea.
Following construction of the pyrimidone core the linkage to
the anomeric position of a ribose is best achieved using the
Vorbrüggen nucleosidation (Scheme 32) [86]. In this procedure
an O-silylated pyrimidone (3.9) is combined with the acylated
or benzoylated ribose derivative 3.10 in the presence of a strong
Lewis acid. The generation of the reactive oxycarbenium ion as
well as the liberated nucleophilic pyrimidone therefore occurs
in situ and allows for good stereochemical control.
The ribose component in these drugs is either derived directly
from ribose itself as in zidovudine or prepared by total syn-
thesis as in the case of lamivudine. The oxathiolane ring in
lamivudine for instance can be prepared via an acetal exchange
reaction between glyoxilic acid monohydrate (3.13) and 1,4-
dithiane-2,5-diol (3.14) (Scheme 33) [87]. Subsequent acetyla-
tion of the hydroxy group followed by ester formation using
(−)-L-menthol permits crystallisation separation of the two dia-
stereoisomers. The use of bis-TBDMS-cytosine as a coupling
partner in the presence of trimethylsilyl iodide together with
oxathiolane 3.15 produces lamivudine (3.1) after reduction of
the menthyl ester.
Interestingly, the cis-(−)-enantiomer of structure 3.1 was
reported to be much less cytotoxic although both cis-isomers
are independently active against HIV. Recently, a protocol for
resolving the racemate on large scale using (S)-BINOL was
reported [88]. This method works via the co-crystal formation
between (S)-BINOL and cis-(−)-lamivudine forming a binary
complex which was characterised by single crystal X-ray
crystallography.

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2292
Scheme 33: Synthesis of lamivudine.
Scheme 34: Synthesis of raltegravir.
Raltegravir (3.18, Isentress), is another important pyrimidine-
based anti-HIV drug which was launched by Merck in 2008
[89]. Structurally, this HIV-integrase inhibitor consists of a
fully substituted pyrimidone core flanked by an oxadiazole ring
as well as an additional terminal para-fluorobenzyl unit. The
central pyrimidone core was accessed in a linear fashion
starting by amination of acetone cyanohydrin (3.19) followed
by CBz-protection of the resulting amine and finally amino-
lysis of the nitrile 3.20 with hydroxylamine [90] (Scheme 34).
The resulting amidoxime 3.21 was then reacted with dimethyl-
acetylene dicarboxylate (DMAD) which upon heating in
xylenes undergoes ring-closure yielding the desired pyrimidine
3.22 but unfortunately only in modest yield. However, this key
intermediate could be readily N-methylated, and in a simple
extension to the sequence subjected to direct amide formation,
debenzylation and finally coupled with the corresponding acid

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2293
Scheme 35: Mechanistic studies on the formation of 3.22.
chloride of oxadiazole derivative 3.23. This particular oxadia-
zole 3.23 was prepared via a clever sequence involving acyla-
tion of methyl tetrazole (3.24) with ethyl oxalylchloride (3.25)
to form intermediate 3.26 which when heated extrudes nitrogen
gas and subsequently collapses to the desired oxadiazole 3.23,
all progressing in high yield.
The formation of the hydroxypyrimidone core (3.22) of ralte-
gravir deserves further discussion as its unexpected mechanism
was only recently fully elucidated in a joint effort between
Merck process chemists and the Houk group at UCLA [91].
These studies combined B3LYP density functional theory with
labelling studies and revealed that the most likely pathway
involves the formation of a tightly bound polar radical pair 3.31
resulting from thermal homolysis of the N–O bond
(Scheme 35). This species subsequently recombines under for-
mation of a C–N bond and a C=O double bond (3.32) allowing
for the final cyclocondensation to occur with liberation of
methanol. Furthermore these studies were able to disprove a
potential alternative [3,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement step by
incorporating 15N enriched precursors leading to the formation
of pyrimidone 3.22, which is only consistent with a formal
[1,3]-sigmatropic rearrangement. Subsequent calculations
demonstrated the high energy barrier for such a concerted [1,3]-
shift, ultimately leading to the finding of the before-mentioned
polar radical pair pathway which is about 8 kcal/mol lower in
energy. This is consistent with the experimentally observed rate
acceleration in case of the Z-isomer of 3.33 over the E-isomer
which was also confirmed by calculations showing an energy
gap of 3 kcal/mol.
In general the pyrimidine ring is well represented in a number
of kinase inhibitors such as imatinib (3.36), erlotinib (3.37) and
lapatinib (3.38) (Figure 10).
In order to prepare the core heterocyclic unit a direct conden-
sation between a 1,3-dicarbonyl compound 3.39 and an amidine
or guanidine 3.40 is frequently employed (Scheme 36a). Alter-
natively, an amidine can be condensed with a vinylogous amide
3.41 resulting in the direct formation of 2,4-disubstituted pyrim-

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2294
Figure 10: Structures of selected pyrimidine containing drugs.
Scheme 36: General preparation of pyrimidines and dihydropyrimidones.
idines. These condensations often require relatively harsh reac-
tion conditions despite this they are of great value as they
involve cheap or easily accessible materials and typically only
form water as the principle byproduct.
In other syntheses the Biginelli reaction [92] has been employed
to give rapid access to several related dihydropyrimidone struc-
tures 3.43 that can be easily oxidised to the corresponding aro-
matic forms. In this classic three-component reaction an alde-
hyde (3.44), an α-ketoester (3.45) and an urea (3.46) undergo a
multicomponent coupling furnishing the desired heterocycle
with up to five variable substituents (Scheme 36b). Conse-
quently, these MCR (multicomponent reactions) are important
in accessing highly functionalised building blocks commonly
used in early research and discovery programs to enable
scoping of structure activity patterns.
A modification of the above pyrimidine synthesis has been
applied in the generation of imatinib (3.36, Gleevec) which is
Novartis’ tyrosine kinase inhibitor used for the treatment of
chronic myeloic leukaemia. In a patented route the aldol prod-
uct 3.47 undergoes a condensation reaction with guanidine 3.48
in basic media to give the 2-aminopyrimidine 3.49 (Scheme 37)
[93]. After generating the functional pyrimidine core a
hydrazine-mediated reduction of the nitro group in the side
chain was conducted with Raney-Nickel as the catalyst. Amide
formation with 4-chloromethylbenzoyl chloride (3.50) and
a direct displacement of the benzylic chloride with
N-methylpiperazine (1.118) complete this synthesis of imatinib
in excellent overall yields.
One noteworthy feature of this imatinib synthesis is that it is
specifically designed for facile isolation of intermediates by

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2295
Scheme 37: Synthesis of imatinib.
Scheme 38: Flow synthesis of imatinib.
precipitation due to their limited solubility in non-polar solvents
[94]. Whilst this process was efficient in enabling the isolation
of pure material after each step, it does not encourage tele-
scoping of steps, which would in principal increase the overall
efficiency of the process. Recently, similar approaches have
been utilised in the academic environment using enabling tech-
niques in a route to imatinib. For instance, our group has
employed continuous flow synthesis methods to imatinib
[95,96]. The route not only afforded imatinib but led to many
previously inaccessible derivatives in an automated fashion
within a single working day (Scheme 38). In addition, this par-
ticular sequence showcases the uses of scavenger resins for
in-line purification as the synthesis progresses and features the
use of a Buchwald–Hartwig amination in a late stage fragment
coupling. While it was sufficient to access only small amounts
of these structures (around 50 mg), these techniques are
currently being adopted by several major pharmaceutical
companies in order to enhance drug development and even
manufacturing sequences.
Erlotinib (3.37, Tarceva) is another related medication which is
used to treat non-small lung cancer as well as pancreatic cancer

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2296
Scheme 39: Syntheses of erlotinib.
by targeting the epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine
kinase. The structure feature of this compound is the trisubsti-
tuted quinazoline core bearing an aniline moiety and two poly-
ether appendages (Scheme 39). A representative route to 3.37
[97,98] enlists ethyl 3,4-dihydroxybenzoate (3.59) which after
double etherification and incorporation of an amine was then
subjected to a condensation reaction with formamide (3.60) at
elevated temperature. Chlorination of the resulting quinazoli-
none 3.61 with phosphorous oxychloride in the presence of
N,N-dimethylaniline ultimately generates the starting material
for the final SNAr reaction with 3-aminophenylacetylene (3.62)
and completes the optimised synthesis of 3.37 (Scheme 39).
One reported drawback of the above synthesis was the insta-
bility of the chloroquinazoline intermediate 3.63. Recent
improvements circumvent this issue by converting the quina-
zolinone 3.61 to the corresponding methylthioquinazoline 3.64
by thiolation and a subsequent methylation (route B,
Scheme 39) [99]. Nucleophilic aromatic substitution with the
previously used aniline derivative 3.62 then furnishes erlotinib
in 73% yield. Despite adding an additional step this new proce-
dure was found to be more robust and reproducible than the
previously reported sequence (route A, Scheme 39).
An alternative route which completely avoids the intermediacy
of an activated quinazoline has also been recently reported
[100] (Scheme 40). This short synthesis starts from an elabo-
rated nitrocyanobenzene derivative 3.66 which was reduced
using sodium dithionate in water to give the corresponding
amine 3.67 in 95% yield. Treatment of this amine with
dimethylformamide dimethylacetal (DMF-DMA) gave an N,N-
dimethylformamidine 3.68 which reliably reacted with the
required aniline derivative at high temperatures in the presence
of a mild acid such as acetic acid. This reaction is believed to
proceed via a Dimroth rearrangement, in which the intermedi-
ate iminopyrimidine 3.69 undergoes a ring-opening by addition
of water. The intermediate hemi-aminal 3.70 then renders
amidoaldehyde 3.71 which after cyclisation delivers 3.37. This
overall process effectively results in the perceived migration of
the phenyl moiety from a pyrimidine-type nitrogen to the
aniline nitrogen.
GlaxoSmithKline’s lapatinib (3.38, Tykerb) is a novel dual
kinase inhibitor used in the treatment of solid tumors such as
those found in breast cancer and contains a quinazoline core
structure. It consists of a 2,5-disubstituted furan ring, which is
directly linked to the aminoquinazoline unit (Scheme 41). The
quinazoline heterocycle was prepared starting from 5-iodoan-
thranilic acid (3.72) via initial condensation with formamidine
acetate (3.73) followed by chlorination using oxalyl chloride or
phosphorous oxychloride [101]. Performing a nucleophilic aro-
matic substitution on the chloride 3.74 with aniline 3.75 renders
the extended core of lapatinib. This intermediate (3.76) was
then coupled with 5-formyl-2-furanoboronic acid (3.77) using
standard Suzuki cross-coupling conditions. Finally, a reductive
amination of the pendant aldehyde of 3.78 with 2-(methylsul-
fonyl)ethylamine (3.79) furnishes the desired product lapatinib
(Scheme 41).
Rosuvastatin (3.80, Crestor) is a competitive HMG-CoA reduc-
tase inhibitor that is marketed by AstraZeneca as an important
cholesterol lowering drug. Like all other representatives of the
statin family rosuvastatin consists of a syn-1,3-diol pharma-
cophore attached to a highly substituted heterocyclic core

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2297
Scheme 40: Synthesis of erlotinib proceeding via Dimroth rearrangement.
Scheme 41: Synthesis of lapatinib.
(Scheme 42) [102]. Various syntheses of the pyrimidine unit
have been described, Hirai and Watanabe for example reported
a classical cyclocondensation strategy converting 4-fluorobenz-
aldehyde (1.46) and an α-ketoester 3.81 to the desired pyrimi-
dine system 3.82 utilising S-methylisothiourea hemisulfate
(3.83) with a DDQ-mediated dehydrogenation [103,104]. Oxi-
dation of the thioether 3.82 followed by nucleophilic aromatic
substitution and subsequent mesylation installs the sulfonamide
moiety 3.83, after which the ester on the pyrimidine was
converted to the required aldehyde functionality 3.84, then
allowing for the introduction of the side chain 3.85 via a
Horner–Wadsworth–Emmons olefination. The newly furnished
advanced intermediate 3.86 was next desilylated and subjected
to a Narasaka reduction yielding rosuvastatin after saponifica-
tion and formation of the calcium salt.
An alternative approach to the key aldehyde 3.84 on route to
rosuvastatin has been reported which also features an N-methyl-

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2298
Scheme 42: Synthesis of rosuvastatin.
guanidine mediated pyrimidine formation (Scheme 43) [105].
This protocol was found to work well if the condensation of the
required 1,3-dicarbonyl 3.90 with the guanidine derivative 3.91
was carried out in isopropanol in the presence of sodium
isopropoxide as the base. Interestingly, the use of guanidine
itself also yielded the desired pyrimidine, however, subsequent
methylation gave a mixture of regioisomeric products. The
pyrimidine core 3.92 was activated by iodination and then
subjected to a palladium mediated hydroformylation reaction.
For this last step, which was based on earlier studies by the
Beller group [106], it was found that careful optimisation was
required with respect to the palladium source, ligand and ratio
of additives. The sulfonamide formation and attachment of the
syn-diol side chain were conducted following the previous
protocol as described above. Considering the relative lengths of
the two sequences and the combined yields it is difficult to
make much of a case for this latter route especially considering
the relative expense of the palladium and associated ligands
used in the hydroformylation. In addition most of the starting
materials and reagents are decidedly lower costing and easier to
source when pricing the first route.
4. Pyrazines and piperazines
Despite pyrimidines being the dominating isoforms/isomers
amongst the diazine-derived drug compounds the isomeric
pyrazine and pyridazine derivatives are occasionally embodied
within the top selling drugs as they can further improve
physicochemical properties such as binding affinities and
bioavailability [107]. Historically, the first pyrazine syntheses
were reported in the late 19th century when Gutknecht observed
the formation of symmetric systems by bimolecular conden-
sation of α-aminoketones and subsequent areal oxidation [108].
Despite numerous publications since those early days it is
interesting to still find elements of symmetry present in most of
today’s pyrazine-derived marketed drugs.
Varenicline (4.1, Chantix, Pfizer, Figure 11) is a partial agonist
of certain subtypes of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor;

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2299
Scheme 43: Alternative preparation of the key aldehyde towards rosuvastatin.
Figure 11: Structure comparison between nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonists.
however, despite competitively binding to these receptors it is
reported to not significantly enhance the downstream release of
the neurotransmitter dopamine, thus explaining its potential in
the treatment of patients addicted to smoking.
A comparison of the structure of varenicline with known natural
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor agonists such as (−)-cytisine
(4.2), morphine (4.3) or nicotine (4.4) shows many structural
similarities, namely, a bridging/cyclic secondary or tertiary
amine being placed distal to a polar aromatic substructure
(Figure 11). The main difference lies in the environment of the
secondary amine exemplifying commonly used tactics in
designing newer and more selective inhibitors [109]. In order to
prepare varenicline a common intermediate (4.5) has been iden-
tified and used at various stages in the history of this compound.
Early routes towards this bridged tetrahydro-1H-benzazepine
used a benzyne-cycloaddition strategy followed by OsO4-medi-
ated dihydroxylation, diol-cleavage and subsequent double
reductive amination (Scheme 44, pathway A). Alternatively, a
homologation strategy was envisaged, where the cyanohydrin
derived from carboxyindanone 4.6 was converted to the desired
intermediate 4.5 via cyanide reduction, lactam formation and
subsequent amide reduction (Scheme 44, pathway B). However,
as both of these routes were found to be cumbersome upon
scale-up due to the use of unstable and toxic reagents, a third
strategy was developed utilising non-toxic commodity reagents
(Scheme 44, pathway C) [110]. Therefore, 2-bromophenylace-
tonitrile (4.7) was subjected to a Michael addition with acrylate
4.8 followed by a Pd-catalysed cyclisation yielding indene 4.9
[111]. Under hydrogenation conditions this material furnished
an amino-ester intermediate, which upon treatment with base
produces lactam 4.10. This material can be further reduced and
protected to generate the desired building block 4.5.
After protection of the piperidine nitrogen atom of 4.5 a regio-
selective double nitration using a mixture of nitric acid and
triflic acid and reduction using Pearlmans catalyst is described
to generate an intermediate diamine which upon immediate con-
densation with glyoxal and following a mild deprotection yields
varenicline. Alternatively, 2,3-dihydroxy-1,4-dioxane (4.16)

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2300
Scheme 44: Syntheses of varenicline and its key building block 4.5.
Scheme 45: Synthetic access to eszopiclone and brimonidine via quinoxaline intermediates.
can be used instead of glyoxal under a milder set of conditions
for the formation of the pyrazine ring.
Coupling of an aromatic diamine 4.18 with glyoxal (4.19)
to produce a quinoxaline intermediate is by far the most
common approach to these molecules and is nicely illustrated
in the syntheses of the antiglaucoma agent (α2 adrenergic
agonist) brimonidine (4.22, Alphagan, [112] Scheme 45) and
the non-benzodiazepine hypnotic eszopiclone (4.26, Lunesta,
[113]).

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2301
Figure 12: Bortezomib bound in an active site of the yeast 20S proteasome ([114], pdb 2F16).
Scheme 46: Asymmetric synthesis of bortezomib.
In recent times the pyrazine-containing proteasome inhibitor
bortezomib (4.27, Velcade) has been shown to be a promising
agent for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Its structure
consists of three primary building blocks: an N-terminal
pyrazine carboxylic acid, phenylalanine and a novel boronic
acid to mimic a leucine residue. Using X-ray crystallography it
was established that bortezomib binds with various active sites
in the yeast 20S proteasome, and displays chymotryptic,
caspase-like and tryptic activities with varying degrees of
binding [114]. In all of these isoforms the peptide backbone (as
well as the pyrazine ring) provides multiple sites for H-bonding.
The lipophilic components barely assist in binding at all but
may be involved in controlling the observed selectivity towards
a particular sub-type. Importantly the boronic acid binds tightly
to a nearby threonine residue leading to overall excellent
affinity (Figure 12).
Since phenylalanine and the pyrazine carboxylic acid are
commercially available the main synthetic challenge in the
preparation of bortezomib (4.27) lies in the asymmetric syn-
thesis of the boronic acid residue. Using the Ellman chemistry,
N-tert-butanesulfinylaldimes (4.28) are readily transformed into
amino boronates using a copper mediated borylation [115].
Application of this method gave the desired leucine analogue
4.31 in high yield and excellent diastereoselectivity
(Scheme 46). Removal of the N-sulfinyl group under standard
acidic conditions subsequently yields the α-amino acid 4.31 as
the ammonium salt. This was subjected to standard peptide
coupling protocols to furnish bortezomib in four additional
steps.
Whilst the previous section would suggest pyrazines are not
especially common substrates many drug substances feature the
reduced piperazine ring system. For example, 2,5-diketopiper-
azines are typically formed by the dimerisation of amino acids.
These units can be found in the well-known phosphodiesterase
inhibitor tadalafil (4.33, Cialis, Figure 13) [7] and are prepared
by this synthetic strategy. Furthermore, upon reduction of
amino acid derived diketopiperazines chiral disubstituted piper-
azines are obtained in a concise manner. However, the majority

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2302
Figure 13: Structures of some prominent piperazine containing drugs.
Figure 14: Structural comparison between the core of aplaviroc (4.35) and a type-1 β-turn (4.36).
of piperazines found in drug molecules do not contain chiral
centres implying that their major purpose is to serve as linking
unit enhancing binding and hydrophilicity as seen in drugs like
sildenafil (4.34, Viagra), imatinib (3.36, Gleevec) or
levofloxacin (1.103, Levaquin) [116]. Alternatively, piper-
azines are found in bicyclic structures like sitagliptine (2.71,
Januvia) whose synthesis was described in the previous part of
this review.
Owing to the special properties of piperazines (increased solu-
bility and H-bond acceptor capability etc.) it is often consid-
ered to be a privileged structure and therefore occurs widely, for
instance in GlaxoSmithKlines investigational anti-HIV drug
aplaviroc (4.37) which, despite being a promising CCR5
receptor antagonist, was discontinued due to hepatotoxicity
concerns. In this compound the spirodiketopiperazine unit
(4.35) was designed to mimic a type-1 β-turn (4.36) as present
in G-protein coupled receptors (Figure 14) [117].
The synthesis of aplaviroc and its analogues can be accom-
plished via the use of an Ugi multicomponent reaction (Ugi-
MCR) [118]. The procedure involved the condensation of
piperidone 4.38 and butylamine (4.39) followed by reaction of
the resulting imine with isocyanide 4.41 and interception of the
nitrilium intermediate with the amino acid 4.40 (Scheme 47)
[119]. This sequence was completed by structural rearrange-
ment and acid-mediated ring closure to produce the spirocyclic
diketopiperazine 4.43. Following debenzylation this material
was subjected to a reductive amination finally affording
aplaviroc analogues (Scheme 47).
5. Pyridazines and perhydropyridazines
Structures containing pyridazine and perhydropyridazine rings
are gaining interest since both nitrogen atoms can be involved
with interactions with the protein target [107]. Azelastine (5.1)
for example is a selective second generation histamine antago-
nist. Its novel structural feature is a saturated azepine ring at-
tached to a phthalazinone core. A short synthesis of this mole-
cule 5.1 has been reported which employs the coupling of
hydrazine with keto-acid 5.2 to yield phthalazinone 5.3
(Scheme 48). The product when treated with 2-(2-chloroethyl)-
N-methylpyrrolidine (5.4) in hot aqueous sodium hydroxide

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2303
Scheme 47: Examplary synthesis of an aplaviroc analogue via the Ugi-MCR.
Scheme 48: Syntheses of azelastine (5.1).
furnishes azelastine by means of an interesting ring expansion.
This presumably arises through the intermediacy of [3.2.0]-
scaffold 5.5 (Scheme 48, route A) [120]. Alternatively, the
same keto-acid 5.2 can be subjected to a condensation with
substituted hydrazine 5.9, which was obtained from an acid-
mediated hydrolysis of acyl hydrazide 5.8 (Scheme 48, route
B). Although this route is longer the protocol uses a solid
hydrazide 5.7 rather than volatile hydrazine as a safer alter-
native at scale.
Another drug substance that contains a related heterocyclic
structure is cilazapril (5.12), a potent inhibitor of the Angioten-
sine Converting Enzyme (ACE) [121]. This antihypertensive
compound has a perhydropyridazine unit as part of a [5.4.0]-
bicyclic system, thus apparently enhancing stability against
metabolism. This unusual ring system evolved from structure
optimisations of earlier ACE inhibitors enalapril (5.10) and
captopril (5.11) that mimic the N-acylproline moiety respon-
sible for H-bonding (Figure 15).
The synthesis of cilazapril starts with a double condensation
between piperazic acid derivative 5.13 and acid chloride 5.14
(Scheme 49) [122]. Upon hydrogenative cleavage of both
benzyl groups and activation of the liberated carboxylic acid the
bicyclic core structure 5.16 was obtained in good overall yield.
A borane mediated reduction of the more accessible amide car-

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2304
Figure 15: Structures of captopril, enalapril and cilazapril.
Scheme 49: Synthesis of cilazapril.
bonyl in 5.16 followed by hydrazine induced removal of the
phthalimide protecting group furnishes the primary amine 5.17.
Subsequent treatment with trilflate 5.18 yields the corres-
ponding substitution product which through saponification of
the ethyl ester and hydrolysis of the tert-butyl ester furnishes
cilazapril (5.12).
6. Triazines and polyazacyclic systems
Triazines, both in the form of the 1,3,5-isomer and the 1,2,4-
isomer, are widely represented in bioactive substances whose
applications range from agrochemical to pharmaceutical usage.
In general, triazines are electron-deficient compounds that
readily undergo functionalisation reactions by nucleophilic
aromatic substitution. They are known to participate in
Diels–Alder reactions with electron-rich alkynes liberating
nitrogen gas or hydrogen cyanide respectively. Lamotrigine
(6.1, Lamictal), a sodium-channel blocker for inhibition of the
release of glutamate and aspartate contains an easily recognised
1,2,4-triazine ring. Being a widely prescribed anticonvulsant, it
has FDA approval for several symptoms ranging from bipolar
disorder and epilepsy to general mood stabilisation. The 1,2,4-
triazine unit is also present in less widely prescribed drugs such
as ceftriaxone (6.2), a cephalosporine antibiotic and azapropa-
zone (6.3), an anti-inflammatory and analgesic compound
(Figure 16), again exemplifying the general scope of biological
coverage.
The reported routes to this heterocyclic scaffold are again based
on condensation reactions often between an aminoguanidine
and a benzoyl derivative under various acidic or basic condi-
tions. By way of illustration 2,3-dichlorobenzoyl cyanide 6.4
reacts with aminoguanidine (6.5) to give an intermediate guani-
dinoiminoacetonitrile 6.6, which undergoes a base-mediated
cyclisation in methanol to yield lamotrigine in high overall
yield (Scheme 50) [123,124].
Alternatively, aminoguanidine bicarbonate (6.9) reacts with
α-(phenylimino)-2,3-dichlorophenylacetamidine hydrochloride

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2305
Figure 16: Structures of lamotrigine, ceftriaxone and azapropazone.
Scheme 50: Synthesis of lamotrigine.
Scheme 51: Alternative synthesis of lamotrigine (no yields reported).
(6.8) to form an α-(guanidinoimino)-2,3-dichlorophenylacet-
amidine salt 6.10 that can also be converted to lamotrigine
under basic conditions (Scheme 51).
In the sections presented thus far the key heterocyclic moiety
was either a monocyclic or benzannulated system. However, a
considerable number of today’s newest drugs possess two or
more annulated nitrogeneous heterocycles. Most commonly a
five-membered ring such as an imidazole or pyrazole is at-
tached to a six-membered ring containing up to four nitrogen
atoms. This next section will discuss several of the most impor-
tant of these compounds.
A first example is the antiviral compound imiquimod (6.11,
Aldara), which consists of a fused imidazo[4,5-c]quinoline ring
system. In this structure the isobutyl side chain mimics ribose
(or deoxyribose) in the nucleoside structures such as adenosine
(6.12, Figure 17).
Figure 17: Structural comparison between imiquimod and the related
adenosine nucleoside.
Imiquimod (6.11) can be obtained through several different
routes most of which begin from a quinoline core structure fol-
lowed by later installation of the imidazole ring. However,
many of these early syntheses suffer from the lengthy and step-
wise introduction of the various nitrogen atoms present in the

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2306
Scheme 52: Conventional synthesis of imiquimod (no yields reported).
Scheme 53: Synthesis of imiquimod.
core unit. An early patent route exemplifying this is depicted in
Scheme 52 [125]. This sequence starts with a SNAr reaction
between 4-chloro-3-nitroquinoline (6.13) and isobutylamine
(6.14) followed by hydrogenation of the nitro group. Upon
treatment of the resulting diaminoquinoline scaffold 6.16 with
triethyl orthoformate in glacial acetic acid the pendant imida-
zole ring is formed. In order to install the missing amino group
a three step sequence involving N-oxide formation, chlorina-
tion and amination is required to furnish imiquimod.
New, more efficient routes therefore utilise different strategies.
A considerably shorter and more flexible approach was
described in a recent patent where 2-bromobenzaldehyde (6.19)
was subjected to a Knoevenagel coupling reaction with ethyl
isocyanoacetate (6.20) (Scheme 53) [126]. The resulting acry-
late 6.21 was brominated under standard conditions with
N-bromosuccinimide and then treated with phosphorous
oxychloride to reform the previously hydrolysed isonitrile
moiety. Upon treatment of this material, 6.22, with isobutyl-
amine (6.14) the desired imidazole portion of imiquimod was
generated. The ethyl ester in 6.23 was subsequently converted
into the corresponding primary amide 6.24 as required for a
copper-mediated N-arylation reaction rendering the imidazo-
quinolinone scaffold 6.25. A phosphorous oxychloride medi-
ated chlorination of the amide and aminolysis conclude the syn-
thesis. Although the reported Ullmann reaction of 6.24 was
low-yielding, it was not optimised using modern catalyst
screening methods and could in comparison to many other
related ring formations be optimised to a much higher yield
[127].
A very different approach to imiquimod (6.11) starts from
commercially available anthranilic acid (6.26) which can be
converted to the benzoxazine 6.27 (Scheme 54) [128]. Upon
treatment of 6.27 with in situ generated hydrazoic acid the
corresponding 5-methyl-1H-tetrazole derivative 6.28 was

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2307
Scheme 54: Synthesis of imiquimod via tetrazole formation (not all yields reported).
Figure 18: Structures of various anti HIV-medications.
obtained. Esterification of the carboxylic acid followed by
cyclisation under more basic reaction conditions affords the
corresponding tetrazoloquinoline 6.29. Further sequential
manipulations can then be used to install the two nitrogen atoms
needed for the imidazole ring. Neatly the tetrazole unit when
treated with triphenylphosphine generates an intermediate
iminophosphorane 6.32 via a retro-Staudinger reaction
furnishing imiquimod upon work-up. While this route is
synthetically very interesting it is unlikely to be amenable for
transfer to bulk scale production because of the potential explo-
sive nature of the reactive tetrazole unit.
Purines alongside pyrimidine structures make up the key motifs
of the nucleotide bases of DNA and RNA. Currently, there are
five purine containing drugs listed within the top commercial
pharmaceuticals: tenofovir (6.33), valacyclovir (6.34), acyclovir
(6.35), famcyclovir (6.36) and abacavir (6.37, Figure 18).
Many of these compounds are based on guanosine or adenosine
as core heterocycle. They are often prescribed as combinations
of individual drugs for the treatment of viral resistant strains
[129]. For example, abacavir (6.37) exists as a cocktail compo-
nent in Trizivir in combination with lamivudine (3.1) and
zidovudine (3.2, AZT) or in Epzicom with lamivudine (3.1)
only. It was found that these combinations better suppress the
replication of HIV by an order of magnitude when compared to
the individual drugs. The purine ring in these systems is nearly
always introduced in the synthesis as a premade adenine or
other purine based building block. Valacyclovir (6.34) is a
prodrug of acyclovir (6.35) undergoing ester hydrolysis in vivo.

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2308
Scheme 55: Synthesis of abacavir.
Figure 19: Structures of diazepam compared to modern replacements.
Its synthesis also begins from acyclovir. For abacavir (6.37) the
guanosine analogue comes via a stepwise process (Scheme 55)
[130]. The key building block is diaminodichloropyrimidine
6.40 which can be prepared by cyclocondensation of guanidine
with diethyl malonate (6.39), followed by chlorination using
phosphorous oxychloride [131]. Formylation of both amines
with formic acid in cold acetic anhydride gives rise to the bis-
formamide 6.41, which is then treated with aminocyclopentene
6.42 to yield the required purine ring system 6.43. Finally, this
material undergoes an SNAr reaction with cyclopropylamine to
furnish abacavir (6.37).
The benzodiazepinone ring system present in diazepam (6.44) is
a well-recognised motif in a variety of sedatives prescribed to
induce sleep in people suffering insomnia. However, more
recently these structures have been superseded by species
incorporating different heterocyclic scaffolds such as zolpidem
(6.45) [6,132-134], zaleplon (6.46) [135] and eszopiclone (6.47)
[7]. These structures display anxiolytic effects but induce rela-
tively little sedation [136]. The structures of these more modern
variants are obtained by scaffold hopping protocols, a widely
used technique to bridge between apparently diverse com-
pounds (Figure 19) [137].
Amongst the novel pyrazolopyrimidine anxiolytics ocinaplon
(6.48) has been used as an important lead compound. The
patented preparation of ocinaplon [138] describes the use of
vinylogous amides undergoing condensation reactions with
guanidines or an aminopyrazole. In order to prepare the
required aminopyrazole 6.49 an addition of acetonitrile into
ethyl picolinate (6.50) under basic conditions followed by an
aldol condensation with dimethylformamide diethylacetal
(DMF-DMA) is described (Scheme 56). The resulting vinylo-
gous amide 6.52 undergoes cyclisation with aminoguanidine
(6.5) at elevated temperatures yielding the desired aminopyra-
zole 6.49. This material is subsequently progressed to the pyra-
zolopyrimidine core of ocinaplon by condensation with a
second vinylogous amide 6.53, itself derived from 4-acetylpyri-
dine and DMF.
Although ocinaplon has been discontinued as a drug due to
complications involving the liver other members of this family

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2309
Scheme 56: Synthesis of ocinaplon.
Scheme 57: Access to zaleplon and indiplon.
have been developed using analogous strategies. Two of these
alternative medications are zaleplon (6.46, Sonata) and indiplon
(6.54) which jointly share the pyrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidine as a
central component. However, they differ in their substitution
patterns (Scheme 57). The aminopyrazole in zaleplon was
prepared in a straightforward manner from hydrazine and dini-
trile 6.55 [139], whereas for indiplon the aminopyrazole struc-
ture comes from a ring-opening of an isoxazole, which yields
the vinylogous amide 6.55. The desired aminopyrazole 6.56
was obtained upon treatment with hydrazine in the normal
fashion [140].
Typical of many drug discovery programs novelty often arises
from new patentable heterocyclic scaffolds that appear to
improve the compounds pharmacokinetic and pharmacody-
namic properties. This was true of the pyrazolopyrimidone
containing drug which was initially designed for the treatment
of acute chest pain, but later turned out to be a potent PDE5
inhibitor preventing the breakdown of cGMP instead. This first-
in-class compound is known as sildenafil (6.61, Viagra), which
today is widely used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction
[141].
The pyrazolopyrimidone core of sildenafil imitates the purine
structure of the guanidine base [142]. In most routes to the pyra-
zole ring a condensation reaction between a diketoester 6.62
and hydrazine begins the process. It has been found that the
desired N-2 isomer 6.63 is normally the predominant tautomer
in solution giving the desired N-1 alkylated pyrazole product
6.65 when performed under neutral or acidic conditions in both
polar and non-polar solvents (Scheme 58, route A). Presumably,
the N-2 nitrogen is donating its lone pair into the ring such that
the N-1 nitrogen can react in a pyridine-like fashion with the
electrophile. Under basic conditions the undesired thermody-
namic N-2 methylation product 6.67 was observed [143].
Alternatively, in these reactions methylhydrazine can be used to
directly generate the methylated pyrazole products (6.65 and
6.67; Scheme 58, route B). However, the reaction only proceeds
with good regioselectivity (10:1) if the diketone 6.62 is added to

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2310
Scheme 58: Different routes towards the required N-methylpyrazole 6.65 of sildenafil.
Scheme 59: Polymer-supported reagents in the synthesis of key aminopyrazole 6.72.
a solution of methylhydrazine in ethanol. If the order of addi-
tion was reversed a 5:4 mixture of alkylation products was
instead obtained.
Our group has described a synthesis of sildenafil (6.61) in
which the pyrazole core as well as the target molecule was
prepared using only polymer supported reagents (Scheme 59)
[144]. In this sequence a highly functionalised hydrazone 6.68
can be generated and subsequently reacted with a polymer-
supported source of cyanide 6.69. The resulting cyanohy-
drazine 6.70 furnishes the desired pyrazole core 6.71 on treat-
ment with manganese dioxide under basic conditions. Continua-
tion of this approach delivered the API in high yield and
avoided laborious purification procedures at each individual
step.
In order to fulfil a process route to sildenafil (6.61), a nitration
reaction on the premade pyrazole ring of 6.65 was performed
(Scheme 60). The resulting molecule was then subjected to
ammonolysis of the ester group, both of these initial two steps
progressed in very high yield delivering a crystalline product.
Stannous chloride in ethanol was employed to reduce the nitro
group rendering an intermediate amine which was acylated with
2-ethoxybenzoyl chloride (6.77). Further reaction with aqueous
sodium hydroxide promoted the cyclisation of the bis-amide
6.78 to furnish the desired pyrazolopyrimidone structure 6.79.
Finally, a Friedel–Crafts acylation of this material with
sulfamoyl chloride 6.80 in the presence of AlCl3 was used to
generate sildenafil.
More recently several new convergent routes for the prepar-
ation of sildenafil have been reported [141]. For instance, nitrile
6.81 can be converted into imidate 6.82 and subsequently
cyclised to sildenafil with aminopyrazole 6.72 (Scheme 61,
route A).
Alternatively, imine formation between aldehyde 6.83 and the
heterocyclic amine 6.72 can be used to furnish dihydrosilde-
nafil (6.84) upon intramolecular trapping of the imine inter-
mediate. Subsequent oxidation to sildenafil can be accom-

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2311
Scheme 60: Early synthetic route to sildenafil.
Scheme 61: Convergent preparations of sildenafil.

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2312
Figure 20: Comparison of the structures of sildenafil, tadalafil and vardenafil.
Scheme 62: Short route to imidazotriazinones.
Scheme 63: Alternative route towards vardenafils core imidazotriazinone (6.95).
plished using Pd/C and trifluoroacetic acid at elevated tempera-
tures (Scheme 61, route B). The commercial synthesis,
however, utilises a CDI-mediated amide formation between
acid 6.85 and aminopyrazole 6.72, followed by base-mediated
cyclocondensation, both steps occurring with excellent yields
(Scheme 61, route C).
In addition to sildenafil (6.61) and tadalafil (4.33) a third phos-
phodiesterase inhibitor, under the name of vardenafil (6.87,
Levitra), also features amongst the top retailing pharmaceut-
icals (Figure 20). The only structural difference between varde-
nafil and sildenafil lies in the nature of the bicyclic core mimic-
king the guanidine DNA base. Here vardenafil contains an
imidazo[5,1-f][1,2,4]triazine core.
A recent paper describes an interesting route towards a number
of imidazotriazinones 6.88 by making use of an electrophilic
N-amination reaction of substituted 3H-imidazoles 6.89 fol-
lowed by cyclocondensation of the intermediate 6.90 with
formamide (Scheme 62) [145].
This route was also applied to the formal synthesis of varde-
nafil where the amido imidazole starting material 6.91 was
α-aminated using LiHMDS as base and O-(diphenylphos-
phinyl)hydroxylamine (6.92, Ph2P(O)ONH2, Scheme 63). The
subsequent acylation with 2-ethoxybenzoyl chloride (6.77)
provided the precursor for a base-mediated cyclocondensation
to the desired imidazotriazinone 6.95 which was obtained in
good yield.
In an alternative approach reported by Bayer, the substituted
imidazole ring 6.96 was formed via cyclisation of 6.97 in the
presence of chloroacetone (6.98) followed by elaboration via
halogenation [146] and subsequent copper-catalysed cyanation
to give nitrile 6.99. This intermediate then undergoes acid-
mediated ring closure delivering the imidazotriazinone core of

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2313
Scheme 64: Bayer’s approach to the vardenafil core.
Scheme 65: Large scale synthesis of vardenafil.
vardenafil (6.95) in a reasonable 19% yield over the 5 step
sequence (Scheme 64).
In order to generate vardenafil on a production scale the Bayer
group also reported the use of a amidrazone 6.100 as a cyclisa-
tion precursor (Scheme 65). First the amide oxime 6.101 was
formed from the corresponding nitrile 6.102 which upon palla-
dium-mediated N–O bond cleavage yielded an amidine deriva-
tive on route to the desired amidrazone 6.100 through exchange
with hydrazine. This material was then subjected to a conden-
sation reaction with keto-ester 6.103 in refluxing methanol fol-
lowed by a phosphorous oxychloride mediated ring closure
yielding imidazotriazinone 6.95. The synthesis of vardenafil
was completed by a stepwise sulfamoylation protocol.
A structurally related drug to vardenafil is Schering’s temozolo-
mide (6.105, Temodar), an antineoplastic medication consisting
of an unusual imidazo[5,1-d]1,2,3,5-tetrazine core. Temozolo-
mide itself is a prodrug, which after intestinal absorption can
cross the blood brain barrier where it is readily hydrolysed
liberating carbon dioxide and 5-(methyltriazen-1-yl)-imidazole-
4-carboxamide (6.106), which further fragments into
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (6.107) and the highly reac-
tive methyldiazonium cation (6.108) (Scheme 66) [147]. This
methyldiazonium cation is a powerful electrophile capable of
methylating guanine nucleosides at the C6 carbonyl oxygen and
eventually leading to base-pair mismatch and interruption of
DNA replication thus accounting for its wide use in the treat-
ment of advanced cancers.
The common intermediate in the synthesis of temozolomide is
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (6.107) which can be
prepared from N-(2-amino-1,2-dicyanovinyl)formamidine
(6.111, [148-152]) under basic conditions (Scheme 67). Its
diazotisation followed by reaction with methyl isocyanate
(6.113) affords temozolomide in a non-concerted cycloaddition

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2314
Scheme 66: Mode of action of temozolomide (6.105) as methylating agent.
Scheme 67: Different routes to temozolomide.
sequence [153]. However, due to the dangers of contamination
by residual methyl isocyanate [154] this route would not be
acceptable on industrial scale. Therefore in an alternative ap-
proach, 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide (6.107) can be
treated with 4-nitrophenyl chloroformate to yield carbamate
6.114 [155]. This material reacts with methylhydrazine to form
semicarbazide 6.115 which can be oxidised with tetrabutylam-
monium iodide and periodic acid furnishing temozolomide.
However, the use of highly toxic methylhydrazine also reduces
the application of this route in a process setting.
A more safe and benign approach reports upon the high yielding
conversion of key imidazole 6.107 into urea derivative 6.117
using N-succinimidyl-N’-methyl carbamate (6.118)
(Scheme 68) [156]. Upon treatment of this material with sodium
nitrite and tartaric acid temozolomide is quickly obtained, albeit
as a separable 1:1 mixture with the related azaisoxanthine
(6.119). The various reported routes towards this drug hence
demonstrate the delicate balance between safety and efficiency
when preparing such a compound on large scale.
When analysing the heterocyclic core structures discussed in the
last part of this article, one will recognise the manifold struc-
tural differences and consequently unique modes of actions of
these compounds. However, it is remarkable to see so few
marketed drugs containing those novel and structurally com-
plex heterocyclic cores. In particular the absence of heteroatoms
such as oxygen and sulfur seems particularly striking consid-
ering their abundance within the previously reviewed 5-
membered heterocycles.
In a recent article [157] this finding was addressed and using
computer based algorithms it was predicted that numerous
interesting heterocycles are in fact tractable although they

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2315
Scheme 68: Safer route towards temozolomide.
appear to be unknown to the synthetic community (Figure 21).
With this in mind it is hoped that medicinal chemists are
currently exploiting such unexplored scaffolds and that we will
see them incorporated in future drug molecules.
Figure 21: Some unreported heterocyclic scaffolds in top market
drugs.
Conclusion
After compiling the above material a number of conclusions can
be drawn regarding the abundance of certain heterocycles and
the frequency and nature of typical chemical transformations
applied in current drug syntheses. Amongst the aromatic hetero-
cycles encountered in drug molecules in this review pyridines
and pyrimidines are most common and are followed by purines.
It is likely this results from the abundance of these heterocycles
in natural products such as alkaloids and important cofactors/
vitamins (pyridines) and nucleotides (pyrimidines and purines).
Furthermore, this might suggest a classical approach to drug
design where substrate analogues gain inspiration from existing
natural ligands. The use of robust scaffold hopping methods and
more advanced design parameters have inspired novel hetero-
cylic approaches with distinct physicochemical advantages.
Interestingly, many of these newer scaffolds were originally
thought to be synthetically intractable and hence were over-
looked for many years. Nevertheless, the drive for novel patent
positions has resulted in the discovery of several new hetero-
cyclic syntheses.
It is evident that reduced forms of parent heterocycles such as
piperidines and piperazines and their beneficial features
(H-bonding, bioavailability, hydrophilic spacer, pharma-
cophore etc.) are beginning to dominate synthesis strategies. In
addition, these structures can be used easily in order to intro-
duce asymmetry and display usable chiral information in drug
molecules to improve potency.
Transformations that lead to six-membered heterocycles show
high dependence on condensation reactions between carbonyl
compounds and nitrogen-containing building blocks as the pri-
mary synthesis route. As such ammonia, amidines/guanidines or
amidrazones become classical reaction partners with ketoesters
and diketones. Due to the electron-deficient nature of many of
these heterocycles nucleophilic aromatic substitutions are
widely used to subsequently functionalise these ring systems.
For fully reduced heterocycles more linear synthesis sequences
are used in their construction often with an eye to developing
asymmetric processes. Newer chemistries using metathesis or
various organometallic protocols are beginning to have a more
important impact. Owing to the multi-step nature which is
necessary to generate novel heterocycles we should anticipate
that further advances will be necessary, especially sequences
that lead to ready telescoping of the routes. Without doubt the
pressure currently imposed on pharmaceutical companies in
order to deliver novel species more rapidly and at lower cost
will drive innovation and discovery to enable many new
methods.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Royal
Society (to I.R.B. and M.B.).

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2316
References
1.
Emsley, J. The Consumer’s Good Chemical Guide; W. H. Freeman,
1994.
2.
Nicolaou, K. C.; Montagnon, T. Molecules that Changed the World;
Wiley-VCH, 2008.
3.
Silverman, R. B. The Organic Chemistry of Drug Design and Drug
Action; Elsevier Academic Press: Burlington, MA, 2004.
4.
Li, J.-J.; Johnson, D. S.; Sliskovich, D. R.; Roth, B. D. Contemporary
Drug Synthesis; John Wiley and Sons, 2004.
5.
Scannell, J. W.; Blanckley, A.; Boldon, H.; Warrington, B.
Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2012, 11, 191–200. doi:10.1038/nrd3681
6.
Baxendale, I. R.; Hayward, J. J.; Ley, S. V.; Tranmer, G. K.
ChemMedChem 2007, 2, 768–788. doi:10.1002/cmdc.200700008
7.
Baumann, M.; Baxendale, I. R.; Ley, S. V.; Nikbin, N.
Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2011, 7, 442–495. doi:10.3762/bjoc.7.57
8.
Kiuru, P.; Yli-Kauhaluoma, J. Pyridine and Its Derivatives. In
Heterocycles in Natural Product Synthesis; Majumdar, K.;
Chattopadhyay, S. K., Eds.; Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA:
Weinheim, Germany, 2011; pp 267–297.
doi:10.1002/9783527634880.ch8
9.
Carlson, G. P. Toxicol. Lett. 1996, 85, 173–178.
doi:10.1016/0378-4274(96)03660-0
10. Pryde, D. C.; Dalvie, D.; Hu, Q.; Jones, P.; Obach, R. S.; Tran, T.-D.
J. Med. Chem. 2010, 53, 8441–8460. doi:10.1021/jm100888d
11. Garvey, D. S.; Wasicak, J. T.; Elliott, R. L.; Lebold, S. A.;
Hettinger, A.-N.; Carrera, G. M.; Lin, N.-H.; He, Y.; Holladay, M. W.;
Anderson, D. J.; Cadman, E. D.; Raszkiewicz, J. L.; Sullivan, J. P.;
Arneric, S. P. J. Med. Chem. 1994, 37, 4455–4463.
doi:10.1021/jm00052a005
12. Olesen, P. H.; Tønder, J. E.; Hansen, J. B.; Hansen, H. C.; Rimvall, K.
Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2000, 8, 1443–1450.
doi:10.1016/S0968-0896(00)00063-8
13. Gohlke, H.; Gündisch, D.; Schwarz, S.; Seitz, G.; Tilotta, M. C.;
Wegge, T. J. Med. Chem. 2002, 45, 1064–1072.
doi:10.1021/jm010936y
14. Heinisch, G.; Holzer, W.; Kunz, F.; Langer, T.; Lukavsky, P.;
Pechlaner, C.; Weissenberger, H. J. Med. Chem. 1996, 39,
4058–4064. doi:10.1021/JM960341G
15. Bashford, K. E.; Burton, M. B.; Cameron, S.; Cooper, A. L.;
Hogg, R. D.; Kane, P. D.; MacManus, D. A.; Matrunola, C. A.;
Moody, C. J.; Robertson, A. A. B.; Warne, M. R. Tetrahedron Lett.
2003, 44, 1627–1629. doi:10.1016/S0040-4039(03)00034-0
16. Henry, G. D. Tetrahedron 2004, 60, 6043–6061.
doi:10.1016/j.tet.2004.04.043
17. Joule, J. A.; Smith, G.; Mills, K. Heterocyclic chemistry, 3rd ed.;
Chapman and Hall: London, 1995; pp 72–119.
18. Lehmann, J.; Alzien, T.; Martin, R. E.; Britton, R. Org. Lett. 2013, 15,
3550–3553. doi:10.1021/ol4013525
19. Pabst, G. R.; Schmid, K.; Sauer, J. Tetrahedron Lett. 1998, 39,
6691–6694. doi:10.1016/S0040-4039(98)01438-5
20. Agarwal, N.; Goel, A.; Ram, V. J. J. Org. Chem. 2003, 68, 2983–2985.
doi:10.1021/jo0204496
21. Cotterill, I. C.; Usyatinsky, A. Y.; Arnold, J. M.; Clark, D. S.;
Dordick, J. S.; Michels, P. C.; Khmelnitski, Y. L. Tetrahedron Lett.
1998, 39, 1117–1120. doi:10.1016/S0040-4039(97)10796-1
22. Enyedy, I. J.; Sakamuri, S.; Zaman, W. A.; Johnson, K. M.; Wang, S.
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2003, 13, 513–517.
doi:10.1016/S0960-894X(02)00943-5
23. Chuck, R. Appl. Catal., A 2005, 280, 75–82.
doi:10.1016/j.apcata.2004.08.029
24. Krishna Mohan, K. V. V.; Suresh Kumar Reddy, K.; Narender, N.;
Kulkarni, S. J. J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem. 2009, 298, 99–102.
doi:10.1016/j.molcata.2008.10.010
25. Krishnan, V.; Bhat, A.; Sachade, N. Process for the Preparation of
Pyridine and β-Picoline in Vapour Phase via Amorphous
Silica-Alumina Catalysts. Indian Patent IN 179244, Jan 25, 1994.
26. Suresh, D. D.; DiCosimo, R.; Loiseau, R.; Friedrich, M. S.;
Szabo, H.-C. Preparation of 3-Methylpyridine from
2-Methylglutaronitrile. U.S. Patent 5,066,809, Nov 19, 1991.
27. Piwinski, J. J.; Wong, J. K.; Green, M. J.; Ganguly, A. K.; Billah, M. M.;
West, R. E., Jr.; Kreutner, W. J. Med. Chem. 1991, 34, 457–461.
doi:10.1021/jm00105a069
28. Sachs, G.; Shin, J. M.; Howden, C. W. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther.
2006, 23 (Suppl. 2), 2–8. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2036.2006.02943.x
29. Bekhazi, M.; Zoghbi, M. Synthesis of Omeprazole-type Pyridine
Derivatives and Intermediates thereof. WO Patent 1997/029103, Aug
14, 1997.
30. Katrizky, A. R.; Ostercamp, D. L.; Yousaf, T. I. Tetrahedron 1987, 43,
5171–5186. doi:10.1016/S0040-4020(01)87693-6
31. Cantello, B. C. C.; Cawthorne, M. A.; Haigh, D.; Hindley, R. M.;
Smith, S. A.; Thurlby, P. L. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 1994, 4,
1181–1184. doi:10.1016/S0960-894X(01)80325-5
32. Cantello, B. C. C.; Cawthorne, M. A.; Cottam, G. P.; Duff, P. T.;
Haigh, D.; Hindley, R. M.; Lister, C. A.; Smith, S. A.; Thurlby, P. L.
J. Med. Chem. 1994, 37, 3977–3985. doi:10.1021/jm00049a017
33. Gaonkar, S. L.; Shimizu, H. Tetrahedron 2010, 66, 3314–3317.
doi:10.1016/j.tet.2010.03.006
34. Gilchrist, T. L. Heterocyclic Chemistry; John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
35. Rybakov, V. B.; Bush, A. A.; Babaev, E. B.; Aslanov, L. A.
Acta Crystallogr., Sect. E 2004, 60, o160–o161.
doi:10.1107/S1600536803029295
36. Zimmerman, H. E.; Grunewald, G. L.; Paufler, R. M. Org. Synth. 1966,
46, 101–104.
37. Parker, R. H.; Jones, W. M. J. Org. Chem. 1978, 43, 2548–2550.
doi:10.1021/jo00406a058
38. Wiley, R. H.; Smith, N. R. Organic Syntheses; Collect. Vol. 4; John
Wiley & Sons: New York, 1963; p 201.
39. von Pechmann, H. Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1891, 264, 261–309.
doi:10.1002/jlac.18912640202
40. Ashworth, I. W.; Bowden, M. C.; Dembofsky, B.; Levin, D.; Moss, W.;
Robinson, E.; Szczur, N.; Virica, J. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2003, 7,
74–81. doi:10.1021/op025571l
41. Li, X.; Abell, C.; Warrington, B. H.; Ladlow, M. Org. Biomol. Chem.
2003, 1, 4392–4395. doi:10.1039/b307549d
42. Prashanta Kumar, B. R.; Nanjan, M. J.; Suresh, B.; Karvekar, M. D.;
Adhikary, L. J. Heterocycl. Chem. 2006, 43, 897–903.
doi:10.1002/jhet.5570430413
43. Frank, R. L.; Pilgrim, F. J.; Riener, E. F. Org. Synth. 1950, 30.
doi:10.1002/0471264180.os030.15
44. McGall, G. H.; Barone, A. D. Nucleic Acid Labeling Compounds. U.S.
Patent 2001/0018514 A1, Aug 30, 2001.
45. Finch, H.; Fox, C.; Sajad, A. Respiratory Disease Treatment. W.O.
Patent WO2010015818, Feb 11, 2010.
46. Adiyaman, M.; Guner, D.; Ridvanoglu, N.; Yurdakul, A. A. Process for
the Production of substituted Phenyl Ethers. W.O. Patent
WO2004000810, Dec 31, 2003.
47. Nersesian, D. L.; Black, L. A.; Miller, T. R.; Vortherms, T. A.;
Esbenshade, T. A.; Hancock, A. A.; Cowart, M. D.
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2008, 18, 355–359.
doi:10.1016/j.bmcl.2007.10.067

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2317
48. Halama, A.; Hejtmankova, L.; Lustig, P.; Richter, J.; Srsnova, L.;
Jirman, J. Method for obtaining Pioglitazone as an antidiabetic agent.
W.O. Patent WO02088120, Nov 7, 2002.
49. Thijs, L.; Zhu, J. Processes for making Pioglitazone and compounds
of the processes. W.O. Patent WO2005080387, Sept 1, 2005.
50. Bhanja, C.; Jena, S. J. Chem. Pharm. Res. 2012, 4, 4323–4333.
51. Martina, S. D.; Vesta, K. S.; Ripley, T. L. Ann. Pharmacother. 2005,
39, 854–862.
52. Rohbogner, C. J.; Wirth, S.; Knochel, P. Org. Lett. 2010, 9,
1984–1987. doi:10.1021/ol100453x
53. Davies, I. W.; Marcoux, J.-F.; Corley, E. G.; Journet, M.; Cai, D.-W.;
Palucki, M.; Wu, J.; Larsen, R. D.; Rossen, K.; Pye, P. J.;
DiMichele, L.; Dormer, P.; Reider, P. J. J. Org. Chem. 2000, 65,
8415–8420. doi:10.1021/jo000870z
54. Davies, I. W.; Marcoux, J.-F.; Wu, J.; Palucki, M.; Corley, E. G.;
Robbins, M. A.; Tsou, N.; Ball, R. G.; Dormer, P.; Larsen, R. D.;
Reider, P. J. J. Org. Chem. 2000, 65, 4571–4574.
doi:10.1021/jo000159u
55. Hooper, D. C. Drugs 1999, 58 (Suppl. 2), 6–10.
doi:10.2165/00003495-199958002-00002
56. Andriole, V. T. Formulary 2002, 37 (Suppl. 3), 13–15.
57. Cosme, G. A.; Fernandez, L. S. P.; Molina, P. A.; Palomo, N. F.;
Villasante, P. J. Method for Preparing Moxifloxacin and Moxifloxacin
Hydrochloride. Eur. Patent EP 1 832 587 A1, Sept 12, 2007.
58. Petersen, U.; Schenke, T.; Krebs, A.; Grohe, K.; Schriewer, M.;
Haller, I.; Metzger, K. G.; Endermann, R.; Zeiler, H.-J.
7-(1-Pyrrolidinyl)-3-quinolone- and naphthyridonecarboxylic acid
Derivatives as Antibacterial Agents and Feed Additives. U.S. Patent
4,990,517, Feb 5, 1991.
59. Petersen, U.; Schenke, T.; Krebs, A.; Grohe, K.; Schriewer, M.;
Haller, I.; Metzger, K. G.; Endermann, R.; Zeiler, H.-J.
7-(1-Pyrrolidinyl)-3-quinolone- and naphthyridonecarbolxylic acid
Derivatives as Antibacterial Agents and Feed Additives. U.S. Patent
5,607,942, March 4, 1997.
60. Petersen, U.; Schenke, T.; Krebs, A.; Schenke, T.; Philipps, T.;
Grohe, K.; Bremm, K.-D.; Endermann, R.; Metzger, K. G. New
Quinoline and Naphthyridinonecarboxylic Acid Derivatives. Ger.
Patent DE 4 208 792 A1, March 23, 1993.
61. Cheng, Y.; Femg, S.; Wang, Z. Novel and Economical Process for
Preparing (S,S)-2,8-Diazabicyclo[4.3.0]nonane and its Enantiomer.
U.S. Patent 2008/0221329 A1, Sept 11, 2008.
62. Chu, D. T.; Mitscher, L. A. Process for Preparation of Racemate and
Optically Active Ofloxacin and Related Derivatives. U.S. Patent
4,777,253, Oct 11, 1988.
63. Hayakawa, I. D. S.; Tanaka, Y. D. S. Tricyclic compounds, a Process
for their Production and Pharmaceutical Compositions Containing said
Compounds. Eur. Patent EP 101 829 B1, Dec 30, 1986.
64. Bridgwood, K. L.; Veitch, G. E.; Ley, S. V. Org. Lett. 2008, 16,
3627–3629. doi:10.1021/ol801399w
65. Buske, G. Chem. Eng. News 2009, 87, 2.
66. Campbell, S. F.; Cross, P. E.; Stubbs, J. K. 2-(Secondary
Aminoalkoxymethyl)dihydropyridine Derivatives as Anti-Ischaemic and
Anti-Hypertensive Agents. U.S. Patent 4,572,909, Feb 25, 1986.
67. Lukša, J.; Josič, D.; Kremser, M.; Kopitar, Z.; Milutinovič, S.
J. Chromatogr., B 1997, 703, 185–193.
doi:10.1016/S0378-4347(97)00394-0
68. Kim, S.-C.; Choi, K.-M.; Cheong, C.-S. Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 2002,
23, 143–144.
69. Sircar, I.; Anderson, K. R.; Bonadies, L. Tetrahedron Lett. 1988, 29,
6835–6838. doi:10.1016/S0040-4039(00)88453-1
70. Rodriguez, G.; Varon, J. Crit. Care Shock 2006, 9, 37–41.
71. Andersen, K. H.; Nordlander, M.; Westerlund, R. C. Short-Acting
Dihydropyridines. U.S. Patent 5,856,346, Jan 5, 1999.
72. Vishnu, N. R.; Puruschottam, J. A.; Kumar, S. S. Preparation of
Dihydropyridines. Eur. Patent EP 2 386 544, Nov 16, 2011.
73. Sanguinetti, M. C.; Tristani-Firouzi, M. Nature 2006, 440, 463–469.
doi:10.1038/nature04710
74. Andersen, K. E.; Braestrup, C.; Gronwald, F. C.; Joergensen, A. S.;
Nielsen, E. B.; Sonnewald, U.; Soerensen, P. O.; Suzdak, P. D.;
Knutsen, L. J. S. J. Med. Chem. 1993, 36, 1716–1725.
doi:10.1021/jm00064a005
75. Lei, A.; Chen, M.; He, M.; Zhang, X. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2006,
4343–4347. doi:10.1002/ejoc.200600558
76. Broadley, K. J.; Kelly, D. R. Molecules 2001, 6, 142–193.
77. Daeniker, H. U.; Grob, C. A. Org. Synth. 1964, 44.
doi:10.1002/0471264180.os044.30
78. Arai, N.; Akashi, M.; Sugizaki, S.; Ooka, H.; Inoue, T.; Ohkuma, T.
Org. Lett. 2010, 12, 3380–3383. doi:10.1021/ol101200z
79. Wang, S.; Onaran, M. B.; Seto, C. T. Org. Lett. 2010, 12, 2690–2693.
doi:10.1021/ol1004356
80. Peters, J.-U. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 2007, 7, 579–595.
81. Mattei, P.; Boehringer, M.; Di Gorgio, P.; Fischer, H.; Hennig, M.;
Huwyler, J.; Koçer, B.; Kuhn, B.; Loeffler, B. M.; MacDonald, A.;
Narquizian, R.; Rauber, E.; Sebokova, E.; Sprecher, U.
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2010, 20, 1109–1113.
doi:10.1016/j.bmcl.2009.12.024
82. Albrecht, S.; Adam, J.-M.; Bromberger, U.; Diodone, R.; Fettes, A.;
Fischer, R.; Goeckel, V.; Hildbrand, S.; Moine, G.; Weber, M.
Org. Process Res. Dev. 2011, 15, 503–514. doi:10.1021/op2000207
83. Warnke, D.; Barreto, J.; Temesgen, Z. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2007, 47,
1570–1579. doi:10.1177/0091270007308034
84. Matsutame, C.; Uchiumi, C.; Asada, H.; Umetsu, T. Preparation of
Uracil. Jap. Patent 58038268 A, March 5, 1983.
85. Guo, X.; Shen, J. Method for Synthesising Thymine. Chin. Patent CN
101143850A, March 19, 2008.
86. Vorbrüggen, H.; Krolikiewicz, K.; Bennua, B. Chem. Ber. 1981, 114,
1234–1255. doi:10.1002/cber.19811140404
87. Jin, H.; Siddiqui, M. A.; Evans, C. A.; Tse, H. L. A.; Mansour, T. S.;
Goodyear, M. D.; Ravenscroft, P.; Beels, C. D. J. Org. Chem. 1995,
60, 2621–2623. doi:10.1021/jo00113a050
88. Roy, B. N.; Singh, G. P.; Srivastava, D.; Jadhav, H. S.; Saini, M. B.;
Aher, U. B. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2009, 13, 450–455.
doi:10.1021/op800228h
89. Summa, V.; Petrocchi, A.; Bonelli, F.; Crescenzi, B.; Donghi, M.;
Ferrara, M.; Fiore, F.; Gardelli, C.; Paz, O. G.; Hazuda, D. J.;
Jones, P.; Kinzel, O.; Laufer, R.; Monteagudo, E.; Muraglia, E.;
Nizi, E.; Orvieto, F.; Pace, P.; Pescatore, G.; Scarpelli, R.;
Witmer, M. V.; Rowley, M. J. Med. Chem. 2008, 51, 5843–5855.
doi:10.1021/jm800245z
90. Belyk, K. M.; Morrison, H. G.; Jones, P.; Summa, V. Potassium Salt of
an HIV-Integrase Inhibitor. WO Patent 2006/060712 A2, June 8, 2006.
91. Pye, P. J.; Zhong, Y.-L.; Jones, G. O.; Reamer, R. A.; Houk, K. N.;
Askin, D. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2008, 47, 4134–4136.
doi:10.1002/anie.200703681
92. Ryabukhin, S. V.; Plaskon, A. S.; Ostapchuk, E. N.;
Volochnyuk, D. M.; Tolmachev, A. A. Synthesis 2007, 417–427.
doi:10.1055/s-2007-965881

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2318
93. Szczepek, W.; Luniewski, W.; Kaczmarek, L.; Zagrodzki, B.;
Samson-Lazinska, D.; Szelejewski, W.; Skarzynski, M. Process for
Preparation of Imatinib Base. U.S. Patent 7,674,901 B2, March 9,
2010.
94. Deadman, B. J.; Hopkin, M. D.; Baxendale, I. R.; Ley, S. V.
Org. Biomol. Chem. 2013, 11, 1766–1800. doi:10.1039/C2OB27003J
95. Hopkin, M. D.; Baxendale, I. R.; Ley, S. V. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46,
2450–2452. doi:10.1039/c001550d
96. Hopkin, M. D.; Baxendale, I. R.; Ley, S. V. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2013,
11, 1822–1839. doi:10.1039/C2OB27002A
97. Schnur, R. C.; Arnold, L. D. Alkynyl- and Azido-Substituted
4-Anilinoquinazolines. U.S. Patent 5,747,498, May 5, 1998.
98. Knesl, P.; Roeseling, D.; Jordis, U. Molecules 2006, 11, 286–297.
99. Chandregowda, V.; Rao, G. V.; Reddy, G. C. Synth. Commun. 2007,
37, 3409–3415. doi:10.1080/00397910701483761
100.Chandregowda, V.; Rao, G. V.; Reddy, G. C. Org. Process Res. Dev.
2007, 11, 813–816. doi:10.1021/op700054p
101.Nishino, S.; Hirotsu, K.; Shima, H.; Harada, T.; Oda, H. Process for
Producing 4-Aminoquinazoline Compounds. Eur. Patent EP 1 481 971
B1, Nov 16, 2011.
102.Istvan, E. S.; Deisenhofer, J. Science 2001, 292, 1160–1164.
doi:10.1126/science.1059344
103.Hirai, K.; Ishiba, T.; Koike, H.; Watanabe, M. Pyrimidine Derivatives.
U.S. Patent 5,260,440, Nov 9, 1993.
104.Watanabe, M.; Koike, H.; Ishiba, T.; Okada, T.; Seo, S.; Hirai, K.
Bioorg. Med. Chem. 1997, 5, 437–444.
doi:10.1016/S0968-0896(96)00248-9
105.Andrushko, N.; Andrushko, V.; König, G.; Spannenberg, A.; Börner, A.
Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2008, 847–853. doi:10.1002/ejoc.200700813
106.Klaus, S.; Neumann, H.; Zapf, A.; Strübing, D.; Hübner, S.;
Almena, J.; Riermeier, T.; Gross, P.; Sarich, M.; Krahnert, W.-R.;
Rossen, K.; Beller, M. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2006, 45, 154–158.
doi:10.1002/anie.200502697
107.Wermuth, C. G. MedChemComm 2011, 2, 935–941.
doi:10.1039/c1md00074h
108.Gutknecht condensation. Comprehensive Organic Name Reactions
and Reagents; Wiley, 2010; pp 1302–1304.
doi:10.1002/9780470638859.conrr289
109.Coe, J. W.; Brooks, P. R.; Vetelino, M. G.; Wirtz, M. C.; Arnold, E. P.;
Huang, J.; Sands, S. B.; Davis, T. I.; Lebel, L. A.; Fox, C. B.;
Shrikhande, A.; Heym, J. H.; Schaeffer, E.; Rollema, H.; Lu, Y.;
Mansbach, R. S.; Chambers, L. K.; Rovetti, C. C.; Schulz, D. W.;
Tingley, F. D., III; ’Neill, B. T. J. Med. Chem. 2005, 48, 3474–3477.
doi:10.1021/jm050069n
110.Busch, F. R.; Hawkins, J. M.; Mustakis, L. G.; Sinay, T. G., Jr.;
Watson, T. J. M. Preparation of High Purity Substituted Quinoxaline.
WO Patent 2006/0900236, Aug 31, 2006.
111.Singer, R. A.; McKinley, J. D.; Barbe, G.; Farlow, R. A. Org. Lett.
2004, 6, 2357–2360. doi:10.1021/ol049316s
112.Gluchowski, C. (2-Imidazolin-2-ylamino)tetrahydroquinoxalines and
methods for using same. Eur. Patent EP 0422878 A1, April 17, 1991.
113.Kavishwar, G. A.; Kavishwar, S. G.; Naik, A. M.; Sawant, S. D.
Process for the Preparation of Eszopiclone. U.S. Patent
2008/0146800 A1, June 19, 2008.
114.Groll, M.; Berkers, C. R.; Ploegh, H. L.; Ovaa, H. Structure 2006, 14,
451–456. doi:10.1016/j.str.2005.11.019
115.Beenen, M. A.; An, C.; Ellman, J. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130,
6910–6911. doi:10.1021/ja800829y
116.Källström, S.; Leino, R. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2008, 16, 601–635.
doi:10.1016/j.bmc.2007.10.018
117.Habashita, H.; Kokubo, M.; Hamano, S.; Hamanaka, N.; Toda, M.;
Shibayama, S.; Tada, H.; Sagawa, K.; Fukushima, D.; Maeda, K.;
Mitsuya, H. J. Med. Chem. 2006, 49, 4140–4152.
doi:10.1021/jm060051s
118.Dömling, A.; Huang, Y. Synthesis 2008, 2859–2883.
doi:10.1055/s-0030-1257906
119.Nishizawa, R.; Nishiyama, T.; Hisaichi, K.; Matsunaga, N.;
Minamoto, C.; Habashita, H.; Takaoka, Y.; Toda, M.; Shibayama, S.;
Tada, H.; Sagawa, K.; Fukushima, D.; Maeda, K.; Mitsuya, H.
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2007, 17, 727–731.
doi:10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.10.084
120.Scheffler, G.; Engel, J.; Kutscher, B.; Sheldrick, W. S.; Bell, P.
Arch. Pharm. 1988, 321, 205–208. doi:10.1002/ardp.19883210406
121.Przyklenk, K.; Kloner, R. A. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 1989, 28,
167–175.
122.Attwood, M. R.; Hassall, C. H.; Kröhn, A.; Lawton, G.; Redshaw, S.
J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1 1986, 1011–1019.
doi:10.1039/P19860001011
123.Baxter, M. G.; Miller, A. A.; Sawyer, D. A. Substituted Aromatic
Compounds. U.S. Patent 4,602,017, July 22, 1986.
124.Baxter, M. G.; Elphick, A. R.; Miller, A. A.; Sawyer, D. A. Substituted
Aromatic Compounds. U.S. Patent 4,560,687, Dec 24, 1985.
125.Gerster, J. F. 1H-Imidazo[4,5-c]quinolin-4-amines and Antiviral Use.
U.S. Patent 4,689,338, Aug 25, 1987.
126.Allegrini, P.; Castaldi, G. A.; Colombo, L.; Mariotti, E. Process for the
Preparation of Imiquimod and Intermediates thereof. Eur. Patent EP
1529781 A1, May 11, 2005.
127.Ley, S. V.; Thomas, A. W. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2003, 42,
5400–5449. doi:10.1002/anie.200300594
128.Gerster, J. F.; Lindstrom, K. J. Process for Preparing
Imidazoquinolinamines. WO Patent 97 48704, Dec 24, 1997.
129.Pirrone, V.; Thakkar, N.; Jacobson, J. M.; Wigdahl, B.; Krebs, F. C.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 2011, 55, 1831–1842.
doi:10.1128/AAC.00976-10
130.Rossi, A.; Vecchio, E.; Pizzocaro, R.; Bedeschi, A. Process of
Preparation of Abacavir. Eur. Patent EP 1857458A1, Nov 21, 2007.
131.Jang, M.-Y.; Lin, Y.; De Jonghe, S.; Gao, L.-J.; Vanderhoydonk, B.;
Froeyen, M.; Rozenski, J.; Herman, J.; Louat, T.; Van Belle, K.;
Waer, M.; Herdewijn, P. J. Med. Chem. 2011, 54, 655–668.
doi:10.1021/jm101254z
132.Nair, D. K.; Mobin, S. M.; Namboothiri, I. N. N. Org. Lett. 2012, 14,
4580–4583. doi:10.1021/ol3020418
133.Sumalatha, Y.; Reddy, T. R.; Reddy, P. P.; Satyanarayana, B.
ARKIVOC 2009, No. ii, 315–320.
134.Guetzoyan, L.; Nikbin, N.; Baxendale, I. R.; Ley, S. V. Chem. Sci.
2013, 4, 764–769. doi:10.1039/C2SC21850J
135.Naik, A. M.; Sawant, S. D.; Kavishwar, G. A.; Kavishwar, S. G.
Int. J. ChemTech Res. 2010, 2, 1–3.
136.Licata, S. C.; Rowlett, J. K. Pharmacol., Biochem. Behav. 2008, 90,
74–89. doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2008.01.001
137.Böhm, H.-J.; Flohr, A.; Stahl, M. Drug Discovery Today: Technol.
2004, 1, 217–224. doi:10.1016/j.ddtec.2004.10.009
138.Lippa, A. S.; Chen, Z.; Skolnick, P. Salts and Co-Crystals of
Pyrazolopyrimidine Compounds, Compositions thereof and Methods
for their Production and Use. U.S. Patent 2008/0045547 A1, Feb 21,
2008.
139.Smith, C. J.; Iglesias-Sigüenza, F. J.; Baxendale, I. R.; Ley, S. V.
Org. Biomol. Chem. 2007, 5, 2758–2761. doi:10.1039/b709043a

Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 2013, 9, 2265–2319.
2319
140.Powell, D.; Gopalsamy, A.; Wang, Y. D.; Zhang, N.; Miranda, M.;
McGinnis, J. P.; Rabindran, S. K. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2007, 17,
1641–1645. doi:10.1016/j.bmcl.2006.12.116
141.Campbell, S. F. Clin. Sci. 2000, 99, 255–260.
142.Dunn, P. J. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2005, 9, 88–97.
doi:10.1021/op040019c
143.Lednicer, D. The Organic Chemistry of Drug Synthesis;
Wiley-Intersciences: New York, 1998; Vol. 6, p 180.
144.Baxendale, I. R.; Ley, S. V. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2000, 10,
1983–1986. doi:10.1016/S0960-894X(00)00383-8
145.Heim-Riether, A.; Healy, J. J. Org. Chem. 2005, 70, 7331–7337.
doi:10.1021/jo051014w
146.Nowakowski, M.; Vetter, A. Method for the Production of
2-(2-Ethoxyphenyl)-Substituted Imidazotriazinones. WO Patent
2002/50075 A1, June 27, 2002.
147.Darkes, M. J. M.; Plosker, G. L.; Jarvis, B.
Am. J. Cancer (Auckland, N. Z.) 2002, 1, 55–80.
148.Alves, M. J.; Booth, B. L.; Fernanda, M.; Proenç, J. R. P.
J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1 1990, 1705–1712.
doi:10.1039/P19900001705
149.Alves, M. J.; Booth, B. L.; Carvalho, A.; Eastwood, P. R.; Nezhat, L.;
Pritchard, R. G.; Fernanda, M.; Proença, J. R. P.
J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2 1994, 1949–1956.
doi:10.1039/P29940001949
150.Elion, G. B.; Burgi, C.; Hitchings, G. H. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1952, 74,
411–414. doi:10.1021/ja01122a037
151.Yahya-Zadeh, A.; Booth, B. L. Synth. Commun. 2001, 31, 3617–3622.
doi:10.1081/SCC-100107009
152.Yahyazadeh, A. J. Pharm. Res. 2009, 2, 302–303.
153.Lunt, E.; Stevens, M. F. G.; Stone, R.; Wooldridge, K. R. H.;
Newlands, E. D. Tetrazine Derivatives. U.S. Patent 5,260,291, Nov 9,
1993.
154.One of the biggest tragedies in chemical industry occurred on
December 2nd/3rd 1984 nearby the Indian city of Bhopal where a leak
at a manufacture plant caused 30-40 tonnes of volatile methyl
isocyanate to escape causing an estimated 10,000-20,000 causalities
in the densely populated area and leaving 60,000 residents with
severe health issues.
155.Kuo, S.-C. Synthesis of Temozolomide and Analogs. U.S. Patent
6,844,434 B2, Jan 18, 2005.
156.Turchetta, S.; De Ferra, L.; Zenoni, M.; Anibaldi, M. Process for
Preparing Temozolomide. Eur. Patent EP 2151442 A2, Feb 10, 2010.
157.Pitt, W. R.; Parry, D. M.; Perry, B. G.; Groom, C. R. J. Med. Chem.
2009, 52, 2952–2963. doi:10.1021/jm801513z
License and Terms
This is an Open Access article under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
The license is subject to the Beilstein Journal of Organic
Chemistry terms and conditions:
(http://www.beilstein-journals.org/bjoc)
The definitive version of this article is the electronic one
which can be found at:
doi:10.3762/bjoc.9.265
