Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 72, No. 7, pp. 1207–1228, 2000.
© 2000 IUPAC
1207
*Pure Appl. Chem. Vol. 72, No. 7, 2000.  A special topic issue on green chemistry. This introductory overview is an
outcome of activity by the Working Party on Synthetic Pathways and Processes in Green Chemistry of the IUPAC
Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry; Membership: Pietro Tundo (Chairman), Paul Anastas, Masakazu
Anpo (Osaka Prefecture University, Japan), David StC. Black (Chairman, IUPAC Subcommittee on Organic
Synthesis), Joseph Breen‡, Terrence Collins, Werner Klein (President, IUPAC Chemistry and the Environment
Division; IUCT, Germany), Guy Martens (IUPAC Committee on Chemistry and Industry; Solvay, s.a. Belgium),
Sofia Memoli (Secretary), Junshi Miyamoto (Past President, IUPAC Chemistry and the Environment Division),
Tomasz Modro (University of Pretoria, South Africa), Martyn Poliakoff, and N. William Tumas.
†Corresponding author: E-mail: tundop@unive.it
‡To whose memory this paper is dedicated. Joe Breen was a leading pioneer of green chemistry. Following his
retirement from EPA, Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, where he worked on asbestos, dioxins, and pollution
prevention, Joe became Executive Director of the Green Chemistry Institute, a not-for-profit organization promoting
environmentally benign syntheses and processing. His premature death on 19 July 1999 created a void in the
Working Party team, but encouraged all of us to continue our mission, having in mind his passion for this work and
his exquisite friendship.
Synthetic pathways and processes in green
chemistry. Introductory overview*
Pietro Tundo1†, Paul Anastas2, David StC. Black3, Joseph Breen‡,
Terrence Collins4, Sofia Memoli5, Junshi Miyamoto6, Martyn
Polyakoff7, and William Tumas8
1Università Ca’ Foscari di Venezia, Dipartimento di Scienze Ambientali, Dorsoduro
2137 Venice, Italy; 2White House Office of Science and Technology Policy;
3University of New South Wales, School of Chemistry, Sydney, Australia; 4Carnegie
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA;  5Interuniversity Consortium
“Chemistry for the Environment, Italy”; 6Evaluation and Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan; 7University of Nottingham, UK; 8Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA
Contents
Green Chemistry in the International Context
The Concept of Green Chemistry
Definition of green chemistry
Green chemistry: Why now?
The historical context of green chemistry
The emergence of green chemistry
The Content of Green Chemistry
Areas of green chemistry
Preliminary remarks
Alternative feedstocks
Benign reagents/synthetic pathways

1208
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
Synthetic transformations
Solvents/reaction conditions
Products/design of safer chemicals
Minimization of  energy consumption
Future Perspectives
Future challenges and opportunities for the chemical profession and the science of chemistry
An environmentally friendly economy from green chemistry
Interdisciplinary approach
Green chemistry education
Conclusions
References
GREEN CHEMISTRY IN THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
It has come to be recognized in recent years, that the science of chemistry is central to addressing the
problems facing the environment. Through the utilization of the various subdisciplines of chemistry and
the molecular sciences, there is an increasing appreciation that the emerging area of green chemistry* is
needed in the design and attainment of sustainable development. A central driving force in this increasing
awareness is that green chemistry accomplishes both economic and environmental goals simultaneously
through the use of sound, fundamental scientific principles.
Recently, a basic strategy has been proposed for implementing the relationships between industry
and academia, and hence, funding of the research that constitutes the engine of economic advancement;
it is what many schools of economics call the “triple bottom line” philosophy, meaning that an enter-
prise will be economically sustainable if the objectives of environmental protection, societal benefit,
and market advantage are all satisfied [1].  Triple bottom line is a strong idea for evaluating the success
of environmental technologies. It is clear that the best environmentally friendly technology or discovery
will not impact on the market if it is not economically advantageous; in the same way, the market that
ignores environmental needs and human involvement will not prosper. This is the challenge for the
future of the chemical industry, its development being strongly linked to the extent to which environ-
mental and human needs can be reconciled with new ideas in fundamental research.
On the other hand, it should be easy to foresee that the success of environmentally friendly reac-
tions, products, and processes will improve competitiveness within the chemical industry. If companies
are able to meet the needs of society, people will influence their own governments to foster those
industries attempting such environmental initiatives. Of course, fundamental research will play a cen-
tral role in achieving these worthy objectives. What we call green chemistry may in fact embody some
of the most advanced perspectives and opportunities in chemical sciences.
It is for these reasons that the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has a
central role to play in advancing and promoting the continuing emergence and impact of green chemis-
*The terminology “green chemistry” or “sustainable chemistry” is the subject of debate. The expressions are intended to
convey the same or very similar meanings, but each has its supporters and detractors, since “green” is vividly evocative but may
assume an unintended political connotation, whereas “sustainable” can be paraphrased as “chemistry for a sustainable environ-
ment”, and may be perceived as a less focused and less incisive description of the discipline. Other terms have been proposed,
such as “chemistry for the environment” but this juxtaposition of keywords already embraces many diversified fields involving
the environment, and does not capture the economic and social implications of sustainability. The Working Party decided to
adopt the term green chemistry for the purpose of this overview. This decision does not imply official IUPAC endorsement for
the choice. In fact, the IUPAC Committee on Chemistry and Industry (COCI) favors, and will continue to use sustainable
chemistry to describe the discipline.

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1209
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
try. When we think about how IUPAC furthers chemistry throughout the world, it is useful to refer to
IUPAC’s Strategic Plan. This plan demonstrates the direct relevance of the mission of IUPAC to green
chemistry, and explains why there is growing enthusiasm for the pursuit of this new area as an appropri-
ate activity of a scientific Union. The IUPAC Strategic Plan outlines among other goals:
•
IUPAC will serve as a scientific, international, nongovernmental body in objectively addressing
global issues involving the chemical sciences. Where appropriate, IUPAC will represent the inter-
ests of chemistry in governmental and nongovernmental forums.
•
IUPAC will provide tools (e.g., standardized nomenclature and methods) and forums to help
advance international research in the chemical sciences.
•
IUPAC will assist chemistry-related industry in its contributions to sustainable development, wealth
creation, and improvement in the quality of life.
•
IUPAC will facilitate the development of effective channels of communication in the interna-
tional chemistry community.
•
IUPAC will promote the service of chemistry to society in both developed and developing coun-
tries.
•
IUPAC will utilize its global perspective to contribute toward the enhancement of education in
chemistry and to advance the public understanding of chemistry and the scientific method.
•
IUPAC will make special efforts to encourage the career development of young chemists.
•
IUPAC will broaden the geographical base of the Union and ensure that its human capital is
drawn from all segments of the world chemistry community.
•
IUPAC will encourage worldwide dissemination of information about the activities of the Union.
•
IUPAC will assure sound management of its resources to provide maximum value for the funds
invested in the Union.
Through the vehicle of green chemistry, IUPAC can engage and is engaging the international
community in issues of global importance to the environment and to industry, through education of
young and established scientists, the provision of technical tools, governmental engagement, communi-
cation to the public and scientific communities, and the pursuit of sustainable development. By virtue of
its status as a leading and internationally representative scientific body, IUPAC is able to collaborate
closely in furthering individual national efforts as well as those of multinational entities.
An important example of such collaboration in the area of green chemistry is that of IUPAC with
the Organization for the Economical Cooperation and Development (OECD) in the project on “Sustain-
able Chemistry”, aimed at promoting increased awareness of the subject in the member countries. Dur-
ing a meeting of the Environment Directorate (Paris, 6 June 1999), it was proposed that United States
and Italy co-lead the activity, and that implementation of five recommendations to the member coun-
tries be accorded the highest priority, namely:
•
research and development
•
awards and recognition for work on sustainable chemistry
•
exchange of technical information related to sustainable chemistry
•
guidance on activities and tools to support sustainable chemistry programs
•
sustainable chemistry education
These recommendations were perceived to have socio-economic implications for worldwide imple-
mentation of sustainable chemistry. How IUPAC and, in particular, its Divisions can contribute to this
effort is under discussion. IUPAC is recognized for its ability to act as the scientific counterpart to
OECD for all recommendations and activities. Although the initiatives being developed by the OECD
are aimed primarily at determining the role that national institutions can play in facilitating the imple-
mentation and impact of green chemistry, it is recognized that each of these initiatives also has an
important scientific component. Whether it is developing criteria or providing technical assessment for
awards and recognition, identifying appropriate scientific areas for educational incorporation, or pro-
viding scientific insight into the areas of need for fundamental research and development, IUPAC can

1210
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
play and is beginning to play an important role as an international scientific authority on green chemis-
try.
Other multinational organizations including, among others, the United Nations, the European
Union, and the Asian Pacific Economic Community, are now beginning to assess the role that they can
play in promoting the implementation of green chemistry to meet environmental and economic goals
simultaneously. As an alternative to the traditional regulatory framework often implemented as a unilat-
eral strategy, multinational governmental organizations are discovering that green chemistry as a
nonregulatory, science-based approach, provides opportunities for innovation and economic develop-
ment that are compatible with sustainable development. In addition, individual nations have been ex-
tremely active in green chemistry and provide plentiful examples of the successful utilization of green
chemistry technologies. There are rapidly growing activities in government, industry, and academia in
the United States, Italy, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Spain, Germany, Japan, China, and many
other countries in Europe and Asia, that testify to the importance of green chemistry to the future of the
central science of chemistry around the world.
Organizations and Commissions currently involved in programs in green chemistry at the na-
tional or international level include, for example:
•
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), with the “Green Chemistry Program” which in-
volves, among others, the National Science Foundation, the American Chemical Society, and the
Green Chemistry Institute;
•
European Directorate for R&D (DG Research), which included the goals of sustainable chemis-
try in the actions and research of the European Fifth Framework Programme;
•
Interuniversity Consortium “Chemistry for the Environment”, which groups about 30 Italian uni-
versities interested in environmentally benign chemistry and funds their research groups;
•
UK Royal Society of Chemistry, which promotes the concept of green chemistry through a “UK
Green Chemistry Network” and the scientific journal Green Chemistry;
•
UNIDO-ICS (International Centre for Science and High Technology of  the United Nations In-
dustrial Development Organization) which is developing a global program on sustainable chem-
istry focusing on catalysis and cleaner technologies with particular attention to developing and
emerging countries (the program is also connected with UNIDO network of centers for cleaner
production); and
•
Monash University, which is the first organization in Australia to undertake a green chemistry
program.
THE CONCEPT OF GREEN CHEMISTRY
Definition of green chemistry
The term green chemistry, as adopted by the Working Party, is defined as:
The invention, design and application of chemical products and processes to reduce or to
eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances [2].
While this short definition appears straightforward, it marks a significant departure from the man-
ner in which environmental issues have been considered or ignored in the up-front design of the mol-
ecules and molecular transformations that are at the heart of the chemical enterprise.
Looking at the definition of green chemistry, the first thing one sees is the concept of invention
and design. By requiring that the impacts of chemical products and chemical processes are included as
design criteria, the definition of green chemistry inextricably links hazard considerations to perfor-
mance criteria.

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1211
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
Another aspect of the definition of green chemistry is found in the phrase “use and generation”.
Rather than focusing only on those undesirable substances that might be inadvertently produced in a
process, green chemistry also includes all substances that are part of the process. Therefore, green
chemistry is a tool not only for minimizing the negative impact of those procedures aimed at optimizing
efficiency, although clearly both impact minimization and process optimization are legitimate and comple-
mentary objectives of the subject. Green chemistry, however, also recognizes that there are significant
consequences to the use of hazardous substances, ranging from regulatory, handling and transport, and
liability issues, to name a few. To limit the definition to deal with waste only, would be to address only
part of the problem. As will be seen later, green chemistry is applicable to all aspects of the product life
cycle as well.
Finally, the definition of green chemistry includes the term “hazardous”. It is important to note
that green chemistry is a way of dealing with risk reduction and pollution prevention by addressing the
intrinsic hazards of the substances rather than those circumstances and conditions of their use that might
increase their risk. Why is it important for green chemistry to adopt a hazard-based approach? To under-
stand this, we have to revisit the concept of risk. Risk, in its most fundamental terms, is the product of
hazard and exposure:
Risk = Hazard  ¥  Exposure
A substance manifesting some quantifiable hazard, together with a quantifiable exposure to that
hazard, will allow us to calculate the risk associated with that substance. Virtually all common ap-
proaches to risk reduction focus on reducing exposure to hazardous substances. Regulations often re-
quire increases in control technologies and treatment technology, and in personal protective equipment
such as respirators, gloves, etc., in order to reduce risk by restricting exposure.
By achieving risk reduction through hazard reduction, green chemistry addresses concerns about
the cost and potential for failure of exposure controls. Regardless of the type of exposure control,
ranging from engineering controls through personal protective gear, there is always going to be an up-
front capital cost; to what degree this cost can be recouped will be situation-specific, but it will always
be there. In contrast, there is no additional up-front capital cost necessarily associated with green chem-
istry. While some green chemistry options may require capital investment, others may actually lower
total cost of operations from the outset. This result is frequently the case in some of the easiest ways of
implementing green chemistry technologies.
Exposure controls, because they rely on either equipment or human activity to accomplish their
goals, are capable of failing. Respirators can rupture, air scrubbers can break down, and so forth. When
failure occurs, risk is maximized because the resultant exposure is to a constant hazard. Green chemis-
try, in contrast, does not rely on equipment, human activity, or circumstances of use but, instead, changes
the intrinsic hazard properties of the chemical products and transformations. Consequently, green chem-
istry is not as vulnerable to failure, as are the traditional approaches to hazard control.
The definition of green chemistry also illustrates another important point about the use of the term
“hazard”. This term is not restricted to physical hazards such as explosiveness, flammability, and
corrosibility, but certainly also includes acute and chronic toxicity, carcinogenicity, and ecological tox-
icity. Furthermore, for the purposes of this definition, hazards must include global threats such as global
warming, stratospheric ozone depletion, resource depletion and bioaccumulation, and persistent chemi-
cals. To include this broad perspective is both philosophically and pragmatically consistent. It would
certainly be unreasonable to address only some subset of hazards while ignoring or not addressing
others. But more importantly, intrinsically hazardous properties constitute those issues that can be ad-
dressed through the proper design or redesign of chemistry and chemicals.

1212
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
Green chemistry: Why now?
The adoption of green chemistry as one of the primary methods of pollution prevention is a fairly recent
phenomenon. It is certainly reasonable to question why this fairly straightforward approach is only now
taking hold. The answer is found in a combination of factors, including economic, regulatory, scientific,
and even social factors. Each of these incentives has combined to make the 1990s the decade during
which green chemistry was introduced and has found implementation and commercialization on a wide
industrial scale.
Since the early 1960s, environmental statutes and regulations have proliferated at an exponential
rate. With these regulations came cost, restrictions on the use of chemicals, and increased testing of
chemical substances to determine their hazard. The increased cost and restrictions on the use of certain
chemicals provided powerful incentives for industry to find replacements, substitutes, or alternatives.
The toxicity testing required by many of these statutes generated new knowledge and a new awareness
about the type and degree of hazard associated with many chemicals. As the collective knowledge
resulting from this testing of chemicals began to grow in scientific and industrial circles, there was a
corresponding growth in the public demand for more information about chemicals that are present in
their communities. For example, in the United States, this culminated in the 1980s with the passage of
the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), which made public relevant
data on chemicals being released to the air, water, and land by industry. As a consequence, industry has
been confronted by tremendous pressure, not only to reduce the release of toxic chemicals to the envi-
ronment, but also to reduce the use of hazardous chemicals overall.
Lastly, the science of chemistry continues to make advances in the capacity to manipulate mol-
ecules and molecular transformations. As we learn more about the hazards of chemicals, the subject
translates this knowledge into powerful tools for structure–activity relationships that correlate hazard
with molecular construction. Armed with this knowledge, chemists are now able to do what they do
best, which is to design and manipulate molecules, and to apply their findings to reduction of hazard.
Therefore, from a scientific point of view the answer to “why now for green chemistry” is because now
we can. We now have scientific tools to address our environmental concerns at the molecular level.
The historical context of green chemistry [3]
Green chemistry concerns the development of chemical technology and processes that are designed to
be incapable of causing pollution. We humans have dealt with toxicity and pollution throughout our
Scheme 1 Environmental protection activities that require the intervention of green chemistry to minimize their
impact.
Green
Chemistry
Remediation
Control
Clean up
Regulation
Economic
Impact

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1213
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
entire history, but only recently have we been armed with an understanding of its sources and
consequences. Scheme 1 portrays how green chemistry can diminish the need for other approaches to
environmental protection. Ideally, the application of green chemistry principles and practice renders
regulation, control, clean-up, and remediation unnecessary, and the resultant environmental benefit can
be expressed in terms of economic impact.
During the 1990s, environmental protection forces have been enveloping the science of chemistry
with ideas and examples of green chemistry, and Paul Anastas coined the term “green chemistry” to
focus  attention on an area of research and development that was undergoing rapid expansion and that
was increasingly characterized by emergence of distinctive objectives and principles. The principles of
green chemistry, as articulated by Anastas and Warner [2], can guide chemists towards fulfilling their
unique and vital role in achieving sustainable development. These principles are:
•
It is better to prevent waste than treat or clean up waste after is formed.
•
Synthetic methods should be designed to maximize the incorporation of all materials used in the
process into the final product.
•
Wherever practicable, synthetic methodologies should be designed to use and generate substances
that possess little or no toxicity to human health and the environment.
•
Chemical products should be designed to preserve efficacy of function while reducing toxicity.
•
The use of auxiliary substances (e.g., solvents, separation agents, etc.) should be made unneces-
sary wherever possible and innocuous when used.
•
Energy requirements should be recognized for their environmental and economic impacts and
should be minimized. Synthetic methods should be conducted at ambient temperature and pres-
sure.
•
A raw material or feedstock should be renewable, rather than depleting, wherever technically and
economically practicable.
•
Unnecessary derivatization (blocking group, protection/deprotection, temporary modification of
physical/chemical processes) should be avoided whenever possible.
•
Catalytic reagents (as selective as possible) are superior to stoichiometric reagents.
•
Chemical products should be designed so that at the end of their function they do not persist in the
environment and break down into innocuous degradation products.
•
Analytical methodologies need to be further developed to allow for real-time in-processing moni-
toring and control prior to the formation of hazardous substances.
•
Substances and the form of a substance used in a chemical process should be chosen so as to
minimize the potential for chemical accidents, including releases, explosions, and fires.
The principles can motivate chemistry at all levels: research, reduction to practice, education,
national and international policy, and public perception. Stated another way, green chemistry is about
the redevelopment of chemistry to protect life itself. Such promise and intent hold enormous attraction
for people. Just a few examples of recent initiatives and undertakings serve to illustrate the historical
growth and incalculable potential of green chemistry:
•
In the United States, green chemistry was an official focus area by the EPA at the beginning of the
1990s, and there was a great deal of activity in research, symposia, and education. In 1995,  the
United States launched the Presidential Green Chemistry Challenge Awards, which sought to
provide visibility and recognition to those companies and academic researchers with outstanding
achievements in green chemistry.
•
In Italy, the Interuniversity Consortium Chemistry for the Environment (INCA) was established
in 1993, with the aim to join together the academic groups dealing with chemistry and the envi-
ronment; one of its focus areas is pollution prevention through research for cleaner reactions,
products and processes. INCA organized its first meeting in Venice “Processi Chimici Innovativie
Tutela dell’Ambiente”, in February 1993.
•
In August 1996, IUPAC approved the formation of the Working Party on Green Chemistry under
Commission III.2, which provided the beginnings of this work. The First International Green

1214
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
Chemistry Conference in Venice was held in September 1997 under the IUPAC sponsorship. The
same year, the Green Chemistry Institute was founded.
•
The European Commission has sustainability in its main research area, and the aims of green
chemistry are present in the 4th and 5th Framework Programmes.
The emergence of green chemistry
Since its initial introduction in the early 1990s, green chemistry has spread throughout all aspects of the
international chemical enterprise. There has been general recognition that green chemistry affects all of
the various subdisciplines of chemistry and cuts across the interests and goals of industry, academia,
and government. In addition to spreading across these boundaries, the development and use of green
chemistry also transcends national borders. One example is that of the International Green Chemistry
Summer School held in Venice, Italy each year, and funded by the European Commission. It is managed
by INCA and hosts postgraduate students from approximately twenty nations. The students are trained
by an international group of authorities on green chemistry, representing a wide range of expertise.
The next CHEMRAWN conference organized by IUPAC in Boulder, Colorado, USA in June
2001 is entitled Toward Environmentally Benign Processes and Products, and will attract speakers and
delegates, from both industrialized as well as developing nations, to deliberate on how the subject can
contribute toward achieving the goals of sustainable development.
Currently, around the world there are conferences, research funding programs, national awards,
and recognition and educational programs devoted to green chemistry. Institutions such as INCA, the
Green Chemistry Institute (which has chapters in over a dozen countries) the Green Chemistry Network
located in the UK, and the Japanese Chemical Innovation Institute are working to coordinate and dis-
seminate green chemistry information around the globe. In recent years, a number of research institutes
and centers have been established in the United States, Italy, China, Japan, Australia, Sweden, the
United Kingdom, Germany, Spain, Taiwan, and other nations as well.
The chemical literature on green chemistry has been expanding through books [4], journals, and
direct Internet publishing. The primary literature as well as reviews and analysis continue to grow, as an
understanding of the applicability of green chemistry to industrial interests and traditional scientific
challenges becomes known.
The growth of green chemistry has continued at an amazingly rapid pace in recent years, but it
must be put into context. While there are numerous fine examples of how green chemistry is being used
for the benefit of industry, the environment, and society, they constitute only a small fraction of the
unrealized potential. The scientific tools and methodologies must be made available and used by the
chemistry community for maximum benefit. The alternative of the costly and inefficient regulatory
measures of the past, as a unilateral process, should no longer be an option. IUPAC is uniquely posi-
tioned to play a major role, in supporting and advancing economic and environmental benefits through
scientific innovation in green chemistry.
THE CONTENT OF GREEN CHEMISTRY
Areas of green chemistry
Economic considerations and environmental evaluations have pushed the chemical industry to adopt
new eco-friendly technologies to survive in a market that becomes more demanding every day. Green
chemistry will be one of the fields in which these sometimes conflicting forces will contend. Those
companies that accept such a challenge and are the first to develop new, environmentally friendly
technologies are most likely to gain the market, and to enjoy the support of their governments in promoting
their initiatives.

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1215
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
In the framework of the OECD “Risk Management Programme”, a new activity called “Sustain-
able Chemistry” was endorsed by the member countries (Paris, February 1998), with the aim of encour-
aging the development of chemical products and processes (and of recommending the related actions)
which are at the same time environmentally friendly and economically viable.
The activity started with a survey of the Steering Group [USA, Italy, Japan, Germany, Belgium,
Canada, Mexico, Sweden, UK, and Business and Industry Advisory Committee to the OECD (BIAC)]
on programs and initiatives on green chemistry launched worldwide by governments, industries and
academies.
In consideration of the results of the survey, the policy and programmatic aspects of the sustain-
able chemistry activity were discussed at the Venice Workshop (October 1998) in the presence of repre-
sentatives of governments, industries, and academies from 22 countries and approved at the OECD
meeting in Paris (6 June 1999) [5].
The areas for the development of green chemistry have been identified as follows:
Use of alternative feedstocks: The use of feedstocks that are both renewable rather than depleting and
less toxic to human health and the environment.
Use of innocuous reagents: The use of reagents that are inherently less hazardous and are catalytic
whenever feasible.
Employing natural processes: Use of biosynthesis, biocatalysis, and biotech-based chemical transfor-
mations for efficiency and selectivity.
Use of alternative solvents: The design and utilization of solvents that have reduced potential for
detriment to the environment and serve as alternatives to currently used volatile organic solvents,
chlorinated solvents, and solvents that damage the natural environment.
Design of safer chemicals: Use of molecular structure design—and consideration of the principles of
toxicity and mechanism of action—to minimize the intrinsic toxicity of the product while main-
taining its efficacy of function.
Developing alternative reaction conditions: The design of reaction conditions that increase the selec-
tivity of the product and allow for dematerialization of the product separation process.
Minimizing energy consumption: The design of chemical transformations that reduce the required
energy input in terms of both mechanical and thermal inputs and the associated environmental
impacts of excessive energy usage.
This delineation of topics will be adopted in the ensuing Symposium-in-Print, since it is presently
the most recognizable subdivision of the field. But, as the OECD is a socio-economic organization, this
classification does not necessarily prescribe to a scientific interpretation of green chemistry. This is
particularly true in the present case, where synthetic transformations and organic syntheses are the
topics of our issue. The introductory overview will therefore be divided into sections according to a few
key factors in synthesis, namely:
•
alternative feedstocks
•
benign reagents/synthetic pathways
•
synthetic transformations
•
solvents/reaction conditions
•
products/design of safer chemicals
•
minimization of energy consumption
This subdivision refers more specifically to organic synthesis and shows that the principles of
green chemistry can be used for all aspects of chemical processes. The OECD subdivision will be
maintained in the Symposium-in-Print, where full scientific references are given.

1216
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
Preliminary remarks
The key to waste minimization in fine chemicals manufacture is the widespread substitution of classical
organic syntheses employing stoichiometric amounts of inorganic reagents with cleaner, catalytic
alternatives.
Reaction efficiency, much like product selectivity, has long been a goal of synthetic design and,
even prior to the enunciation of green chemistry principles, was recognized to offer environmental
benefits. When the overall yield of a process is increased by 10 or 20%, less material ends up in waste
streams and more is converted into product. However, yield is not entirely adequate as a measure of
reaction efficiency, and needs to be considered in conjunction with the concept of “atom economy” (see
below). In order to measure the “green” character of a reaction, a few simple parameters have been
proposed.
The E factors (kg waste per kg product) of chemical processes increase dramatically on going
downstream from bulk to fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals, mainly owing to the use of stoichiomet-
ric methods. The concept of atom efficiency is a useful tool for rapid evaluation of the amount of waste
generated by alternative processes. The general theme of atom efficiency, is illustrated (see the opening
review by Sheldon, this issue, pp. 1233–1246) with industrially relevant examples. These include ca-
talysis by solid acids and bases, catalytic reductions and oxidations, catalytic C–C bond formation,
asymmetric catalysis, biocatalysis, and catalysis in novel media (aqueous and fluorous biphasic sys-
tems, supercritical fluids, and ionic liquids).
The concept of atom economy has been proposed to join the concept of reaction efficiency based
on the yields. As Trost has outlined [6], a synthetic transformation can achieve 100% yield of product
and still generate a substantial amount of waste if the transformation is not “atom economical”. Atom
economy is the ratio of the molecular weight of the target molecule to the sum total of the molecular
weights of all the substances produced in the stoichiometric equation for the reaction involved. The
comparison is made on a theoretical basis (100% yield) and provides a better measure of the intrinsic
efficiency of the transformation. From the green chemistry point of view, reactions that have an atom
economy of 1.0 have an intrinsic synthetic elegance, and are easily recognizable since no by-products
are formed at all.
These parameters do not evaluate the environmental impact of the reaction involved, and other
factors must be taken into account. They are considered as the environmental quotient (EQ), which is E
multiplied by an arbitrarily assigned unfriendliness quotient. Of course, the magnitude of Q is the
object of debate (see the following paper of Herrchen and Klein), but on this basis it is possible to
quantitatively assess the environmental impact of processes.
The second opening review deals with life-cycle assessment (LCA), a useful tool for waste man-
agement (Herrchen and Klein, this issue pp. 1247–1252). A life-cycle conceptual approach comprises
the consideration of all stages along the life cycle of a chemical, as well as the consideration of environ-
mental impacts caused by by-products and auxiliaries.
The environmental LCA is a fairly new management methodology and represents an innovative
approach; it can be used either for evaluating already existing products/processes (as a criterion for eco-
label release) or to design and assess new products or new processes. In the life-cycle approach, all
stages along the life cycle of a chemical (i.e., raw material extraction, pre-production, production, use,
recycling, and disposal) as well as environmental impacts caused by by-products and auxiliaries (such
as solvents, additives, technical facilities) are considered.
A significant improvement in the evaluation of green chemical products can be approached by the
complementary use of the methodologies of LCA and risk assessment. The use and combination of both
methodologies can either be performed by a separate use of the instruments, depending on the scope,
definition, and application of LCA, an iterative use of LCA and risk assessment, or a complete integra-
tion of both instruments.
This aspect is closely related to green chemistry, as it gives the principles that a priori regulate
new chemical production. The lack of knowledge of the effects of several pollutants, and the scarce

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1217
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
availability of reliable data for industrial processes, stress the necessity of a rational and pragmatic
approach.
Alternative feedstocks
The synthesis and manufacture of any chemical substance begins with the selection of a starting material
from which the final product will be built. In many cases the selection of a starting material can be the
most significant factor in determining the impact of the synthesis on the environment. This selection not
only needs to be assessed in terms of what the material’s characteristics are, but also on what the upstream
impacts of the origins of this starting material were, as well as what the implications for the rest of the
process by the choice of this particular starting material will be. If the substance itself does not pose any
hazard to human health or the environment, for example, but the retrieval and/or isolation of the substance
causes significant risk to either, then this factor must be taken into account in the selection. Or, if the use
of the starting material means that a particularly toxic or otherwise hazardous reagent will be required
in order to carry out the requisite synthetic transformation, then this factor also needs to be considered
in the selection process.
Innocuous or more innocuous
Certainly, a first-level assessment of any starting material must be whether or not the substance itself
poses a hazard in the form of either toxicity, accident potential, possible ecosystem damage, or another
form. This hazard can be evaluated in terms for which there are extensive data on properties ranging
from dose response to flammability to ozone depleting potential. In the absence of empirical data, there
are a wide range of structure–activity relationship models, which can give reasonable approximations
for the properties in question.
Renewable
In addition to the direct hazard associated with a particular chemical substance, the implications of
using a renewable versus a depleting feedstock need to be included in the selection of that substance as
a starting material in a synthetic transformation. The feasibility and benefits of using bio-based instead
of petroleum-based feedstocks, for example, is actively being researched in both academia and the
chemical industry.
To ensure a high degree of product safety for consumers and the environment, renewable re-
sources have often been shown to have advantages when compared with petrochemical raw materials
and can therefore be regarded as being the preferred source of raw material.
Oleochemistry is a branch of chemistry that uses vegetable oils and fats as renewable resources.
Some recent applications of derivatives of oils and fats friendly for human health and the environment,
in cosmetic formulations, polymer synthesis, lubricant production, are discussed in Hill’s paper (this
issue pp. 1255–1264).
Together with carbohydrates and proteins, fatty oils are important renewable resources compared
to fossil and mineral raw materials. Results from oleochemistry show that the use of vegetable fats and
oils allows the development of competitive, powerful products, which are both consumer-friendly and
environmentally friendly.
Light is another emerging feedstock in a broad sense, a safe alternative to toxic catalysts in many
synthetic transformations. Beside UV light, the most renewable and environmentally ideal energy source
is sunlight. In this regard, the sentence (about one century ago) of Giacomo Ciamician, one of the
founders of photochemistry must be quoted [7]. His sentence looks like a Jules Verne description, but
one concerning chemistry:
 “On the arid lands there will spring up industrial colonies without smoke and without
smokestacks; forests of glass tubes will extend over the plants and glass buildings will rise
everywhere; inside of these will take place the photochemical processes that hitherto have
been the guarded secret of the plants, but that will have been mastered by human industry

1218
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
which will know how to make them bear even more abundant fruit than nature, for nature is
not in a hurry but mankind is”.
Although it appeared (and still is) futuristic, we now know that many of these former fictions can
be realized and applied. To address such enormous tasks, photocatalytic systems that are able to operate
effectively and efficiently not only under UV light but also under the most environmentally ideal energy
source, sunlight, must be established.
One example is given by Anpo (this issue pp. 1265–1270), who discusses the development of
titanium oxide photocatalysts able to operate under conditions as mild as visible light and/or solar beam
irradiation. His report involves new approaches in the design and development of second-generation
titanium oxide photocatalysts operating effectively under visible light and/or solar beam irradiation and
practical industrial applications of titanium oxide photocatalysts in Japan.
Solve other environmental problems
Selection of a starting material should be assessed not only for any hazards that the substance might or
might not possess, but also for existing environmental problems that its use as a starting material might
assist in solving. In many communities in the United States, for example, waste biomass has become a
problem due to limited landfill capacity and other solid waste disposal issues. Utilization of waste
biomass as a chemical feedstock in chemical manufacturing processes can alleviate if not completely
eliminate such waste problems.
Biocatalysis harnesses the catalytic potential of enzymes to produce building blocks for the phar-
maceutical and chemical industry. Located at the interface between fermentation processes and petro-
leum-based chemistry, biotransformation processes broaden the toolbox for bioconversion of organic
compounds to functionalized products.
As discussed by Witholt (this issue pp. 1337–1343), a key technology to facilitate and smooth the
necessary transition from petroleum-based chemistry to the use of renewable resources for the produc-
tion of chemicals is represented by biocatalytic processes.
While fermentations use the carbon source for de novo product synthesis, biocatalytic processes
employ a different strategy. Precursor molecules are fed to the biocatalyst, which transforms them to the
desired compound by a limited number of functionalizing steps (usually one). Carbon and energy re-
quired for production of the biocatalyst commonly come from a different easily metabolizable carbon
source such as a sugar. Here, the range of products is not limited by the metabolism of the biocatalyst:
non-natural (xenobiotic) precursor molecules can be efficiently transformed because biocatalysts can
transform non-natural as well as natural and renewable compounds.
The sequestering of carbon dioxide is another example of how the selection of a starting material
can help solve an existing environmental problem. It is well known that carbon dioxide is among the
most potent of “greenhouse gases” that have been found to contribute to global warming. Research is
currently being conducted in the design of new materials that could be used in applications that seques-
ter carbon dioxide during manufacturing processes. The utilization of carbon dioxide in manufacturing
processes in a way that does not allow its escape to the environment might not solve the global warming
issue but can help reduce the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Benign reagents/synthetic pathways
As in the selection of a starting material, the selection of a reagent must include an evaluation to identify
what the hazards associated with a particular reagent are. This evaluation should include an analysis of
the reagent itself, as well as an analysis of the synthetic transformation associated with the use of that
reagent (i.e., to determine product selectivity, reaction efficiency, separation needs, etc.). In addition, an
investigation should be undertaken to determine if more alternative reagents are available that either are
themselves more environmentally benign or are able to carrying out the necessary synthetic transformation
in a more environmentally benign way.

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1219
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
Innocuous or more innocuous
As in the selection of a starting material, the selection of a reagent should start with an evaluation of the
reagent itself to determine if it possesses any hazardous properties. Inherent in this analysis is the question:
Is the transformation requiring the hazardous reagent necessary, or can the final target compound be
obtained from an alternative pathway that uses a less hazardous reagent?
In order to answer this question alternative reagents must be identified, and any hazardous prop-
erties that the alternatives possess must be compared with the hazardous properties associated with the
reagent originally selected. One example of an innocuous reagent (which is produced from nontoxic
intermediates) is dimethylcarbonate [8].
Generates less waste
An important consideration and benefit associated with the use of a particular reagent is whether it is
responsible for the generation of more or less waste than other reagents. The amount of waste either
generated or eliminated, however, cannot be the only consideration. The type of any waste generated
must also be assessed. Just as all chemical products are not equal in terms of their hazard, neither are
chemical waste streams. Waste streams therefore must also be assessed for any hazard properties that
they possess. In this regard, it is obvious that oxidation reactions involving oxygen and hydrogen peroxide
will be of outstanding priority, as they produce water as a by-product.
Green oxidation reactions require the use of nontoxic solvents (water or CO2) and mild reaction
conditions. Oxidations using air as a reagent are difficult to control, being either too slow or too fast for
industrial applications, and intrinsically nonselective when selectivity is very often a crucial parameter.
Hydrogen peroxide is a clean reagent, with water the only by-product formed, and a very high selectiv-
ity can be obtained. However, the use of hydrogen peroxide for fine chemical production is currently
limited by its poor reactivity and its ease to undergo radical decomposition. Therefore, there is a great
effort to develop systems able to selectively activate oxygen and hydrogen peroxide for oxidative trans-
formations. In this context, both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis play a key role. Oxidation
reactions are critical to pharmaceutical, petrochemical, and agricultural industries. Several examples of
how environmentally benign oxidants such as molecular oxygen, hydrogen peroxide or nitrous oxide
can be activated on heterogeneous catalysts are illustrated by Hoelderich (this issue, pp. 1273–1287).
Direct oxidation of isoprenol, b-picoline and benzene are chosen as examples for continuous gas-phase
processes, and oxidation of cyclopentanone, limonene, pinene, and propylene as examples for semi
continuous or batchwise processes in the liquid phase.
These examples illustrate that features known from the synthesis of bulk chemicals can success-
fully be applied to manufacturing intermediate and specialty chemicals by utilizing the phases associ-
ated with conventional industrial reactor systems.
Metal-peroxo systems, polyoxometallates and heteropolyanions, zeolitic and smectitic materials,
and other titanium catalysts are discussed by Sanderson (this issue, pp. 1289–1304). Recent research
progress in catalytic systems for potential use with hydrogen peroxide in industrial chemical synthesis
is reviewed in terms of the positive features identified to date, and the obstacles yet to be surmounted in
order to become more widely adopted.
It is believed that fully inorganic systems have more scope for commercialization than those
containing organic ligands or supports, however robust. Critical targets are larger-pore analogs of tita-
nium silicalite (TS-1), more exploration of smectite-based materials, effective immobilization of acti-
vated metal-peroxo systems, and improvements in design and manipulation of polyoxometallate com-
pounds. Cooperation between branches of chemistry that have not traditionally worked closely together
is advocated.
Selective
Utilizing a reagent that is more selective means that more of the starting material is going to be converted
into the desired product. High product selectivity does not always translate into high product yield (and
less waste generated), however. Both high selectivity and high conversion must be achieved in order for

1220
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
a synthetic transformation to generate little or no waste. Utilizing highly selective reagents can mean
that separation, isolation, and purification of the product will be significantly less difficult. Since a
substantial portion of the burden to the environment that chemical manufacturing processes incur often
results from separation and purification processes, highly selective reagents are very desirable in green
chemistry.
Catalytic
If a catalyst is necessary, it should be used in actually “catalytic amount”. In fact, if a reagent can be
utilized and yet not consumed in the process, it will require less material to continuously effect the
transformation. This implies that catalysis has to be as efficient (not only effective) as possible, involving
a high turnover number.
Other criteria that should be used in the selection of a reagent need to be balanced against each
another in order to optimize the utility of the reagent and minimize the environmental impact.
A large number of industrial processes are based on the use of inorganic or minerals acids. While
many of these processes are catalytic, some require (e.g., acylation using AlCl3) stoichiometric amounts
of Lewis acid. Final isolation of the product necessitates neutralization steps to remove the acid, result-
ing in enormous quantities of hazardous waste, with the cost of disposal of this waste often outweighing
the value of the product.
Misono (this issue, pp. 1305–1311) discusses the use of heteropolyacids as green catalysts for
both acid-catalyzed and oxidation reactions, reporting as examples, two industrial processes which
were made greener by the use of such catalysts in liquid bi-phase systems. The first is the hydration of
a mixture of butenes; only isobutylene reacts selectively and supplies the starting material for the two-
step oxidation to methacrylic acid (1- and 2-butenes left after reaction are utilized as raw material in the
production of low-density polyethylene).
The second example is the polymerization of tetrahydrofuran, which gives poly-
oxytetramethyleneglycol, used as an elastic fiber and elastomer.
Heteropolyacids can be active solid-acid catalysts, providing the unique reaction environment of
a pseudoliquid (catalytically active solid solvent) and thus find many green applications in the future
(see also M. J. Earle and K. R. Seddon, this issue, pp. 1391–1398).
As Clark (this issue, pp. 1313–1319) discusses, the use of heterogeneous catalysts in these pro-
cesses may simplify catalyst removal, thus minimizing the amount of waste formed. Diffusion limita-
tion of liquids within porous solids dictates that effective solid acids for liquid-phase reactions require
the use of mesoporous materials <20–100 Å.
In particular, Clark focuses on new mesoporous solid acids which minimize diffusion limitation
in liquid phase organic transformations and open up new possibilities in the preparation of solid acid
catalysts for liquid-phase reactions. Solid-acid catalysts in organic synthesis are discussed in terms of
properties, preparation, and a few selected applications.
Synthetic transformations
The various reaction types most commonly used in synthesis can have different degrees of impact on
human health and the environment. Addition reactions, for example, completely incorporate the starting
materials into the final product and, therefore, do not produce waste that needs to be treated, disposed
of, or otherwise dealt with. Substitution reactions, on the other hand, necessarily generate stoichiometric
quantities of substances as by-products and waste. Elimination reactions do not require input of materials
during the course of the reaction other than the initial input of a starting material, but they do generate
stoichiometric quantities of substances that are not part of the final target molecule. As such, elimination
reactions are among the least atom-economical transformations. For any synthetic transformation, it is
important to evaluate the hazardous properties of all substances necessarily being generated from the
transformation, just as it is important to evaluate the hazardous properties of all starting materials and

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1221
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
reagents that are added in a synthetic transformation.
Free-radical chemistry has shown a magnificent development over the last 30 years. In the past,
radicals were generally thought to be too reactive to be controlled and unlikely to produce synthetic
applications. Now, the view is that they are useful and selective intermediates. This change has arisen as
a result of two significant achievements: the first change was the determination for radical reactions of
a large number of kinetic constants which led to an understanding of their reaction mechanism. Sec-
ondly, the successful application of radical reaction to the total synthesis of complex molecules demon-
strated that this tool was ready for innovative pathways in organic chemistry.
The photochemical approach to produce radicals is described by Albini (this issue, pp. 1321–
1326), who aims at developing environment-friendly reactions, in particular radical alkylation of elec-
trophilic alkenes via photoinduced electron transfer. This paper illustrates the scope and versatility of
radical alkylation of electrophilic alkenes via photoinduced electron transfer and presents a few appli-
cations in special fields.
The peculiar versatility of photochemical reactions in forming covalent bonds is expected to lead
to their rapid development in organic synthesis. As an example, the scarce medium-dependence of
excited state reactions may be exploited for switching to water as the solvent; the mild reaction condi-
tions are useful for mild cleavage of protective groups or in supramolecular chemistry, or in controlling
the molecular weight of polymers formed from self-assembling units.
Clean radical reactions which use economical reagents are discussed by Murphy (this issue, pp.
1327–1334). The situation that prevents the utilization of radical reactions in synthetic transformation,
is the reagent which is usually used. Tributyltin hydride currently plays a key role in radical chemistry,
but it is a neurotoxic compound; as a consequence, this unacceptable reagent, if not replaced with other
less toxic ones, does preclude the development of green and innovative synthetic pathways for the
formation of the C–C bond.
Two methods for effecting radical reactions in an environmentally friendly way are presented: (i)
The tetrathiafulvalene (TTF)-mediated radical-polar crossover reaction converts arenediazonium salts
to aryl radicals, which have sufficient lifetime to cyclize onto alkenes—the resulting alkyl radicals
couple with TTF+• to afford sulfonium salts which, in turn, undergo solvolysis to alcohols, ethers, or
amides. The method provides the key step in a synthesis of (±)-aspidospermidine; (ii) Hypophosphite
salts and hypophosphorous acid, on the other hand, form C–C bonds with reductive termination. These
economical reagents give radicals efficiently from alkyl halides and allow a very easy separation of
products from by-products.
Solvents/reaction conditions
The use of solvents in the chemical industry and the chemical related industries is ubiquitous. With
increasing regulatory pressure focusing on solvents, there is significant attention being paid to the use
of green chemistry alternatives to traditional solvents.
Less toxic
Certainly, solvents have been developed with an eye toward their safety, since they are often used in
such large volumes. The earliest and most obvious hazards that were recognized in solvent molecules
were their ability to explode or ignite. With the greater understanding of the health and environmental
effects that could be caused by a large number of solvents, new designer solvents are being scrutinized
for other hazards as well.
Human health
Solvents are particularly of concern because the likelihood of significant levels of exposure is extremely
high. Many solvents, by their nature, have high vapor pressure and, in combination with the volumes
that are often used, can result in sufficient doses to cause harm to humans. Halogenated solvents such as
carbon tetrachloride, perchloroethylene, and chloroform have been implicated as potential and/or suspect

1222
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
carcinogens, while other classes of solvents have demonstrated neurotoxicological effects. However,
the direct toxicity to humans is only one aspect of the total hazards that solvents possess. There are a
number of environmental implications of the use of large volumes of solvents.
Environment (local and global)
An important part of our effort toward more environmentally friendly green chemistry is aimed at
reducing the use of organic solvents. Usually, organic solvents are used in much larger quantities than
the solutes they carry and are wasted into the environment through evaporation and leakage.
The use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and their role in stratospheric ozone depletion has created
a global phase-out of the substances from virtually all uses. The use of certain volatile organic com-
pounds (VOCs) as solvents and other uses has generated great concern about their ability to elevate
atmospheric ozone levels. Other substances used as solvents have also been found to possess significant
global warming potential and are thought to contribute to the overall greenhouse gas loading in the
environment.
Some of the main areas of research on alternative solvents includes supercritical fluids, aqueous
applications, polymerized/immobilized solvents, ionic liquids, solventless systems, and reduced hazard
organic solvents.
In the last ten years, there has been incredible growth in research involving the use of carbon
dioxide as an environmentally benign solvent for chemical reactions and polymerizations. It has be-
come a widespread, growing reality, both in academia and in industry. CO2 is a nontoxic, nonflam-
mable, and inexpensive solvent. While CO2 is a gas at ambient conditions, its liquid and supercritical
states are easily attained by compression and heat. Both liquid and scCO2 have a tuneable density (and
dielectric constant) that increases with increasing pressure or decreasing temperature. Many small mol-
ecules are soluble in CO2, including high-vapor-pressure solvents such as methanol, acetone, and tet-
rahydrofuran, many vinyl monomers, and azo- and peroxy-initiators. Water and ionic compounds are
insoluble, as are most polymers.
The two methodologies described by Howdle for dissolving ionic/polar species in scCO2 lead to
a widening of the range of applications for supercritical solvents. (See P. B. Webb et al., this issue, pp.
1347–1355.) Fluorinated surfactants may be used to prepare water in carbon dioxide microemulsions
and allow solubilization of ionic and biological species. The preparation of scCO2 soluble metal precur-
sors that can be impregnated efficiently into polymeric substrates is outlined. Further processing by
heat or UV light leads to metallic particles distributed throughout a polymer substrate. The clean syn-
thesis of such composites can be applied to the development of improved medical implants.
The synthesis and applications of two classes of polymers that are soluble in CO2 at relatively
mild conditions (amorphous or low-melting fluoropolymers and silicone-based polymers), are described
by De Simone (this issue, pp. 1357–1363). This article highlights polymer synthesis, characterization,
and applications in CO2 and places the outstanding research of this leading group in the context of both
green chemistry and the latest developments in CO2 technology.
The increased focus on water in synthetic organic chemistry during the past few decades has
resulted in a large number of reactions that can now be performed successfully in an aqueous medium.
Among these reactions are allylation reactions, the aldol condensation, the Michael addition, the Mannich
reaction, indium-mediated allylation [9] and Grignard-type additions, and the benzoin condensation
[10].
Engberts (this issue, pp. 1365–1372) describes not only how the Diels–Alder reaction can be
successfully performed in water, but also how the rate and selectivity of this important organic transfor-
mation are enhanced by the peculiar properties of this solvent. Also, possibilities for achieving further
increases in rate and enantioselectivity of aqueous Diels-Alder reactions through Lewis acid and micel-
lar catalysis are reviewed.
Kobayashi (this issue, pp. 1373–1380) developed a new class of water-stable Lewis acid catalysts
for performing carbon–carbon bond-forming reactions in water instead of organic solvents. The system
is composed of rare earth metal triflates, which are completely recovered and re-used after the reaction.
Furthermore, Lewis acid-surfactant-combined catalysts, which can be used for reactions in water with-

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1223
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
out using any organic solvents, have been also developed. Finally, Lewis acid catalysis in supercritical
carbon dioxide has been successfully performed. These investigations will contribute to the develop-
ment of environmentally friendly Lewis acid catalysis.
A new emerging class of solvents is represented by ionic liquids, which offer alternatives to
conventional molecular solvents for many synthetic transformations, with both the thermodynamics
and kinetics of reactions carried out in ionic liquids being different to those in conventional molecular
solvents. These solvents are often fluid at room temperature, and consist entirely of organic ionic spe-
cies; they have no measurable vapor pressure, and hence can emit no VOCs. Seddon (this issue, pp.
1391–1398) reviews the current range of organic chemical reactions that can be performed in ionic
liquids.
Makosza’s paper (this issue, pp. 1399–1403) discusses phase-transfer catalysis as a green ap-
proach to waste minimization. This key synthetic methodology utilizes water as the solvent and is
applied and applicable to a great variety of reactions in which inorganic and organic anions and also
carbenes react with organic substrates. It makes use of heterogeneous two-phase systems—one phase
(water) being a reservoir of reacting anions or base for generation of organic anions, whereas organic
reactants and catalysts are located in the second, organic phase. The reacting anions are continuously
introduced into the organic phase in the form of lipophilic ion-pairs with lipophilic cations supplied by
the catalyst.
Phase-transfer catalysis can be carried out in liquid-liquid, solid-liquid, and gas-liquid condi-
tions. The latter (gas-liquid phase-transfer catalysis, GL-PTC) is of importance in green chemistry also
because it is performed under continuous-flow conditions. Transforming the batch reactions into con-
tinuous-flow processes is a challenge for chemical engineers because harmful reactions are avoided,
reaction control is easier, and the volume in which the reaction takes place is greatly reduced [11].
Products/design of safer chemicals
The design of safer chemicals is a process that utilizes an analysis of the chemical structure to identify
what part of a molecule is providing the characteristic or property that is desired from the products and
what part of the molecule is responsible for the toxicity or hazard. By knowing this information, it is
possible to maintain efficacy of function while minimizing the hazard. This goal of designing safer
chemicals can be achieved through several different strategies, the choice of which is largely dependent
on the amount of information that exists on the particular substance.
Mechanism of action
In cases where a mechanism of action is known, there is the greatest potential to design a chemical that
is safer from the perspective of toxicity or other hazard to human health and the environment. Simply
stated, if the pathway toward toxicity is known, and then if any step within that pathway can be prevented
from occurring, then the toxic endpoint will be avoided.
Structure–activity relationships
Although mechanisms of action may be unknown, there are often detailed correlations, by way of
structure–activity relationships, that can be used to design a safer chemical. As an example, if it is
known that the methyl-substituted analog of a substance has very high toxicity, and that the toxicity
decreases as the substitution moves from ethyl to propyl, etc., it would be reasonable to increase the
alkyl chain length to design a safer chemical. Even when the reason for the influence of alkyl chain
length on toxicity is unknown, an empirical structure–activity relationship of this kind offers a powerful
design tool.
Elimination of toxic functional group
A class of chemicals is often defined by certain structural features, such as functional groups like
aldehydes, ketones, nitriles, or isocyanates. If one doesn’t have any information about the specific

1224
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
variations in a chemical’s toxicity with structural modification or in the mechanism by which it produces
that toxicity, the assumption that certain reactive functional groups will react similarly within the body
or in the environment is often a good one. The assumption is especially good if there ara data on other
compounds in the chemical class that demonstrate a common toxic effect.
In such cases, the design of a safer chemical could possibly proceed by removing the toxic func-
tionality which defines the class. In some cases, this is not possible because the functionality is what
gives the molecule the properties that are required for the chemical to perform in the desired way. In
these cases, there are still options, such as masking the functional group as a nontoxic derivative form
and only releasing the parent functionality when necessary.
Reduce bioavailability
If, through the above methods, one cannot identify the structural feature of the molecule that needs to be
modified in order to make it less hazardous, then there is still the option of making the substance less
bioavailable. If the substance is unable, due to structural design, to reach the target of toxicity, then it is
in effect innocuous. This can be done through a manipulation of the water-solubility/lipophilicity
relationships that often control the ability of a substance to pass through biological membranes such as
skin, lungs, or the gastrointestinal tract. The same principle applies to designing safer chemicals for the
environment, such as replacement for ozone-depleting substances. In order for a substance to have a
significant ozone-depleting potential, it must be able to both reach the altitudes and have a sufficient
lifetime in those altitudes in order to cause damage. Many substances are now being designed, which
have the same properties as those of known ozone depleters, but without the ability to be available to the
target of the hazard, in this case the stratospheric ozone layer.
Design for innocuous fate
It was often the goal of the chemist to design substances which were robust and could last as long as
possible. This philosophy has resulted in a legacy of wastes, persistent toxic and bioaccumulative
substances, and lingering toxic waste sites.  It is now known that it is more desirable to avoid substances
that persist indefinitely in the environment or a landfill, and to replace them with those that are designed
to degrade after their useful life is over. Therefore, the design of safer chemicals cannot be limited to
only hazards associated with the manufacture and use of the chemical but also that of its disposal and
ultimate end of life cycle.
Polymeric materials, for instance, should not have any negative effect on the environment during
their production or service and at the end of their life. Polyolefin technology is presented by Romano
(this issue, pp. 1383–1388) as a safe alternative to the use of potentially dangerous monomers and
chemicals and to polymer processing and manufacturing with high environmental impact. The recent
developments in the field of polyolefins (polyethylene, polypropylene and ethylene-propylene copoly-
mers and terpolymers) is reviewed in the light of the positive impact that they will have on several
aspects of the environmental issue.
Minimization of energy consumption
The design of chemical transformations can reduce the required energy input in terms of mechanical,
thermal, and other energy inputs, and the associated environmental impacts of excessive energy usage.
Design for energy minimization is inherently coupled to the design for material efficiency in many
aspects and is therefore addressed in numerous examples in the Symposium-in-Print. For instance,
when utilizing new solvents such as supercritical carbon dioxide, one is often also greatly affecting the
ease of separation, which requires significant energy inputs. Further, if a synthetic transformation is
developed using a catalytic system rather than a stoichiometric process, we know that catalysis is useful
in lowering activation energy required for the conversion. Therefore, rather than identify specific chapters
and research that exclusively address energy concerns, the reader is instead encouraged to appreciate
the intrinsic design changes which are providing extensive benefit for energy minimization through the
use of green chemistry methodologies.

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1225
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Future challenges and opportunities for the chemical profession and the science of
chemistry
The principles of green chemistry are also a substantial beginning for the chemical profession in trying
to deal with the novel ethical context in which humanity has been placed by the unprecedented power
afforded to it in the 20th century by science and technology [12]. Thus, green chemistry is unusual in
that it is here that what has hitherto been called “pure chemistry” must be integrated into the much
broader questions associated with sustainability and vice versa.
Although green chemistry will underpin many activities in environmental protection, Scheme 2
shows that its overall impact is potentially much wider.
Green chemistry has major contributions to make to the quality of life, human welfare, and sus-
tainable development. However, before green chemistry can contribute fully to these areas, it must be
integrated into the discipline of chemistry itself. This requirement presents a number of major chal-
lenges to the chemical profession:
•
Chemists will need to integrate into pure chemistry the questions of why or why not, on environ-
mental protection grounds, a particular technology should be abandoned, improved, or adopted.
These questions must become as important in research and education and made as concrete as the
ubiquitous questions associated with what comprises chemical technology and how it actually
works.
•
It is vital that green chemistry not become a fad, in which chemistry that is not really “green” gets
paraded as such before the scientific community and the world. Such fraud will inevitably bring
the type of disenchantment and confusion that might simply discredit the field and would deny
future generations the great good of experiencing the chemical dimension essential to a sustain-
able technologically advanced civilization.
•
Certain of the largest sustainability issues, where chemists have so much to offer, will require new
approaches that can only be built with long-term commitment. For example, finding efficient
methods for converting solar to chemical energy is a large sustainability issue. The culture of
present-day chemistry places too many short-term obstacles in the path of strategic research prob-
lems of this type. But chemists must solve such problems to achieve sustainability. Thus, the
culture must adapt to recognize that certain sustainability problems will require novel approaches
with inherently longer incubation times. Chemists must learn how better to evaluate and sustain
Scheme 2 Green chemistry in the context of the major drivers for new developments in modern chemistry.
Green
Chemistry
Quality of Life
Environmental Protection
Human Welfare
Sustainable Development

1226
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
research programs that, while they may not rapidly produce large numbers of publications, do
offer reasonable promise of bringing within the fullness of time those critical advances that will
genuinely promote the cause of sustainability.
•
There is the very difficult issue of achieving a wholeness of scientific intelligence where more
than the current specialized and professionalized expertise is paid due homage. The science of
chemistry cannot escape this growth and remain meaningful and important to humanity. Chemis-
try exerts an enormous influence on human action and is thus inextricably intertwined with the
forces that guide human action, especially ethics and certain forms of passion. As such a whole-
ness is achieved, the power of scientific objectivity will be more openly directed by the action-
orienting insights and passions that make us all human, such as our love of life and our desire to
protect it. Such passions are neither vacuous nor disorienting. Rather, they are forces for great
good that are fully capable of directing chemists toward research that really matters to each and
every human being living and to come. Chemistry will have much more to offer, become more
meaningful to humanity, increase in attractiveness as a career choice, grow to be more worthy of
support, spawn large new economic developments, and progress to be more interesting and com-
pelling if chemists work to define and follow their natural and unique role in achieving a virtuous
civilization that sees broad validity within the community of living things for the claim to conti-
nuity of existence in an environment of natural genesis.
An environmentally friendly economy from green chemistry
Chemistry is the central and essential science necessary to deal with the very large questions of global
sustainability. Chemists have proven over time that they possess the imagination, the technical ability,
and the opportunities to produce the brilliant science that will be needed to decisively solve the technical
problems of sustainability. Chemistry needs to begin work on sustainability problems with a force that
befits their importance. The most obviously important research fields center on finding alternatives to
nonrenewable (depleting) resources and pollution prevention through hazard reduction.
Renewable energy sources
In an energy-hungry world that has demonstrated an inability to engage in effective conservation measures
on the scale necessary, the question of energy becomes paramount. The vast majority of energy production
in the world is being generated through the use of finite depleting resources. These same finite resources
(petroleum) are the basic feedstock for over 95% of all high value organic chemicals. It is clear that
burning of fossil fuels is not sustainable, and the research of alternative sources is not proceeding at a
rate necessary to address the problem in the necessary timeframe.
Renewable feedstocks
It is undeniable that the fossilized carbon reserves of the planet, built up over millions of years, are
being consumed at a rapid and ever increasing pace. These reserves are consumed not only as energy
sources, but also to produce feedstocks for the chemical industry. How are we going to achieve renewable
feedstock alternatives? It is the role of creative chemists who will learn how to process renewable
biomass into the chemical building blocks of future economies. In this area, chemists could have a great
deal to offer also. Again, chemists need to develop a strategic plan and ensure that it is adequately
backed.
Pollution reduction
While progress is clearly being made in many arenas, it is still clear that much needs to be done to
reduce the pollution pressure on the environment. Pollution largely results from imperfect applied
chemistry. So who will reduce and eliminate this pressure, if not chemists? There are different kinds of
pollutants. Persistent pollutants are more troubling than others because the environment does not have
sufficiently rapid ways of dealing with them. By designing products and processes throughout the life

Synthetic pathways and processes in green chemistry
1227
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
cycle such that hazards are reduced, it will be to the benefit of sustainability, both environmentally and
economically.
Interdisciplinary approach
Authentic green chemistry is designed to eliminate pollution at its source with the intention that the new
chemistry cannot imperil beneficial life forms. However, the earth’s environment is perhaps the most
complex chemical system we know about. The realization that a multitude of conundrums lie in the path
of green chemistry does not constitute a reason not to proceed. Rather, it provides us with a clear
warning to temper our natural enthusiasm for the good we might do with a healthy scepticism of our
ability to foresee the future. We must be careful and aim this scepticism at avoiding environmental
harm. Designers of the best green chemistry technologies will design for flexibility and deal with unknown
perils in a prudent and correctable manner. Because of the complexity of the environment, green chemistry
projects will require a certain level of multidisciplinary expertise reaching beyond the actual chemistry.
This will be best achieved by collaborations among appropriate specialists.
Green chemistry is a new and innovative approach to furthering the interests of the chemical
enterprise within the context of sustainability. However, it has the potential to strengthen, enrich, and
promote chemistry. In particular, it promises to excite talented young scientists and to attract them to the
chemical profession.
Green chemistry interacts with the activities of all seven IUPAC Divisions as well as with the
Committee on Chemistry and Industry. This expertise places IUPAC in an extremely strong position to
provide leadership in green chemistry, to promote this new approach, and to ensure that green chemists
follow and uphold the highest scientific standards.
Green chemistry education
In order to allow for the full potential of green chemistry to explore the scientific, economic, and
humanitarian advances that its promise holds, the scientific community needs to provide educational
opportunities to train chemists of the future to the scientific principles and technical methodologies that
comprise green chemistry. Since green chemistry requires the same skills and abilities of traditional
chemistry, students of all ages can learn fundamental concepts in ways that are more environmentally
benign. The same rigor and intellectual thoroughness that is an intrinsic part of all chemistry is essential
in the successful and scientifically uncompromising practice of green chemistry.
This educational endeavor can take several forms, including traditional courses in chemistry for
students at primary, secondary, and university levels, as well as professional training for practicing
chemistry in industry. Both of these target audiences need curriculum materials to be developed and a
suitable educational infrastructure in green chemistry to be made available to teachers, instructors, and
professors. Textbooks, laboratory training, student/instructor exchange, and internship programs are all
necessary components of adequate training in green chemistry.
In addition to classical educational mechanisms, there needs to be outreach to science students in
developing nations in many of the same areas as mentioned above. In addition, nonscience students and
professionals (especially those involved in the business/finance communities) need to be aware of the
recent developments and advances green chemistry has brought to the chemical enterprise. Only through
a far-reaching educational initiative will the development, implementation, and achievements of green
chemistry be realized to the benefit of society and the enrichment of the science of chemistry.
CONCLUSIONS
To combine the technological progress with the safeguard of the environment is one of the challenges of
the new millennium. Chemists will play a key role in the realization of the conditions for a sustainable
development, and green chemistry may be their winning strategy.

1228
P. TUNDO et al.
© 2000 IUPAC, Pure and Applied Chemistry 72, 1207–1228
The following Symposium-in-Print will give some examples of the potentialities of such a new
and rapidly emerging field, but does not intend to cover it entirely. The projects and programs men-
tioned in this report, as well, are only the most visible part of all the initiatives that scientists all over the
world are undertaking in the field of green chemistry. Other projects are coming from many organiza-
tions, and IUPAC is on the way of launching an official green/sustainable program aimed at attracting
and stimulating the active participation of more and more chemists.
REFERENCES
1.
J. Elkington, < http://www.sustainability.co.uk/sustainability.htm>
2.
P. T. Anastas and J. C. Warner. Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice. Oxford Science Publications,
Oxford (1998).
3.
T. J. Collins. Green Chemistry, MacMillan, Encyclopedia of Chemistry, MacMillan Inc., New
York (1997).
4.
(a) P. T. Anastas and T. C. Williamson (Eds.). Green Chemistry: Frontiers in Chemical Synhtesis
and Processes, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1998); (b) P. T. Anastas and C. A. Farris (Eds.).
Benign by Design: Alternative Synthetic Design for Pollution Prevention, ACS Symp. Ser. n. 577.
Washington DC (1994); (c) P. Tundo and P. T. Anastas (Eds.). Green Chemistry: Challenging
Perspectives, Oxford University Press, Oxford (2000).
5.
OECD Environmental Health and Safety Publications, Series on Risk Management N°10 (1999),
“Proceedings of the OECD workshop on sustainable chemistry” Venice, 15–17 October 1998, pp.
204–205.
6.
(a) B. M. Trost. Science 254, 1471 (1991); (b) B. M. Trost. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 34, 259
(1995).
7.
G. Ciamician. Science 36, 385 (1912).
8.
P. Tundo and M. Selva. “Simplify gas-liquid phase transfer catalysis”, CHEMTECH, 25(5), 31–
35 (1995).
9.
L. A. Paquette, T. M. Mitzel, M. B. Isaac, C. F. Crasto, W. W. Schomer. J. Org. Chem. 62, 4293–
4301 (1997).
10.
R. Breslow. Acc. Chem. Res. 24, 159 (1991).
11.
P. Tundo. Continuous-Flow Methods in Organic Synthesis, E. Horwood Pub., Chichester, UK
(1991).
12.
H. Jonas. The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of Ethics for the Technological Age, University
of Chicago Press, Chicago (1984).
