1619
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011.
doi:10.1351/PAC-REP-10-01-01
© 2011 IUPAC, Publication date (Web): 8 July 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
(IUPAC Technical Report)* 
Elangannan Arunan1,‡, Gautam R. Desiraju2, Roger A. Klein3,
Joanna Sadlej4, Steve Scheiner5, Ibon Alkorta6, David C. Clary7,
Robert H. Crabtree8, Joseph J. Dannenberg9, Pavel Hobza10,
Henrik G. Kjaergaard11, Anthony C. Legon12, Benedetta Mennucci13,
and David J. Nesbitt14
1Department of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India; 2Solid State and Structural Chemistry Unit, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India; 330 Kimberley Road, Chesterton,
Cambridge, CB4 1HH, UK; 4Department of Chemistry, Laboratory of Intermolecular
Interactions, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, PL-02093, Poland; 5Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, 0300 Old Main Hall, Utah State University, Logan, UT
84322, USA; 6Medicinal Chemistry Institute, Juan de la Cierva 3, Madrid E-28006,
Spain; 7Department of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Oxford University,
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QZ, UK; 8Department of Chemistry, 225 Prospect
Street, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511-8499 USA; 9Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, City University of New York, Hunter College, 695 Park
Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA; 10Institute of Organic and Biochemistry,
Academy of Sciences of Czech Republic, Flemingovo nam 2, Praha CZ 16610,
Czech Republic; 11Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen,
Universitetsparken 5, DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark; 12School of Chemistry,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK; 13Department of Chemistry, University of
Pisa, Via Risorgimento 35 Pisa 1-56125, Italy; 14Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
Abstract: The term “hydrogen bond” has been used in the literature for nearly a century now.
While its importance has been realized by physicists, chemists, biologists, and material sci-
entists, there has been a continual debate about what this term means. This debate has inten-
sified following some important experimental results, especially in the last decade, which
questioned the basis of the traditional view on hydrogen bonding. Most important among
them are the direct experimental evidence for a partial covalent nature and the observation of
a blue-shift in stretching frequency following X–HY hydrogen bond formation (XH being
the hydrogen bond donor and Y being the hydrogen bond acceptor). Considering the recent
experimental and theoretical advances, we have proposed a new definition of the hydrogen
bond, which emphasizes the need for evidence. A list of criteria has been provided, and these
can be used as evidence for the hydrogen bond formation. This list is followed by some char-
acteristics that are observed in typical hydrogen-bonding environments.
Keywords: bonding; electrostatic interactions; hydrogen bonding; IUPAC Physical and
Biophysical Chemistry Division; molecular interactions; noncovalent interactions.
*Sponsoring body: IUPAC Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Division: see more details on p. 1630.
‡Corresponding author: E-mail: arunan@ipc.iisc.ernet.in

CONTENTS
1. 
INTRODUCTION
2. 
HYDROGEN BONDING: A CRITICAL SURVEY
2.1
Physical forces involved in the hydrogen bond
2.2
Hydrogen bond donors and acceptors
2.3 
Distance and energy criteria: Crystallographic evidence
2.4
Spectroscopic evidence
2.5
Theoretical methods
3.
DEFINING THE HYDROGEN BOND
4.
CONCLUSIONS
MEMBERSHIP OF SPONSORING BODIES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
REFERENCES 
I. INTRODUCTION
The importance of hydrogen bonding cannot be overemphasized. It may best be summarized using a
definition for hydrogen bonding given in the Penguin dictionary: “A weak electrostatic chemical bond
which forms between covalently bonded hydrogen atoms and a strongly electronegative atom with a
lone pair of electrons … Life would be impossible without this type of bond” [1]. One starts wonder-
ing what an electrostatic chemical bond is and at the same time marvels at the clever juxtaposition of
the words “electrostatic” and “chemical” to describe the hydrogen bond. Pauling, in his classic book
The Nature of the Chemical Bond, had concluded that hydrogen bonding has to be electrostatic as it can-
not be chemical (covalent) [2]! Moreover, it is well established now that a lone pair of electrons in a
strongly electronegative atom represents just one of the many types of acceptors for a hydrogen bond.
There have been several books on hydrogen bonding [3–15] starting with the first authoritative
book by Pimentel and McClellan [3] in 1960. This was preceded by the compilation of papers presented
in the IUPAC symposium on hydrogen bonding published in 1959 and edited by Hadzi [4]. It is diffi-
cult to establish when the concept of hydrogen bond was first suggested. Before all these books, the
term “hydrogen bond” was brought into the mainstream by the classic book published by Pauling in
1939 [2]. According to Pauling, Latimer and Rodebush were the first to mention the term “hydrogen
bond” in the published literature in 1920 [16]. This could very well be true as the reports preceding
these used different words to describe the same phenomenon. For example, Werner had mentioned
Nebenvalenz [17] (German for secondary or weak valence) and Pfeiffer had used Innere
Komplexsalzbildung (“internal complex salt-bridge” for describing the intramolecular hydrogen bond
in 1-hydroxyanthraquinone) [18]. Moore and Winmill [19] had used the term “weak union” to describe
the weaker basic properties of trimethylammonium hydroxide compared to tetramethylammonium
hydroxide. According to them, the trimethyl compound was a weak union between trimethylamine and
water. Clearly, the concept of hydrogen bond existed before 1920; in fact, Huggins, from the same
Department as Latimer and Rodebush (University of California, Berkeley), had apparently used this in
his M.S. thesis [20].
The importance of hydrogen bonding is also amply demonstrated by the number of publications
containing the terms “hydrogen bond” or “hydrogen bonding”. For the period 2006–2008, there is on
an average at least one paper published and indexed in SciFinder every hour! To be precise, on
26 December 2005, SciFinder had 96688 references containing the words “hydrogen bond” and on
29 December 2008, this had grown to 127793 references. That amounts to 28.3 papers a day, clearly a
little more than one paper every hour. It is indeed surprising then that most authors feel that there is no
universally accepted definition for the hydrogen bond. 
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1620

This manuscript discusses the evolution of our understanding about hydrogen bonding. Following
this discussion, we propose a definition of hydrogen bonding. This takes into account the understand-
ing that has resulted from the investigations of very many researchers. Indeed, the authors of this man-
uscript “were standing on the shoulders of giants”, to paraphrase Newton. While many important ref-
erences have been given, it is likely that some equally or even more important references have been left
out. A more comprehensive list of references on this topic is available from the books referred to above
[3–15] and in the reviews published on hydrogen bonding in literature cutting across disciplines
[21–40]. Our main focus in this article is to propose a modern definition for the hydrogen bond. The
complexity involved in doing this has led to our proposing a short definition followed by a list of crite-
ria and characteristics for hydrogen bonding observed under various circumstances. Many authors have,
in the past, resorted to providing a list of criteria in addition to or instead of providing a definition for
hydrogen bond. This includes the books by Pimentel and McClellan [3] and Scheiner [11].
Section 2 discusses several aspects of hydrogen bonding such as the nature of physical forces
involved, various hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, distance and energy criteria, spectroscopic char-
acterization, and theoretical methods. In Section 3, the proposed definition is discussed. Section 4 con-
cludes this paper and summarizes our efforts.
2. HYDROGEN BONDING: A CRITICAL SURVEY
2.1. Physical forces involved in the hydrogen bond
All the initial examples for hydrogen bonding had FH, OH, or NH as donors, and this naturally led to
the conclusion that only these groups can form hydrogen bonds. The three elements F, O, and N are
among the most electronegative in the periodic table. Hence, an H atom attached to any of these three
atoms will have a significant partial positive charge. Latimer and Rodebush mentioned that “a free pair
of electrons on one water molecule exerts sufficient force on a hydrogen held by a pair of electrons on
another water molecule to bind the molecules together…hydrogen nucleus held between two octets
constitutes a weak “bond”’ (the double quote for bond was used by Latimer and Rodebush). During the
first half of the 20th century, the Lewis/Langmuir octet rules of valence was unquestionable [41]. Thus,
Pimentel and McClellan applauded the audacity of the proposal by Latimer and Rodebush which
showed a departure from the octet rule. As H has only one electron and it was already participating in
the covalent bond formed with F, O, or N, it was originally thought that it could not have another cova-
lent bond. This led Pauling to conclude that the hydrogen bond is electrostatic (ionic) in nature.
Electrostatic interactions do play a crucial role in hydrogen bonding but cannot explain several impor-
tant experimental observations including the lengthening of the X–H bond with a resultant red-shift in
the experimental X–H stretching frequency. Here, electrostatic is taken to mean the interaction between
rigid dipoles. Thus, defining a hydrogen bond as “no more than a particularly strong type of directional
dipole-dipole interaction” [42] is certainly incomplete. As Buckingham wrote in a book “The hydrogen
bond results from inter-atomic forces that probably should not be divided into components, although no
doubt electrostatic and overlap interactions are the principal ingredients” [43].
In fact, Pauling himself estimated that hydrogen bonding in O–HO contacts could have about
5 % covalent nature [2]. This was based on the HO distance of about 1.8 Å compared to the O–H dis-
tance of 1.0 Å which was taken to be 100 % covalent. Coulson [41], Del Bene and Pople [44],
Dannenberg [35], Gilli et al. [45], Weinhold and Landis [46], and many others have highlighted the
importance of a partial covalent nature in the hydrogen bond. This was shown to be important in coop-
erative phenomena that are observed in hydrogen-bonded systems [11,13,35,47]. The partial covalent
nature of the hydrogen bond has been experimentally verified during the last decade by NMR spin–spin
coupling [48] and Compton scattering [49] measurements. Moreover, the similarity between charge-
transfer interaction and hydrogen bonding has been pointed out by many including Ratajczak and
Orville-Thomas [50]. Quite recently, it has been shown that even Rg–H2O (Rg- rare gas) interactions
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1621

show signs of hydrogen bonding [51], and not surprisingly charge-transfer interaction as well [52] for
heavier noble gases such as Kr and Xe. Co-operativity and charge transfer are observed in most hydro-
gen-bonded systems, and they are included in the list of characteristics.
There have been numerous attempts to decompose the hydrogen-bonding interaction into electro -
static, polarization, charge transfer, dispersion, and exchange repulsion [53–56]. Although the electro-
static component has often been taken to include only dipole–dipole interactions [42], several authors
have shown the importance of invoking higher moments, quadrupole, octupole, etc. [57–59]. The reader
is referred to a critical review by Dykstra and Lisy [60] for more details on the development of various
models. Today, it is well accepted that hydrogen bonding has contributions from electrostatic inter -
actions between permanent multipoles, polarization, or induction interactions between permanent and
induced multipoles, dispersion arising from instantaneous multipoles-induced multipoles, charge-trans-
fer-induced covalency, and exchange correlation effects from short-range repulsion due to overlap of
the electron distribution. The contribution from the individual forces mentioned above varies depend-
ing on the hydrogen bond donor, acceptor, and the environment.
There have also been numerous studies in which intermolecular interaction was decomposed into
various interactions including hydrogen bonding as an independent, though undefined, interaction.
Curiously, some of these studies [29,42,61] list hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions as two
different contributions despite the vast literature equating hydrogen bonding to electrostatic inter -
actions. Hansen has successfully divided cohesion energy into contributions arising from dispersion,
dipole–dipole interaction, and hydrogen bonding and derived useful solubility parameters for a large
number of molecules [61,62].
Clearly, no single physical force can be attributed to hydrogen bonding. It is suggested in the list
of criteria that the forces involved in the X–HY interaction be more than just London dispersion
forces. The main reason for this is the predominantly directional nature of hydrogen bonding as opposed
to the more isotropic nature of London dispersion forces. Clear experimental evidence for this differ-
ence can be seen in the crystal structure of H2O and H2S, the former having 4 neighbors and the later
having 12 neighbors (i.e., H2S is nearly spherical) [2]. However, recent experimental results on H2S
offer more insight and are discussed in the next section.
2.2 Hydrogen bond donors and acceptors
As mentioned in the above section, the original examples of hydrogen bonding were found to involve
the electronegative atoms F, O, or N [2]. The current IUPAC definition given in the “Gold Book” still
specifically mentions these atoms, though it adds a caveat suggesting that the phenomenon is not lim-
ited to these atoms [63]. However, it was realized even in the early days that hydrogen bonding could
occur with atoms other than F, O, and N as X and/or Y. Pimentel and McClellan devote a chapter on
“What groups can form hydrogen bonds?” This chapter highlights the range of possible donors and
includes CH and SH groups specifically as donors. It does not list the range of acceptors but discusses
aromatic rings specifically. The book by Desiraju and Steiner has indeed been motivated by the non-
conventional donors and acceptors and has the title The Weak Hydrogen Bond in Structural Chemistry
and Biology [13]. It discusses C–HO hydrogen bonds and π-acceptors in detail. It points out that the
C–HN hydrogen bond was discussed in 1935 by Kumler [64] and that the O–Hπ interaction was
discussed by Wulf et al. in 1936 [65]. Rao and Jakkar published a paper in 1943 with the title “Evidence
for H bond in benzene” [66]. Clearly, it has been realized that X [22] may be any element having
electro negativity larger than that of H (F, N, O, C, P, S, Cl, Se, Br, and I) and Y [67] could be any of
these elements and also π-electrons.
The range of donors and acceptors has gone far beyond what is mentioned above. For example,
Crabtree and co-workers showed that another H atom itself as in metal hydrides could be the acceptor
of a hydrogen bond, and it was called dihydrogen bonding [68]. Dihydrogen bonding in the gas phase
was first reported by Mikami and co-workers [69]. Sadlej and co-workers have discussed the various
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1622

energy components of dihydrogen bonds and compared them with that of hydrogen bonds [70]. Though
C is included in the list of atoms mentioned above, it rarely acts as an acceptor atom, the one exception
being CO, which has C as the negative end [71]. More often, C atoms act as acceptors only as part of
π-bonds. Recently, both experimental [72] and theoretical [73] work has revealed the presence of a one-
electron hydrogen bond with C in CH3 radical as the acceptor atom. A lone pair is actually not needed
for a hydrogen bond. It has also been shown that the σ-bonding electrons of H2 could act as hydrogen
bond acceptors, though the authors of the paper had suggested that it be classified as van der Waals
interaction despite the similarity with the hydrogen bonding [74]. More recently, it was shown that the
global minimum in a complex between CH4 and H2O has OH pointing toward a tetrahedral face of CH4
with a bond critical point between H of OH and C of CH4 [75]. This does indeed look like the first step
toward the formation of CH5
+, and it may be pointed out that hydrogen bonding is in fact an important
intermediate in proton-transfer reactions [76]. 
The relation between hydrogen bonding and proton-transfer reactions is widespread, and it is
included as one of the characteristics of a hydrogen bond. This has been amply demonstrated by the
systematic work on ammonium halides by Legon [77]. He considered the effect of methylation in the
gas-phase ammonium halides H3NHX (X = F, Cl, Br, or I). Spectroscopic evidence shows that all the
H3NHX are essentially simple hydrogen-bonded complexes in the gas phase but methylation to give
(CH3)3NHX causes movement of H away from HX toward N, so that the contribution of the ionic
bond NH+–X– increases. Moreover, along the series (CH3)3NHX from X = F to X = I, there is a
monotonic increase in ionic character as it becomes easier for HX to dissociate into H+ and X–. Thus,
in gas-phase trimethylammomium iodide, there is an increased extent of proton transfer from I to N,
representing a significant contribution from the ionic form (CH3)3NH+I–. There is also a large increase
in binding strength owing to the increased ionic character.
There have been numerous reports on transition elements acting as hydrogen bond acceptors as
well [78,79]. The book by Desiraju and Steiner [13] has compiled the literature up to 1997, and the
recent edited volume by Grabowski [14] has a chapter authored by Calhorda [78] specifically devoted
to transition elements as acceptors. Hydrogen bonding involving ionic systems is found to be stronger
than found in neutral systems and has been christened ion-assisted/charge-assisted hydrogen bonding
(CAHB) [15,80]. Gilli and co-workers have also discussed resonance-assisted hydrogen bonding, polar-
ization-assisted hydrogen bonding, and induction-assisted hydrogen bonding [15,32,80]. As already
mentioned, hydrogen bonding in different environments relies on varying contributions from physical
and chemical forces, and these classifications are useful to some extent. In this manuscript, our main
focus is to define a hydrogen bond that would be appropriate for all environments. Our aim is to give a
definition that is both general and accurate.
Whether rare gases (Rg = He, Ar, Ne, Kr, Xe) can act as hydrogen bond acceptors has been hotly
debated. Often RgHX interactions have been categorized as van der Waals interactions. The electro -
negativity of Kr has been estimated as 3.0, and it would not be surprising if it does indeed form a hydro-
gen bond [81]. In fact, for the RgHF series, experimental results are known for all the rare gases from
He to Xe [82–86]. All these complexes have equilibrium geometry in which the Rg interacts with HF
through the H side. However, in HeHF, the HF is a free rotor [82] and in NeHF, it is a nearly free
rotor [83]. Clearly, it does not make any sense to identify these complexes as “hydrogen bonded” as the
HF in this complex is freely rotating and there is no orientational preference for H pointing toward
He/Ne. However, the heavier rare gases Ar, Kr, and Xe do show strong directional preferences and are
clearly hydrogen bonded [86]. The NeHF is a particularly interesting case in that isotopic substitu-
tion of H by D makes the internal rotation somewhat hindered with the zero point energy only slightly
(4 cm–1) above the barrier for internal rotation of DF [87]. Hence, in the NeDF complex, there is sig-
nificantly more orientational preference than in the NeHF complex.
A similar trend has been observed recently for the RgH2O series. Results from molecular beam
scattering experiments reported by Cappelletti and co-workers have shown that the RgH2O inter -
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1623

action becomes “hydrogen bonding” as the rare gases become heavier [51], i.e., the HeH2O inter -
action is isotropic whereas the XeH2O interaction is very directional with the OHXe bond that is
nearly linear. More recently, it has been shown that rare gas atoms cannot only be acceptors but also
donors in hydrogen-bonded complexes. In particular, HRgF (Rg = Ar, Kr) has been shown to form
strong hydrogen bonds with typical acceptors such as HF and N2 [88–90]. It is clear that both X and Y
are certainly not restricted to N, O, or F and may even include atoms not mentioned here. Hence, the
proposed definition does not put any restriction on X or Y.
The diboranes are excluded from the list of hydrogen-bonded systems for the simple reason that
B is less electronegative than H. In diboranes, the H atoms are negatively polarized when compared to
B. It is suggested that this criterion be used as a convention to avoid diverse nomenclature to describe
the same systems. For example, the HFClF complex was termed as anti-hydrogen bond by Klemperer
and co-workers as they expected it to form the hydrogen-bonded ClFHF [91]. It can now easily be
recognized as a halogen-bonded or more specifically a chlorine-bonded complex, and Cl is less electro -
negative than F (i.e., Cl carries a partial positive charge in ClF and is the acceptor of electron density
from F of HF). Halogen-bonded systems have been receiving significant attention over the last decade
[92,93]. It is important to realize that HFClF, and more importantly HFHF, may be called fluorine-
bonded except that no one uses such a terminology! Similarly, there are examples reported recently in
which hydrides act as halogen bond acceptors such as LiHClCF3 [94]. These are better characterized
as halogen-bonded rather than hydrogen-bonded, though H is indeed bonded to two atoms here as well
and it would fit Pimentel and McClellan’s definition of a hydrogen bond [3]. Desiraju and Steiner [13]
and Alkorta et al. [27] have used the term “inverse hydrogen bonding” to address these situations. We
propose a convention in which LiHClF and HFClF are halogen (chlorine)-bonded rather than
hydrogen- or fluorine-bonded, respectively. Hence, in the definition it is emphasized that the X atom is
more electronegative than the H atom. It is important to realize that electronegativity of an atom can be
very different in different environments. Also, one may need to look at group electronegativities rather
than that of atoms [95]. The importance of group electronegativity can be highlighted by the hydrogen-
bonded complex F3SiHOH2, where X is Si atom having a lower electronegativity [96].
2.3 Distance and energy criteria: Crystallographic evidence
Most of the early examples of hydrogen bonding reported distances between the X and Y atoms which
were less than the sum of their respective van der Waals radii [2]. This led many, including Pauling [2],
Pimentel and McClellan [3], Hamilton and Ibers [5], and Buckingham and Fowler [57], to conclude that
H is immersed in the electron cloud of Y and the distance between X and Y is not in any way affected
by the presence of H atom. This amounted to ignoring the H atom in the hydrogen bond, but this view
did prevail for a long time. In fact, Pauling suggested that in the bifluoride anion (FHF)–, the distance
between the two F– is just the sum of fluoride ion radii. In bifluoride ion, one may expect a proton in
between two F−and a bare proton is indeed too small (0.66 fm) [81]. However, even in bifluoride ion,
the H is not a bare proton and does occupy a finite volume in between two F. Pauling’s argument was
extended to neutral hydrogen-bonded complexes by Buckingham and Fowler [57] who suggested that
the X—Y distance would be equal to the sum of van der Waals radii of X and Y. The recent books by
Jeffrey [12], Scheiner [11], and Desiraju and Steiner [13] highlight the inadequacy of this criterion.
As locating the H atom was difficult in the early days, it was not possible to define a hydrogen
bond radius, as Pauling did successfully for other interactions such as covalent radii, ionic radii, metal-
lic radii, and van der Waals radii [2]. Even without a hydrogen bond radius, based on the heavy atom
distances from databases such as Cambridge Structural Database [97] and Protein Databank [98],
Desiraju and Steiner [13] and Jeffrey [12] did come up with more reasonable cutoffs in terms of X—Y
distances for strong, medium, and weak hydrogen bonds.
Wallwork did define the hydrogen bond radii at a time when hydrogen atoms could not be located
accurately but was disappointed not to find any correlation with other properties such as binding energy
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1624

[99]. Recently, Arunan and coworkers [100,101] and Klein [102,103] have independently shown that
using van der Waals radii to confirm/rule out hydrogen bonding can lead to erroneous conclusions both
at short and long distances for strong and weak hydrogen bonds, respectively. Hydrogen bond radii have
been proposed for strong, medium, and weak hydrogen bonds based on electron density studies, and a
strong correlation of these radii has been shown with the dipole moment of XH [101]. The hydrogen
bond radii for XH approach the van der Waals radii of H as the dipole moment of HX approaches zero.
These suggestions are new and will be tested in the future. However, in the list of criteria given in this
manuscript, the use of van der Waals radii, especially of the heavy atoms, is discouraged. Indeed, Bondi
in his original paper recommended that van der Waals radii be used only for estimating crystallographic
volumes [104].
Pauling had suggested 8–42 kJ mol–1 as a typical hydrogen bond energy [2], even though this
range does not cover the bifluoride anion (FHF)– included by him as an example of hydrogen bonding,
or for that matter a number of other ionic hydrogen-bonded systems such as NH3NH4
+. Pimentel and
McClellan were more cautious and did not put any limit on the binding energy [3]. The books by
Desiraju and Steiner [13] and Jeffrey [10] recommend limits for strong (63–167 kJ mol–1), medium
(17–63 kJ mol–1), and weak (<17 kJ mol–1) hydrogen bonds, with notably no lower limit for weak
hydrogen bonds. Similar limits were originally suggested by Emsley [23]. The existing IUPAC defini-
tion [63] also does not give a lower limit but suggests an upper limit of 20–25 kJ mol–1.
Dissociation energy in a defined range provides a poor criterion for the existence of a hydrogen
bond. As a point of reference, we first consider a series taken to represent pure London dispersion,
ionic, and covalent interactions, namely, Ne2, NaF, and F2, for which the approximate values of De are
0.3, 477, and 160 kJ mol–1, respectively [105]. On the other hand, the range of binding strength for the
hydrogen bond can be illustrated neatly by considering the closely related, isoelectronic series NeHF
[87], HFHF [108], H2OHF [107], and (FHF)−[106], for which the De values are 1, 19, 43,
and 167 kJ mol–1, respectively. Although it is debatable whether there is a hydrogen bond in NeHF
because HF is almost freely rotating, H spends more time in the region between Ne and F (and as
pointed out earlier more so for NeDF), and for the present purpose NeHF can be considered the
limit of a weak hydrogen bond. The bifluoride ion lies at the strong limit. Thus, the series NeHF,
HFHF, H2OHF, and (FHF)−covers a range of hydrogen bond strengths not widely different
from that of the set of London dispersion and covalent reference values.
It is clear that specifying an energy cutoff is arbitrary and does not help in identifying or exclud-
ing the possibility of a hydrogen bond being present. Directionality rather than energy is the discrimi-
native attribute for a hydrogen bond. Desiraju and Steiner have shown that even the weakest hydrogen
bonds are distinct from the more general van der Waals interactions which are isotropic [109].
Historically, the differences in melting and boiling points for the hydrides of successive row elements
(such as H2O and H2S and HF and HCl) [3], were helpful in identifying the presence of hydrogen bond-
ing in H2O and HF, and it was assumed that H2S and HCl did not form hydrogen bonds. This was fur-
ther corroborated by the fact that H2S has 12 neighbors in the crystal (practically a sphere) as opposed
to the four neighbors for H2O in ice. This difference is rather striking, and hydrogen bonds clearly
induce directional preferences and influence packing modes in crystals. This is listed as one of the char-
acteristics of the hydrogen bond.
With the advent of cryogenic matrices [110] and supersonic beams [111] for producing exotic
species, there have been several reports of hydrogen-bonded complexes involving HCl [112,113] and
H2S [114,115]. Moreover, it has been shown recently that on increasing the pressure and decreasing the
temperature, H2S has a structure similar to that of H2O in ice [116]. In fact, Loveday et al. point out
that H2S is a model system in which the hydrogen bond goes from “absent or very weak to structurally
significant” [116]. They point out that formation of a hydrogen bond involves “a change as simple as
suppressing free rotation about a single axis”. It is clear then that the barriers for large amplitude
motions that break the H bond in X–HY are more important in determining the presence of an
observable hydrogen bond than the X–HY binding energy [117]. If this criterion is applied, one could
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1625

indeed see the “border” between hydrogen-bonding and van der Waals interaction [118]. Hence, in the
list of criteria no specific energy cutoff is given, and it is suggested that the X–HY bond must have
sufficient strength to be observed under the given experimental conditions.
2.4 Spectroscopic evidence
Spectroscopy has played a crucial role in the detection of the hydrogen bonds [3]. Murthy and Rao pre-
sented a comprehensive review on spectroscopy of hydrogen bond in 1968 [21]. In particular, IR and
Raman spectroscopy played important roles in the early days of hydrogen bonds. According to Pimentel
and McClellan, the peak corresponding to the X–H stretch in the IR spectrum offers the “most sensi-
tive, the most characteristic and one of the most informative manifestation of H bond”. Hilbert et al. had
concluded in 1936 that following the hydrogen bond formation, the X–H stretching peak disappears
from the spectrum [119]. Shortly thereafter, Badger and Bauer [120] showed that the X–H stretching
peak does not disappear but gets red-shifted to a lower wave number, the shift correlating with the
strength of the hydrogen bond in X–HY [11,120]. The association between intramolecular hydrogen
bonding and IR red-shift for the X–H stretching frequency was made by Kuhn in a series of papers con-
cerned with structural effects on the IR spectra of diols [121]. In general, the X–H stretching peak
shows decrease in frequency, increase in bandwidth, and increase in intensity. Iogansen has shown the
strong correlation between hydrogen-bonding energy and the increase in intensity of XH stretching
band [38]. Conversely, the intensity of the first X–H stretching overtone is weaker than that observed
in the monomer upon hydrogen bonding [119,122,123] and the red-shift is approximately double that
observed in the fundamental [3,124]. For several years, the “disappearance” of the first overtone was
used as a criterion for strong hydrogen bonding [3]. Recent experiments have shown that such decrease
in overtone intensity happens in both strong (O–HO) and weak (O–HF–C) hydrogen bonds formed
within a single system, i.e., trifluoromethanol dimer formed in a supersonic jet [125].
In the last decade, it has been realized that there could be hydrogen-bonded systems in which the
X–H stretching frequency shows a small blue-shift and the reader is referred to the comprehensive
review by Hobza and Havlas [30]. This was quite surprising, leading to names such as “anti hydrogen
bond” [126] and “improper hydrogen bond” [127] and for a while it was considered that red- and blue-
shifting hydrogen bonds were distinctly different [128]. It has now been realized that there is no fun-
damental difference between red- and blue-shifting hydrogen bonds [129]. Joseph and Jemmis [130]
have provided a unified explanation for red-, blue-, and non-shifting hydrogen bonds based on the opti-
mum X–H bond length in the X–HY hydrogen bond. They have shown that the X–HY energy min-
imum could occur at longer, equal, or shorter X–H distance compared to that in the non-hydrogen-
bonded XH. Karpfen and Kryachko have pointed out that in some specific cases blue-shift in XH
happens even when there is no hydrogen bonding between XH and Y [131]. Sikka has recently dis-
cussed pressure-induced blue-shifts in hydrogen bonds [132]. In any case, the vast majority of hydro-
gen-bonded systems show red-shifts in the XH stretching frequency and an increase in its intensity.
Hence, it is included as a criterion for hydrogen bonding with a caveat given as a footnote.
NMR spectroscopy offers the next best evidence for hydrogen bonding after IR spectroscopy.
According to Pimentel and McClellan [3] “…the IR intensity (of the X–H stretch) and the proton mag-
netic resonance (down shift of the H resonance) are probably the most sensitive to H bond forma-
tion…”. In general, the proton magnetic resonance of XH moves toward lower field (downfield—ter-
minology originating from the early days of NMR when the magnetic field was scanned and
superconducting magnets were not available) compared to non-hydrogen-bonded XH. This is the result
of strong deshielding of the protons, which is a direct consequence of electron redistribution around the
H atom following the H bond formation. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, NMR spectroscopy has pro-
vided direct evidence for through-bond coupling between X and Y in a X–HY hydrogen-bonded sys-
tem [48,133].
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1626

Though IR and NMR spectroscopy offer direct experimental criteria indicating the formation of
hydrogen bonds, spectroscopy in every region of the electromagnetic spectrum has contributed to the
growing knowledge of the hydrogen bond phenomenon. Microwave spectroscopy in a supersonic beam
has provided a wealth of structural information of isolated hydrogen-bonded complexes [134,135].
Moreover, in complexes containing a quadrupolar nuclei, such as 14N or 35Cl, the quadrupolar coupling
constants can change due to the distortion of electronic environment around these atoms, following
hydrogen bond formation [77,136]. The changes in quadrupolar coupling constants, in fact, provide
vital clues in determining the extent of proton transfer [77]. Moreover, recent advances in far IR [137]
or mm-wave [138] or terahertz [139] spectroscopy all contribute to the growing knowledge in this field.
In particular, the hydrogen bond stretch, i.e., HY stretch, can be directly observed today [140].
Electronic spectroscopy has been traditionally used [21] in studies on hydrogen-bonded systems. Today,
all modern spectroscopic techniques, such as 2D-IR [141], and other double resonance techniques
(IR-UV [142], UV-UV [143]) are employed in investigations of hydrogen-bonded systems. Moreover,
mass detected IR spectroscopy, such as resonant 2-photon ionization (R2PI) detection, are also
employed for investigating hydrogen bonds [144]. Vibrational circular dichroism spectroscopy has been
used as a probe for chirality transfer in molecular interactions, including hydrogen bonding [145]. A
recent experimental addition has been the use of helium nanodroplets to study molecular complexes
[146]. In 2009, Raman spectroscopy has been added to this list and has been successfully used to char-
acterize carboxylic acid dimers formed in supersonic jets [147]. Clearly, numerous spectroscopic tech-
niques are used in the study of the hydrogen bond and many more are likely to be added. In any case,
only the red-shift and intensity enhancement in the IR spectrum and a shift toward lower fields in the
NMR spectrum are suggested as criteria for a hydrogen bond.
Hydrogen-bonded interactions are often responsible for specific properties of liquids. This is espe-
cially true in highly structured liquids such as water. When such a hydrogen bond network is present,
specific dynamics occur over a range of time scales, from femtosecond fluctuations that involve a few
molecules to sub-picosecond diffusive motions that involve the breaking and forming of hydrogen
bonds. These dynamics can be experimentally investigated with time-resolved spectroscopic techniques
as well as simulated with computational techniques [148–152]. These studies have provided further
dynamic criteria or distinctive characteristics to identify hydrogen bonds [117,148–152]. Most of these
dynamic studies investigate hydrogen bonding in water, which is of enormous importance. However,
the definition provided here is quite general and would cover these and hopefully other future develop-
ments.
2.5 Theoretical/computational methods
One of the most powerful tools to study hydrogen-bonded systems, or intermolecular interactions in
general, is computational chemistry. These approaches can be divided first into two broad categories.
Empirical approaches make use of a predefined function that estimates the interaction energy in terms
of (a) the nature of the two groups involved and (b) their relative geometry. Such methods are impor-
tant to dynamics calculations but rely heavily on a number of empirical parameters, and do not lend
themselves to analysis of any particular hydrogen bond.
Quantum mechanical methods consider each system and geometry individually, and compute the
interaction via the fundamental forces that guide the motion of the electrons. The most approximate
quantum mechanical methods are known as semi-empirical because they simplify the calculations by
making use of a number of empirical parameters, such as ionization energy of a given atom, sometimes
derived from experiment, but also evaluated so that the final results more closely mimic certain exper-
imental quantities. While widely used to study hydrogen bonds in the 1960s and 1970s [22,153,154],
semi-empirical methods are seldom applied nowadays, due to their well-known deficiencies in this area.
Semi-empirical procedures were succeeded by ab initio methods which do not employ adjustable
parameters. As such, they are far more demanding in terms of computer resources, but modernization
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1627

of the latter made such approaches more accessible and even routine, at least for systems of moderate
size. The level of reliability of these methods can be systematically improved in stages by enlargement
of the basis set, coupled with application of more complete treatments of electron correlation. Indeed,
some of the most accurate calculations of hydrogen-bonded systems to date [155–158] have been
accomplished in this manner.
The most recent addition to this arsenal of theoretical methods is density functional theory (DFT),
which is typically much less computationally demanding than ab initio, and thus may be applied to
larger systems [159,160]. These methods are similar in some ways to ab initio approaches, with the
major distinction that DFT considers all molecular orbitals at one time, via the total electron density,
which leads to their greater efficiency. They have been applied to hydrogen bonds at an accelerating
pace [161–167], beginning in the early 1990s. Their major deficiencies lie first in their failure to include
dispersion forces in a systematic manner; there are ongoing efforts [168–170] to correct this problem,
particularly since dispersion can be one of the major contributors to hydrogen bonding. Also of some
concern is the proliferation of many different variants of DFT, with each having undergone various lev-
els of testing with respect to hydrogen bonds.
Regardless of the choice of method, the computation is capable of providing a good deal of infor-
mation about each interaction. Most important in some ways, the strength of the hydrogen bond is typ-
ically equated with the energy required to separate the two species, the so-called hydrogen bond energy.
This quantity must be corrected for basis set superposition error, usually by the counterpoise procedure
[171]. Unfortunately, there is no clear definition of the hydrogen bond energy for intramolecular hydro-
gen bonds since the two partners cannot be fully separated. There have been some theoretical attempts
recently to overcome this limitation for intramolecular hydrogen bond energy [172,173]. It is generally
useful from a fundamental perspective to partition the total interaction energy into various components,
e.g., electrostatic, exchange repulsion, polarization, etc. Care must be exercised here as there are mul-
tiple formalisms that have been developed for such partitioning [53–56,174–177], and each computes
the components in different ways, which can lead to differing interpretations.
Quantum calculations allow determination of the lowest-energy structure of a given complex,
which provides structural data that complement microwave and X-ray structures, but also provide a
more complete description of the potential energy surface, which include secondary minima and the
energy barriers that separate them. They are also capable of computing vibrational spectra, and of pro-
viding unambiguous pictures of the atomic motions accompanying each normal mode. These analyses
are usually carried out at the harmonic level, which can be at odds with experimental data, particularly
for the weak hydrogen bonding interactions which typically contain significant anharmonic contribu-
tions. NMR chemical shifts are also readily computed [178], as are coupling constants [179].
As a supplement to experimental information, the computed electron distributions lend them-
selves to analysis to aid in understanding the hydrogen-bonding phenomenon. Charges can be assessed
to each atomic center, but as with energy decomposition methods, there are a variety of different means
of computing these charges. One of the more widely used method, natural bond orbital analysis [180],
provides information about specific chemical bonds and lone pairs, in analogy to Lewis structures, as
well as their interactions with vacant anti-bonds.
Theoretical analysis of electron density topology (christened as Atoms in Molecules theory, AIM
theory, by Bader) [181] in hydrogen-bonded systems has proven to be useful and is indeed widely used.
This complements the experimental [182] electron density topology studies very well. The AIM theo-
retical approach [181,183] considers the electron density functional, and its Laplacian, adding bond
paths and critical points to the overall picture, which contain information about ionic vs. covalent con-
tributions to a given interaction. For a hydrogen bond system, in most cases, there is a bond path con-
necting the H to the Y atom and a (3,–1) bond critical point is found [181–184]. There has been a debate
[185–191] about the usefulness of a (3,–1) critical point between two atoms to establish the presence or
absence of a bond between the two atoms. One concern is that a bond critical point could be found for
non-equilibrium geometries such as transition states, i.e., saddle points, rather than true global minima.
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1628

It is, however, perfectly logical that a transition state in a meta-stable equilibrium could be partially sta-
bilized by a hydrogen bond exhibiting a (3,–1) bond critical point [190]. In this instance the hydrogen
bonding energy is insufficient to offset other conformational effects resulting in true minima either side
of the transition state without a hydrogen bond. Klein argues that the absence of a bond critical point,
corroborated by experiment and theory, does imply the absence of a bond although the presence need
not necessarily indicate the presence of a bond in the normally (chemically) accepted sense [190].
However, as is true with many of the characteristics of the hydrogen bond, a (3,–1) bond critical point
is found between H and Y in most X–HY hydrogen bonds and is therefore included as one of the
characteristics of a hydrogen bond. 
3. DEFINING THE HYDROGEN BOND
We are now ready to define the hydrogen bond. For reasons mentioned in Sections 1 and 2, we have
chosen to provide a short, inclusive, and accurate definition for the hydrogen bond. This is followed by
a list of criteria that can be used as evidence for the hydrogen bond. Some typical characteristics of the
hydrogen bond have also been listed. More explanations have been given as footnotes for the sake of
clarity and completeness. The document that contains all these have been submitted to IUPAC as our
recommendation and it appears as the next article in this issue of Pure and Applied Chemistry [192].
The short definition follows the one given by Pimentel and McClellan [3] which is very general
in scope but insists on some evidence for the hydrogen bond formation. One significant difference
between our definition and that of Pimentel and McClellan is that the hydrogen bond donor X–H should
have an X which is more electronegative than H for reasons elaborated in Section 2.2. The short defi-
nition is reproduced below from the recommendation [192]: The hydrogen bond is an attractive
interaction between a hydrogen atom from a molecule or a molecular fragment X–H in which X
is more electronegative than H, and an atom or a group of atoms in the same or a different mol-
ecule, in which there is evidence of bond formation.
As this definition requires some evidence for hydrogen bond formation, it was felt necessary to
provide some criteria that can be used as evidence. Six such criteria have been given. One criterion is
based on the geometry and it points out that the three atoms X–HY usually tend toward linearity. This
directionality is indeed the hallmark of hydrogen bonding as already pointed out in Section 2.3. Two of
the criteria relate to the nature of the physical forces involved in hydrogen bonding. As outlined in
Section 2.1, there is no single physical force that can be ascribed to hydrogen bonds, and hence one cri-
terion requires that the interaction should not be primarily due to dispersion force, which is not highly
directional. Electrostatic forces do play a significant role in the directionality of hydrogen bonding, and
this is connected with the requirement that X be more electronegative than H. The historic criterion
based on the sum of van der Waals radii of X and Y has not been recommended.
Two of the criteria are based on spectroscopy. As mentioned earlier, the red-shift in X–H vibra-
tional frequency observed in IR and deshielding of H in XH observed in NMR have been included. The
fact that there are blue-shifting hydrogen bonds has been pointed out in a footnote. An energetic limit
for the binding energy has not been specified as it is very subjective. However, it has been pointed out
that the thermal vibrational energy along all the coordinates that can break the hydrogen bond should
be less than the potential barriers for breaking the hydrogen bond along those coordinates [117]. The
importance of considering both kinetic energy and potential energy has been pointed out in several
recent publications [117,188]. As one needs to worry about both enthalpy and entropy changes on
hydrogen bond formation, the criterion mentions Gibbs energy explicitly.
The definition is concluded with the listing of some typical characteristics observed in hydrogen-
bonded systems, and five of these have been explicitly mentioned in Section 2. These are: (1) co-oper-
ativity observed in hydrogen bonded network, (2) proton transfer as an intermediate between X–HY
and XH–Y, (3) directionality and the resultant influence in crystal packing, (4) the correlation
between the extent of charge transfer and the hydrogen bond strength, and (5) the observation of a (3,–1)
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1629

bond critical point between H and Y in the electron density topological analysis. In addition, the strong
correlation observed between pKa of X–H and pKb of Y–Z with the energy of the hydrogen bond
formed between them has been included as one of the characteristics [80].
4. CONCLUSIONS
The hydrogen bond is a complex phenomenon. It is inherently difficult to provide a simple definition
for a complex phenomenon. Based on the experimental and theoretical evidence available today, a short
definition for the hydrogen bond has been recommended. This report has summarized our existing
knowledge on hydrogen bonding and provided the rationale for the definition proposed [192].
Therefore, this definition, while simple, must be considered in the light of the criteria proposed for its
validity. These criteria are found to be satisfied in most hydrogen-bonded systems. Some typical char-
acteristics have also been included. However, it is understood that with the advent of experimental and
theoretical techniques that may not exist today, the list of criteria and characteristics could evolve. It is
hoped that the short definition given based on all the existing information today will stand the test of
time. It closely follows the definition given by Pimentel and McClellan [3], and the emphasis on the
evidence of bond formation is crucial.
MEMBERSHIP OF SPONSORING BODIES
Membership of the IUPAC Physical and Biophysical Chemistry Division Committee for the period
2010–2011 is as follows:
President: A. J. McQuillan (New Zealand); Vice President: K. Yamanouchi (Japan); Secretary:
R. Marquardt (France); Past President: M. J. Rossi (Switzerland); Titular Members: J. H. Dymond
(UK); A. Friedler (Israel); R. Guidelli (Italy); J.-G. Hou (China); B. D. Sykes (Canada); A. K. Wilson
(USA); Associate Members: V. Barone (Italy); K. Bartik (Belgium); A. R. H. Goodwin (USA);
V. Mišković-Stanković (Serbia); G. R. Moore (UK); M. Rico (Spain); National Representatives:
K. Bhattacharyya (India); S.-J. Kim (Korea); V. Yu. Kukushkin (Russia); A. J. Mahmood (Bangladesh);
O. V. Mamchenko (Ukraine); A. W. Mombrú Rodríguez (Uruguay); F. H. Quina (Brazil); N. Soon
(Malaysia); V. Tsakova (Bulgaria); M. Witko (Poland).
Membership of the Task Group on Categorizing Hydrogen Bonding and Other Intermolecular
Interactions was as follows:
Cochairs: E. Arunan (India); S. Scheiner (USA); Members: G. R. Desiraju (India); R. A. Klein
(Germany/UK); J. Sadlej (Poland); I. Alkorta (Spain); D. C. Clary (UK); R. H. Crabtree (USA); J. J.
Dannenberg (USA); P. Hobza (Czech Republic); H. G. Kjaergaard (Denmark); A. C. Legon (UK);
B. Mennucci (Italy); D. J. Nesbitt (USA).
The task group met in Pisa, Italy in September 2005 following a discussion meeting in which
12 of the members and 10 outside experts gave presentations. This meeting was followed by E-mail dis-
cussions about the definition of a hydrogen bond. The core group (E. Arunan, S. Scheiner (by web-cam-
era), G. R. Desiraju, R. A. Klein, and J. Sadlej) met in Bangalore in September 2006 following which
the draft recommendation was produced. Comments from the task group and outside experts helped in
refining the write-up. Names of other experts who gave valuable comments are included in the acknowl-
edgments. All of the correspondence and presentations are available at the web site
<http://ipc.iisc.ernet.in/~arunan/iupac/>.
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1630

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank all the participants of the two meetings conducted at Pisa, Italy and Bangalore, India
for their enthusiastic participation and useful comments. We thank the IUPAC for supporting this ini-
tiative and we specifically thank Profs. B. R. Henry, R. D. Weir, Z. Q. Tian, A. J. McQuillan, M. J.
Rossi, and R. Marquardt, who provided valuable comments. Professor McQuillan further played a cru-
cial role in finalizing this report. Several experts have made useful comments toward arriving at the def-
inition given. They include: Profs. J. A. Sordo, M. Rosenberg, K. Venkatesan, F. A. Weinhold, R. F. W.
Bader, A. Nangia, M. Chaplin, A. Chandra, D. Datta, E. D. Jemmis, D. Pratt, S. Pommeret, Y. Marcus,
R. M. Neumann, R. Henchman, D. B. Boyd, A. E. Roitberg, H. M. Muchall, and C. M. Hansen;
Drs. J. Bentley, W. Wang, M. Leach, S. K. Sikka; and Mr. G. Marcotte. We also thank the numerous
anonymous referees who have carefully gone through the earlier drafts and provided valuable com-
ments. Many scientists from around the world had sent comments at a different point in time and we
apologize to those who have not been explicitly mentioned here. All those comments have been quite
useful in producing this manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. The Penguin Dictionary of Science, Penguin, London (1971).
2. L. Pauling. The Nature of the Chemical Bond, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY (1960). The
first edition was published in 1939.
3. G. C. Pimentel, A. L. McClellan. The Hydrogen Bond, W. H. Freeman, San Francisco (1960).
4. D. Hadzi (Ed.). Hydrogen Bonding, Pergamon, London (1959).
5. W. C. Hamilton, J. A. Ibers. Hydrogen Bonding in Solids, W. A. Benjamin, New York (1968). 
6. S. N. Vinogradov, R. H. Linnell. Hydrogen Bonding, Van Nostrand-Reinhold, New York (1971).
7. M. D. Joeston, L. J. Schaad. Hydrogen Bonding, Marcel Dekker, New York (1974).
8. P. Schuster, G. Zundel, C. Sanfordy. The Hydrogen Bond: Recent Developments in Theory and
Experiments, Vols. I–III, North Holland, Amsterdam (1976).
9. P. Schuster. Hydrogen Bonds, Springer Verlag, Berlin (1984).
10. G. A. Jeffrey, W. Saenger. Hydrogen Bonding in Biological Structures, Springer Verlag, Berlin
(1991).
11. S. Scheiner. Hydrogen Bonding: A Theoretical Perspective, Oxford University Press, Oxford
(1997).
12. G. A. Jeffrey. An Introduction to Hydrogen Bonding, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1997).
13. G. R. Desiraju, T. Steiner. The Weak Hydrogen Bond, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1999).
14. S. J. Grabowski (Ed.). Hydrogen Bonding: New Insights, Springer, Dordrecht (2006).
15. P. Gilli, G. Gilli. The Nature of the Hydrogen Bond, Oxford University Press, Oxford (2009).
16. W. M. Latimer, W. H. Rodebush. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 42, 1419 (1920).
17. A. Werner. Leibigs Ann. Chem. 322, 261 (1902).
18. P. Pfeiffer. Ann. Chem. 398, 137 (1913).
19. T. S. Moore, T. F. Winmill. J. Chem. Soc. 101, 1635 (1912).
20. (a) M. L. Huggins. Phys. Rev. 18, 333 (1921); see refs. [2–15] for more historic details and also
(b) M. L. Huggins. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 10, 147 (1971) for a personal account from Huggins.
21. A. S. N. Murthy, C. N. R. Rao. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 2, 69 (1968).
22. P. A. Kollman, L. C. Allen. Chem. Rev. 72, 283 (1972).
23. J. Emsley. Chem. Soc. Rev. 9, 91 (1980).
24. R. Taylor, O. Kennard. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 104, 5063 (1982).
25. M. C. Etter. Acc. Chem. Res. 23, 120 (1990).
26. M. A. Suhm, D. J. Nesbitt. Chem. Soc. Rev. 24, 45 (1995).
27. I. Alkorta, I. Roza, J. Ekguero. Chem. Soc. Rev. 27, 163 (1998).
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1631

28. Y. A. Abramov, L. Brammer, W. T. Klooster, R. M. Bullock. Inorg. Chem. 37, 6317 (1998).
29. T. H. Dunning Jr. J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 9062 (2000).
30. P. Hobza, Z. Havlas. Chem. Rev. 100, 4253 (2000). 
31. C. E. Dykstra, J. M. Lisy. J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 500, 375 (2000).
32. G. Gilli, P. Gilli. J. Mol. Struct. 552, 1 (2000).
33. S. J. Grabowski. J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 10739 (2001).
34. B. Mennucci. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 1506 (2001).
35. J. J. Dannenberg. J. Mol. Struct. 615, 219 (2002).
36. J. Yang, S. J. Ding, M. Radosz, Y. Q. Shen. Macromolecules 37, 1728 (2004).
37. C. L. Perrin, J. B. Nielson. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 48, 511 (1997).
38. A. V. Iogansen. Spectrochim. Acta, Part A 55, 1585 (1999).
39. Y. Yang, Z. Y. Yang, Y. P. Yi, J. F. Xiang, C. F. Chen, L. J. Wan, Z. G. Shuai. J. Org. Chem. 72,
4936 (2007).
40. E. Carosati, S. Sciabola, G. Cruciani. J. Med. Chem. 47, 5114 (2004).
41. R. McWeeny. Coulson’s Valence, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford (1979).
42. J. Israelachvili. Intermolecular and Surface Forces, 2nd ed., Academic Press, New York (1991).
43. A. D. Buckingham. In Intermolecular Interactions from Diatomics to Biopolymers, B. Pullman
(Ed.), John Wiley, New York (1978).
44. J. Del Bene, J. A. Pople. J. Chem. Phys. 52, 4858 (1970).
45. P. Gilli, V. Bertolasi, V. Ferrati, G. Gilli. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 909 (1994). 
46. F. Weinhold, C. R. Landis. Valency and Bonding, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2005). 
47. R. A. Klein. Chem. Phys. Lett. 433, 165 (2006).
48. A. J. Dingley, S. Grzesiek. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 8293 (1998).
49. E. D. Isaacs, A. Shukla, P. M. Platzman, D. R. Harman, B. Barbiellini, C. A. Tulk. Phys. Rev. Lett.
82, 600 (1999).
50. H. Ratajczak, W. J. Orville-Thomas (Eds). Molecular Interactions, p. 15, John Wiley, New York
(1980).
51. W. Aquilanti, E. Cornicchi, M. M. Teixidor, N. Saendig, F. Pirani, D. Cappelletti. Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. 44, 2356 (2005).
52. L. F. Roncaratti, L. Belpassi, D. Cappelletti, F. Pirani, F. Tarantelli. J. Phys. Chem. A 113, 15223
(2009).
53. H. Umeyama, K. Morokuma. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 99, 1316 (1977).
54. J. P. Foster, F. Weinhold. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 102, 7211 (1980).
55. E. D. Glendening, A. Streitwieser. J. Chem. Phys. 100, 2900 (1994).
56. B. Jeziorski, R. Moszyńki, K. Szalewicz. Chem. Rev. 94, 1887 (1994).
57. A. D. Buckingham, P. W. Fowler. Can. J. Chem. 63, 2018 (1985).
58. M. A. Spackman. J. Chem. Phys. 85, 6587 (1986).
59. C. E. Dykstra. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 111, 6168 (1989).
60. C. E. Dykstra, J. M. Lisy. THEOCHEM 500, 375 (2000).
61. C. M. Hansen. Hansen Solubility Parameters: A User Handbook, CRC Press, Boca Raton (2007).
62. C. M. Hansen. Eur. Polym. J. 44, 2741 (2008).
63. IUPAC. Compendium of Chemical Terminology, 2nd ed. (the “Gold Book”). Compiled by A. D.
McNaught and A. Wilkinson. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford (1997). XML on-line
corrected version: doi:10.1351/goldbook (2006–) created by M. Nic, J. Jirat, B. Kosata; updates
compiled by A. Jenkins.
64. W. D. Kumler. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 57, 600 (1935).
65. O. R. Wulf, U. Liddel, S. B. Henricks. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 58, 2287 (1936).
66. N. S. Rao, S. K. K. Jakkar. Quart. J. Indian. Inst. Sci. 6, 1 (1943).
67. E. S. Kryachko, A. Karpfen, F. Remacle. J. Phys. Chem. A 109, 7309 (2005).
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1632

68. R. H. Crabtree, P. E. M. Siegbahn, O. Eisenstein, A. L. Reingold, T. Koetzle. Acc. Chem. Res. 29,
348 (1996).
69. G. N. Patwari, T. Ibata, N. Mikami. Chem. Phys. Lett. 283, 193 (2002).
70. H. Cybulski, M. Pecul, J. Sadlej. J. Chem. Phys. 119, 5094 (2003).
71. A. C. Legon, P. D. Soper, W. H. Flygare. J. Chem. Phys. 74, 4944 (1981).
72. J. M. Merrit, S. Rudic, R. E. Miller. J. Chem. Phys. 124, 084301 (2006).
73. I. Alkorta, J. Rozas, J. Elguero. Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem. 102, 429 (1998).
74. S. J. Grabowski, W. A. Sokalski, J. Leszczynski. Chem. Phys. Lett. 432, 33 (2006).
75. B. Raghavendra, E. Arunan. Chem. Phys. Lett. 467, 37 (2008).
76. F. Fillaux, A. Coussan, M. J. Gutmann. Pure Appl. Chem. 79, 1023 (2007).
77. A. C. Legon. Chem. Soc. Rev. 22, 153 (1993).
78. M. J. Calhorda. In Hydrogen Bonding: New Insights, S. J. Grabowski (Ed.), pp. 263–292,
Springer, Dordrecht (2006).
79. L. Brammer, D. Zhao, F. T. Ladipo, J. Braddock-Wilking. Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B 51, 632
(1995).
80. P. Gilli, L. Pretto, V. Bertolasi, G. Gilli. Acc. Chem. Res. 42, 33 (2009).
81. J. Emsley. The Elements, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Oxford (1998).
82. C. M. Lovejoy, D. J. Nesbitt. J. Chem. Phys. 93, 5387 (1990).
83. D. J. Nesbitt, C. M. Lovejoy, T. G. Lindeman, S. V. O’Neil, D. C. Clary. J. Chem. Phys. 91, 722
(1989).
84. S. J. Harris, S. E. Novick, W. Klemperer. J. Chem. Phys. 60, 3208 (1974).
85. E. J. Campbell, M. R. Keenan, L. W. Buxton, T. J. Balle, P. D. Soper, A. C. Legon, W. H. Flygare.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 70, 420 (1980). 
86. F. A. Baiocchi, T. A. Dixon, C. H. Joyner, W. Klemperer. J. Chem. Phys. 75, 2041 (1981).
87. C. M. Lovejoy, D. J. Nesbitt. J. Chem. Phys. 94, 208 (1991).
88. S. A. C. McDowell. J. Chem. Phys. 118, 4066 (2003).
89. S. Y. Yen, C. H. Mou, H. P. Wu. Chem. Phys. Lett. 383, 606 (2004).
90. J. Cukras, J. Sadlej. Chem. Phys. Lett. 459, 44 (2008).
91. S. E. Novick, K. C. Janda, W. Klemperer. J. Chem. Phys. 65, 5115 (1976).
92. A. C. Legon. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 38, 2686 (1999).
93. P. Metrangolo, F. Meyer, T. Pilati, G. Resnati, G. Terraneo. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 47, 6114
(2008).
94. P. Lipkowski, S. J. Grabowski, J. Leszczynski. J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 10296 (2006).
95. L. D. Garner-O’Neele, A. F. Bonamy, T. L. Meek, B. G. Patrick. J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 639,
151 (2003).
96. X. Li, L. Liu, H. B. Schlegel. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 9639 (2002). 
97. F. H. Allen. Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B 58, 380 (2002); also look at <http://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/>.
98. J. Gu, P. E. Bourne (Eds.). The Worldwide Protein Data Bank in Structural Bioinformatics, 2nd
ed. pp. 293–303, John Wiley, Hoboken (2009).
99. S. C. Wallwork. Acta Crystallogr. 15, 758 (1962) and private communication (2006).
100. B. Lakshmi, A. G. Samuelson, K. V. Jovan Jose, S. R. Gadre, E. Arunan. New J. Chem. 29, 371
(2005).
101. B. Raghavendra, P. K. Mandal, E. Arunan. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 5276 (2006).
102. R. A. Klein. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 13931 (2002).
103. R. A. Klein. Chem. Phys. Lett. 425, 128 (2006).
104. A. Bondi. J. Phys. Chem. 68, 441 (1964).
105. D. R. Lide (Ed.). Handbook of Physics and Chemistry, 90th ed. (Internet version), Sect. 9, CRC
Press/Taylor and Francis, Boca Raton (2010).
106. N. Elghobashi, L. Gonzalez. J. Chem. Phys. 124, 174308 (2006).
107. A. C. Legon, D. J. Millen, H. M. North. Chem. Phys. Lett. 135, 303 (1987).
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1633

108. W. Klopper, M. Quack, M. A. Suhm. J. Chem. Phys. 108, 10096 (1998).
109. G. R. Desiraju, S. Steiner. Chem. Commun. 891 (1998).
110. B. S. Ault, E. Steinback, G. C. Pimentel. J. Phys. Chem. 79, 615 (1975).
111. (a) G. Scoles (Ed.). Atomic and Molecular Beam Methods, Vol. 1, Oxford University Press, New
York (1988); (a) G. Scoles (Ed.). Atomic and Molecular Beam Methods, Vol. 2, Oxford University
Press, New York (1992).
112. P. D. Aldrich, A. C. Legon, W. H. Flygare. J. Chem. Phys. 75, 2126 (1981).
113. W. G. Read, E. J. Campbell, G. Hendersen, W. H. Flygare. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 103, 7670 (1981).
114. E. Arunan, T. Emilsson, H. S. Gutowsky, G. T. Fraser, G. de Oliveira, C. E. Dykstra. J. Chem.
Phys. 117, 9766 (2002).
115. M. Goswami, P. K. Mandal, D. J. Ramdass, E. Arunan. Chem. Phys. Lett. 393, 22 (2004). 
116. J. S. Loveday, R. J. Nelmes, S. Klotz, J. M. Benson, G. Hamel. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1024 (2000).
117. M. Goswami, E. Arunan. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 11, 8974 (2009).
118. R. Parthasarathi, V. Subramanian, N. Sathyamurthy. J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 3349 (2006).
119. G. E. Hilbert, O. R. Wulf, S. B. Hendricks, U. Liddel. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 58, 548 (1936).
120. (a) R. M. Badger, S. H. Bauer. J. Chem. Phys. 5, 605 (1937); (b) R. M. Badger, S. H. Bauer. J.
Chem. Phys. 5, 839 (1937).
121. (a) L. P. Kuhn. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 74, 2492 (1952); (b) L. P. Kuhn. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 76, 4323
(1954); (c) L. P. Kuhn. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 80, 5950 (1958).
122. D. L. Howard, P. Jorgensen, H. G. Kjaergaard. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 17096 (2005).
123. D. L. Howard, H. G. Kjaergaard. J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 9597 (2006).
124. C. Sandorfy. Top. Curr. Chem. 120, 41 (1984).
125. T. Scharge, D. Luckhaus, M. A. Suhm. Chem. Phys. 346, 167 (2008).
126. P. Hobza, V. Špirko, Z. Havlas, K. Buchhold, B. Reimann, H.-D. Barth, B. Brutschy. Chem. Phys.
Lett. 299, 180 (1999).
127. B. J. van der Veken, W. A. Herrebout, R. Szostak, D. N. Shchepkin, Z. Havlas, P. Hobza. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 123, 12290 (2001). 
128. I. V. Alabugin, M. Manoharan, S. Peabody, F. Weinhold. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 5973 (2003). 
129. S. Scheiner, T. Kar. J. Phys. Chem. A 106, 1784 (2002).
130. J. Joseph, E. D. Jemmis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129, 4620 (2007).
131. A. Karpfen, E. S. Kryachko. J. Phys. Chem. A 111, 8177 (2007).
132. S. K. Sikka. High Pressure Res. 27, 313 (2007).
133. M. Pecul, J. Leszczynski, J. Sadlej. J. Chem. Phys. 112, 7930 (2000).
134. A. C. Legon. Chem. Soc. Rev. 19, 197 (1990).
135. E. Arunan, S. Dev, P. K. Mandal. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 39, 131 (2004).
136. J. C. López, J. L. Alonso, I. Peňa, V. Vaquero. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 14128 (2010). 
137. K. Liu, J. D. Cruzan, R. J. Saykally. Science 271, 929 (1996).
138. A. Maris, S. Melandri, W. Caminati, P. G. Favero. Chem. Phys. 282, 111 (2002).
139. K. Liu, M. G. Brown, R. J. Saykally. J. Phys. Chem. A 101, 8995 (1997).
140. F. N. Keutsch, M. G. Brown, P. B. Petersen, R. J. Saykally, M. Geleijns, A. van der Avoird. J.
Chem. Phys. 114, 3994 (2001).
141. S. T. Roberts, K. Ramasesha, A. Tokmakoff. Acc. Chem. Res. 42, 1239 (2009).
142. H. Biswal, P. R. Shirhatti, S. J. Wategaonkar. J. Phys. Chem. A 113, 5633 (2009).
143. S. Maity, G. N. Patwari. J. Phys. Chem. A 113, 1760 (2009).
144. V. A. Shubert, C. W. Muller, T. S. Zwier. J. Phys. Chem. A 113, 8067 (2009).
145. J. Sadlej, J. Cz. Dabrowski, J. E. Rode. Chem. Soc. Rev. 39, 1478 (2010).
146. J. P. Toennies, A. F. Vilesov. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 43, 2622 (2004).
147. Z. Xue, M. A. Suhm. J. Chem. Phys. 131, 054301 (2009).
148. C. J. Fecko, J. D. Eaves, J. J. Loparo, A. Tokmakoff, P. L. Geissler. Science 301, 1698 (2003).
149. R. Kumar, J. R. Schmidt, J. L. Skinner. J. Chem. Phys. 126, 204107 (2007).
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1634

150. E. T. J. Nibbering, T. Elsaesser. Chem. Rev. 104, 1887 (2004).
151. R. Musat, J. P. Renault, M. Candelaresi, D. J. Palmer, S. Le Caer, R. Righini, S. Pommeret.
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 47, 8033 (2008).
152. V. P. Voloshin, Y. I. Naberukhin. J. Struct. Chem. 50, 78 (2009). 
153. P. Kolman. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 99, 4875 (1977).
154. S. Scheiner. Theor. Chim. Acta 57, 71 (1980).
155. K. A. Peterson, T. H. Dunning. J. Chem. Phys. 102, 2032 (1995).
156. S. Scheiner. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 45, 23 (1994).
157. J. A. Frey, S. Leutwyler. J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 12512 (2006).
158. T. P. Tauer, M. E. Derrick, C. D. Sherrill. J. Phys. Chem. A 109, 191 (2005).
159. J. Labanowski, J. Andzelm (Eds). Density Functional Methods in Chemistry, Springer, New York
(1991).
160. Y. Zhao, D. G. Truhlar. Acc. Chem. Res. 41, 157 (2008).
161. G. Fitzgerald, J. Andzelm. J. Phys. Chem. 95, 10531 (1991).
162. Z. Latajka, Y. Bouteiller. J. Chem. Phys. 101, 9793 (1994).
163. S. Tsuzuki, H. P. Luthi. J. Chem. Phys. 114, 3949 (2001).
164. Y. Zhao, O. Tishchenko, D. G. Truhlar. J. Phys. Chem. B 109, 19046 (2005).
165. E. M. Cabaleiro-Lago, J. R Otero. J. Chem. Phys. 117, 1621 (2002).
166. J. S. Arey, P. C. Aeberhard, I.-C. Lin, U. Rothlisberger. J. Phys. Chem. B 113, 4726 (2009).
167. L. Rao, H. Ke, G. Fu, X. Xu, Y. Yan. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 5, 86 (2009).
168. S. Kristyán, P. Pulay. Chem. Phys. Lett. 229, 175 (1994).
169. J. Antony, S. Grimme. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 8, 5287 (2006).
170. P. Jurečka, J. Černý, P. Hobza, D. R. Salahub. J. Comput. Chem. 28, 555 (2007).
171. S. F. Boys, F. Bernardi. Mol. Phys. 19, 553 (1970).
172. M. M. Deshmukh, S. R. Gadre. J. Phys. Chem. A 113, 7927 (2009).
173. K. Wendler, J. Thar, S. Zahn, B. Kirchner. J. Phys. Chem. A 114, 9529 (2010).
174. K. Kitaura, K. Morokuma. Int. J. Quantum Chem. 10, 325 (1976).
175. R. Moszynski, P. E. S. Wormer, B. Jeziorski, A. van der Avoird. J. Chem. Phys. 103, 8058 (1995).
176. K. Szalewicz, B. Jeziorski. In: Molecular Interactions. From Van der Waals to Strongly Bound
Complexes, S. Scheiner (Ed.), p. 3, John Wiley: New York (1997).
177. A. E. Reed, F. Weinhold, L. A. Curtiss, D. J. Pochatko. J. Chem. Phys. 84, 5687 (1986).
178. K. Wolinski, J. F. Hilton, P. Pulay. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 112, 8251 (1990).
179. J. E. D. Bene, S. A. Perera, R. J. Bartlett, M. Yañez, O. Mó, J. Elguero, I. Alkorta. J. Phys. Chem.
A 107, 107 (2003).
180. A. E. Reed, L. A. Curtiss, F. Weinhold. J. Chem. Phys. 83, 735 (1985).
181. R. F. W. Bader. Atoms in Molecules: A Quantum Theory, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1990).
182. P. Coppens. X-ray Charge Densities and Chemical Bonding, Oxford University Press, Oxford
(1997).
183. U. Koch, P. L. A. Popelier. J. Phys. Chem. 99, 9747 (1995).
184. P. Kolandaivel, V. Nirmala. J. Mol. Struct. 694, 33 (2004).
185. J. J. Novoa, F. Mota. Chem. Phys. Lett. 318, 345 (2000).
186. P. Munshi, T. N. Guru Row. J. Phys. Chem. A 109, 659 (2005).
187. L. J. Farrugia, C. Evans, M. Tegel. J. Phys. Chem. A 110, 7952 (2006).
188. A. Martin Pendás, E. Fransisco, M. A. Blanco, C. Gatti. Chem.—Eur. J. 13, 9632 (2007).
189. R. F. W. Bader. J. Phys. Chem. A 113, 10391 (2009).
190. R. A. Klein. Chem. Phys. Lett. 429, 633 (2006). For example, this has been observed for the pla-
nar and quasi-planar conformational transition states of ethane-1,2-diol, and ethanolamine;
unpublished observations, R. A. Klein (2009).
191. E. R. Johnson, S. Keinan, P. Mori-Sanchez, J. Contreras-Garcia, A. J. Cohen, W. Yang. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 132, 6498 (2010).
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
Defining the hydrogen bond: An account
1635

192. E. Arunan, G. R. Desiraju, R. A. Klein, J. Sadlej, S. Scheiner, I. Alkorta, D. C. Clary, R. H.
Crabtree, J. J. Dannenberg, P. Hobza, H. G. Kjaergaard, A. C. Legon, B. Mennucci, D. J. Nesbitt.
Pure Appl. Chem. 83, 1637 (2011).
Republication or reproduction of this report or its storage and/or dissemination by electronic means is permitted without the
need for formal IUPAC permission on condition that an acknowledgment, with full reference to the source, along with use of the
copyright symbol ©, the name IUPAC, and the year of publication, are prominently visible. Publication of a translation into
another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval from the relevant IUPAC National Adhering
Organization.
E. ARUNAN et al.
© 2011, IUPAC
Pure Appl. Chem., Vol. 83, No. 8, pp. 1619–1636, 2011
1636
