LLNL-JRNL-672859
Probing the Active Surface Sites for CO
Reduction on Oxide-Derived Copper
Electrocatalysts
A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, C. W. Li, T. P. Johansson, S.
B. Scott, J. T. McKeown, I. E. Stephens, M. Kumar, M.
W. Kanan, I. Chorkendorff
June 11, 2015
Journal of the American Chemical Society

Disclaimer 
 
This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States 
government. Neither the United States government nor Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, 
nor any of their employees makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or 
responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or 
process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein 
to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or 
otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the 
United States government or Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC. The views and opinions of 
authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States government or 
Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, and shall not be used for advertising or product 
endorsement purposes. 
 

Probing the active surface sites for CO reduction on oxide-derived copper electrocatalysts 
Arnau Verdaguer-Casadevall,1‡ Christina W. Li,2‡ Tobias P. Johansson,1 Soren B. Scott,1 Joseph T. McKe-
own,3 Ifan E. L. Stephens,1 Mukul Kumar,4 Matthew W. Kanan,2* and Ib Chorkendorff1*
1 Center for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality, Department of Physics, Building 312, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark (DTU), DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
2 Department of Chemistry, Stanford University, 337 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, United States
3 Materials Science Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Avenue, Livermore, 
CA 94550, United States
4 Materials Engineering Division, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Avenue, Liver-
more, CA 94550, United States
ABSTRACT: CO electroreduction activity on ox-
ide-derived Cu (OD-Cu) was found to correlate 
with metastable surface features that bind CO 
strongly. Temperature programmed desorption 
of CO on OD-Cu reveals the presence of surface 
sites with strong CO binding that are distinct 
from the terraces and stepped sites found on 
polycrystalline Cu foil. As prepared, OD-Cu re-
duces CO to acetate and ethanol with nearly 50 
% Faradaic efficiency at moderate overpotential. 
Thermal annealing attenuates electrocatalytic 
activity; after annealing at 350 °C, the specific 
current density for CO reduction is reduced 44-
fold and the Faradaic efficiency for ethanol and 
acetate is less than 5%. The loss of activity is cor-
related with a reduction in both the proportion 
of strong CO binding sites and in the bulk grain 
boundary density as assessed by orientation 
mapping using electron nanodiffraction. We pro-
pose that metastable grain boundary surface 
sites with strong CO binding are responsible for 
the high CO reduction activity and selectivity of 
OD-Cu catalysts. Identification of these sites is a 
first step towards understanding the surface 
chemistry necessary for efficient CO electrore-
duction.
The use of renewable energy to convert CO2
into chemicals and fuels is an attractive means of 
mitigating emissions and increasing energy secu-
rity.1,2 Electrochemical CO2 conversion could be 
pivotal to this goal; electrolyzers allow for fast 
startup and require little infrastructure, which 
would enable deployment of decentralized CO2
recycling units scaled to local renewable energy 
sources.3
Figure 1. (a-d) SEM images, (e-g) image quality (IQ) maps constructed 
from electron diffraction data, and (h) TEM image of oxide-derived Cu 
electrodes. (a, e) OD-Cu oxidized at 500 °C and reduced in H2 (OD-Cu–
500), (b, f) OD-Cu–500 after 200 °C anneal in inert atmosphere, (c, g) 
after 350 °C anneal in inert atmosphere, (d, h) OD-Cu oxidized at 300 °C 
and reduced in H2 (OD-Cu–300).

One strategy for efficient electrochemical CO2
conversion is to separate the process into two 
steps: CO2 reduction to CO, followed by CO re-
duction to oxygenates and hydrocarbons. More-
over, several promising CO2 reduction catalysts 
have recently been reported that may enable 
practical CO2 to CO conversion at low tempera-
ture.4-14 While Cu is the only metal with appre-
ciable activity for CO reduction, the separation 
of this process from CO2 reduction enables it to 
be performed in alkaline solution, where the se-
lectivity for C2 products is enhanced.15,16 The key 
challenge is to increase the activity of Cu at low 
overpotential. We recently showed that nano-
crystalline Cu prepared via reduction of a Cu2O 
precursor, “oxide-derived Cu” (OD-Cu), has un-
precedented activity for the reduction of CO to 
oxygenates.17 At potentials as positive as -0.25 V 
vs the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE), OD-
Cu reduces CO with >50 % Faradaic efficiency; 
for ethanol this equates to an overpotential of 
0.43 V; for acetate this equates to an overpoten-
tial of 0.75 V. Thus far, the origin of CO reduction 
activity on OD-Cu, particularly the identity of the 
catalytically active surface site, remains elusive. 
Based on TEM studies, we proposed that the 
catalytic activity for CO reduction was associated 
with the presence of grain boundaries.17,18 How-
ever, catalysis is a surface phenomenon, where-
as grain boundaries are bulk defects. More de-
tailed understanding of the active surfaces of
OD-Cu will enable the development of catalysts 
with even greater improvements in selectivity 
and activity.
This study examines the importance of micro-
structure on the thermodynamics of adsorbate 
binding at the surface and how those thermody-
namics in turn impact catalytic activity. Thermal 
annealing of OD-Cu in inert atmosphere demon-
strates that both the nanograined structure and 
CO reduction activity of OD-Cu are metastable. 
Temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) of 
CO is then used to probe the surface chemistry 
of OD-Cu and its thermally deactivated deriva-
tives. CO-TPD
provides information on the 
strength of CO binding to surface sites, which 
has obvious implications for electrocatalytic CO 
reduction.19 Previous CO-TPD studies on single-
crystalline Cu surfaces have shown that desorp-
tion peak position is diagnostic of the surface 
facet involved in CO binding. TPD has been wide-
ly used to study heterogeneous catalysts such as 
Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 for methanol synthesis19,20 but 
thus far has seldom been used to study electro-
catalytic surfaces.21-23
OD-Cu samples are synthesized via air oxida-
tion at 500 °C followed by H2 reduction at 130 °C
(herein referred to as OD-Cu–500).17 Scanning 
and transmission electron microscopy indicate 
irregularly shaped grains that are 100-300 nm in 
size, aggregated into a dense polycrystalline 
network (Fig. 1a, e). In order to modulate the 
catalytic activity and grain size of OD-Cu, a re-
duced OD-Cu electrode is subsequently annealed 
under vacuum or inert atmosphere at 200 °C and 
350 °C. Thermal post-annealing results in an in-
crease of the average grain size to ~500 nm and
~1 um at 200 °C and 350 °C, respectively (Fig. 1b, 
c, f, g). Nonetheless, the dense polycrystalline 
network observed in OD-Cu, consisting of crys-
tallites bounded by grain boundaries, is still pre-
sent in the thermally annealed samples. For 
comparison, an oxide-derived Cu electrode, oxi-
dized in air at 300 °C for 30 min. and reduced in 
H2 at 130 °C (OD-Cu–300), was also prepared. It 
exhibited a relatively smooth morphology with 
grain sizes in the 200 nm range (Fig 1d, h).
X-ray diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spec-
troscopy (XPS) of all four samples indicate that 
the only bulk crystalline phase present is Cu0, 
and the surface comprises primarily Cu0 with 
some Cu1+ due to native oxide formation during 
transfer of the sample to the XPS chamber (Fig 
SX). The electrochemically active surface area of 
each sample was assessed using an electrochem-
ical capacitance measurement. OD-Cu–500 has a 
roughness factor of 51 (where polycrystalline Cu 
is 1), arising from the high surface area porous 
structure. As anticipated from the grain growth 
observed in the SEM and TEM, the roughness 
factor of the electrode drops from 51 to 24 and
14 as oxide-derived Cu is annealed at 200 °C and 
350 °C, respectively. This is a consequence of 
both grain growth and flattening of the elec-

trode during the annealing process. OD-Cu–300
has a roughness factor of 6, lower than that of 
both thermally annealed electrodes.
Electrochemical activity for CO reduction was 
assessed over a range of potentials via constant 
potential electrolysis in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, 
continuously purged with 1 atm of CO. The CO 
reduction activity of OD-Cu–500 has been previ-
ously reported. OD-Cu–500 exhibits peak Farada-
ic efficiency of 48% for CO reduction at –0.4 V vs. 
RHE and generates C2 and C3 products including 
acetate, ethanol, propanol, ethylene, and ethane 
(Fig 2a), measured by gas chromatography and 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). The surface-
area normalized partial current density for CO 
reduction increases with increasing overpoten-
tial but rapidly reaches a plateau corresponding 
to the mass-transport limit of ~1 mM dissolved 
CO in water (Fig 2c). 24
Upon annealing, the intrinsic CO reduction ac-
tivity of the electrode is significantly reduced. 
The surface-area corrected partial current densi-
ty for CO reduction (jCORedn) is attenuated 6-fold 
on the 200 °C-annealed sample and 44-fold on 
the 350 °C-annealed sample, relative to as-
prepared OD-Cu–500 (Fig. 2c). This suggests that 
the catalytically active sites are tied to metasta-
ble microstructural features such as defects and 
grain boundaries, which are kinetically trapped 
during the low-temperature H2 reduction pro-
cess. 
The catalytic activity of OD-Cu can also be 
modified by altering the properties of the pre-
cursor oxide. OD-Cu–300 is produced from a 
thinner oxide precursor and is intrinsically less 
active for CO reduction than OD-Cu–500. In fact, 
it has very similar specific jCORedn to the partially 
deactivated, 200 °C-annealed sample, despite a 
significantly lower roughness factor. The partial 
current densities for CO reduction at –0.3 V vs.
RHE for OD-Cu–300 and the 350 °C-annealed 
electrode were too low for reliable NMR detec-
tion. The normalized partial current density for 
H2 (jH2) evolution remains essentially unchanged 
regardless of thermal annealing or oxidation 
temperature (Fig 2d).
The loss of intrinsic CO reduction activity upon 
thermal annealing is reflected in the Faradaic 
efficiencies for CO reduction at –0.4 V vs. RHE 
(Fig 2a). The relative ratios of oxygenate to hy-
drocarbon products remain similar, but there is a 
drop in total Faradaic efficiency for CO reduction 
and a corresponding increase in Faradaic effi-
ciency for H2 evolution. While the 200 °C-
annealed sample still shows modest activity for 
CO reduction, attaining 30% total Faradaic effi-
ciency, the 350 °C-annealed sample is essentially 
unselective for CO reduction. OD-Cu–300 reach-
es 31% total Faradaic efficiency, again very simi-
lar to the 200 °C-annealed electrode. The fact 
that two electrodes with very different rough-
ness factors have identical specific activities and 
Faradaic efficiencies for CO reduction indicates 
that electrode porosity or microscopic surface 
area is not a significant determinant of CO re-
duction catalytic activity.
We previously hypothesized that the active 
sites for CO reduction are located at the disor-
dered surfaces associated with grain boundary 
terminations.17 To quantify the grain-boundary 
character distributions, orientation maps were
collected from the OD-Cu-500 and the 350 °C 
Figure 2. (a) Faradaic efficiency for CO reduction at –0.4 V vs. RHE in CO-
saturated 0.1 M KOH. The remainder of the charge passed is in produc-
tion of H2. (b) electrochemical roughness factors (RF), measured from the 
capacitance in a non-Faradaic potential regime, with Cu foil defined as 1. 
(c) Specific current density for CO reduction vs. potential. (d) Specific 
current density for H2 evolution vs. potential. The error bars represent 
one standard deviation from the mean based on 2-5 independent meas-
urements. 

thermally deactivated samples. This TEM-based 
technique collects nanodiffraction patterns from
scanned regions of the samples, providing in-
formation for nanostructures analogous to that 
acquired using EBSD mapping in an SEM. These 
data are subsequently indexed to generate grain 
orientation and grain boundary maps from 
which grain boundary density and misorientation 
angles can be extracted (Figure SX). While this 
technique provides information on bulk grain 
boundary densities rather than surface densities, 
the bulk and surface values can be correlated by 
constant factors derived from the shape and size 
of the grains. From this analysis, OD-Cu–500 has 
an average grain boundary density of 14 ± 2 µm–
1. Upon annealing at 350 °C, the overall grain 
boundary density drops to 2.1 ± 0.4 µm–1, com-
mensurate with grain growth observed during 
thermal treatment (Fig SX). In addition, the frac-
tion of low-energy twin boundaries relative to 
randomly oriented boundaries increases during 
the annealing process. The effects of thermal 
annealing on both microstructure and catalytic 
activity provide evidence for the importance of 
grain boundary surface sites in catalysis. Thermal 
annealing reduces the grain boundary density via 
grain growth and reduces jCORedn while leaving jH2
unaffected. This result suggests that the CO re-
duction activity may be funneled through a rela-
tively small number of highly active sites that are 
associated with grain boundaries while the re-
mainder of the surface behaves essentially like 
polycrystalline Cu foil. In order to connect the 
microstructural and catalytic changes to the 
thermodynamics of adsorbate binding on the 
surface, CO-TPD was used to further probe the 
surface chemistry of OD-Cu.
The OD-Cu samples for TPD were oxidized ex-
situ and mounted in the UHV chamber. Adventi-
tious contamination from exposure to air was 
removed by mildly sputtering the surface, and 
the samples were subsequently reduced at 130 
ºC under a flow of 1 bar of H2 (see the Support-
ing Information). XPS at this stage showed a me-
tallic Cu surface (Fig. S12) with no trace of nickel
(a common contaminant in UHV in the presence 
of CO due to the formation of nickel carbonyl in
the gas lines25) or other metallic impurities. The 
samples were cooled down to 77 K, and CO was 
dosed into the chamber. The temperature was 
then ramped up at 2 K s–1 and a mass spectrom-
eter monitored the signal from CO at mass 28. 
The annealed OD-Cu samples were prepared in 
an identical manner to OD-Cu–500 and annealed 
in UHV at 200 °C or 350 °C prior to CO dosing. 
The experiments were carried out with a con-
stant dosage of 200 L, which results in variable 
CO coverage (Fig. S10). given the different sur-
faces areas of the samples.
Figure 3a shows a typical TPD profile for elec-
tropolished polycrystalline Cu foil. Based on lit-
erature data from single crystalline Cu,19,26,27 the 
TPD features can be assigned to different facet 
terminations. The lowest temperature desorp-
tion feature, from 100 K to 200 K is due to low 
index facets such as Cu(111) and Cu(100), which 
Figure 3. TPD profiles for various Cu samples. a-e) Experimental data 
(solid black lines) and resulting fit from microkinetic simulations (dashed 
red lines). The dotted green lines indicate the central position of the 
low-index facets and stepped sites in polycrystalline Cu. a) Polycrystal-
line Cu. Features arising from low-index facets are highlighted in light 
green, undercoordinated sites are highlighted in dark green; b) OD-Cu–
500; c) OD-Cu annealed at 200 °C; d) OD-Cu annealed at 350 °C; e) OD-
Cu–300; f) overlay of TPD profiles. Measurements were performed at a 
ramp rate of 2 K s–1 with a CO dose of 200 L. g) Experimental CO reduc-
tion activity at –0.4 V as a function of the percentage of strong binding 
sites, estimated from simulations of the TPD profiles. The solid black line 
is a linear fit through all points. The error bars are a means of showing 
uncertainty in the simulations and have been obtained by varying pore 
depth in the model by ±5 µm or 50 %, whichever is lowest. 

bind CO weakly. The higher temperature feature 
between 200 K and 250 K is representative of 
stepped sites such as Cu(211). Figure 3b shows 
the CO-TPD profile on OD-Cu–500. The OD-Cu–
500 profile shows a high-temperature feature 
centered at 275 K that is clearly absent from the 
profiles for polycrystalline Cu and single crystal-
line Cu but is present in different proportions in 
the profiles for the other OD-Cu samples (Fig. 
3f). Annealing OD-Cu–500 to 200 °C and 350 °C 
reduces the area of the high-temperature fea-
ture (Figures 3c-d). The profile of OD-Cu–300 
exhibits broader and less-defined peaks than 
OD-Cu–500 and its annealed derivatives due to 
the higher coverage of CO on the low roughness 
factor electrode, but the high-temperature fea-
ture is clearly still present (Fig. 3e-f).
Two possible factors could account for the 
high-temperature feature in the OD-Cu profiles: 
(i) CO readsorption in the catalyst layer, which 
causes peak broadening and a shift of the peak 
maximum to higher temperature or (ii) surface 
sites with enhanced binding to CO. Both of these 
effects have been observed in TPD studies on 
industrial 
Cu/ZnO/Al2O3
and 
Cu/SiO2
catalysts.28,29 Readsorption likely plays a role in 
the high-temperature feature on OD-Cu materi-
als. OD-Cu–500 has a large roughness factor, and 
a significant fraction of the sample surface may 
reside in mesopores where readsorption could 
easily occur. However, OD-Cu–300 has a rough-
ness factor of only 6, which is the lowest of the 
OD-Cu samples and 2.5-fold lower than the 350 
°C-annealed sample. Despite its lower roughness 
factor, OD-Cu–300 presents a higher proportion 
of the high-temperature feature than the 350 °C 
annealed sample, indicating that readsorption 
alone cannot account for the high-temperature
feature on OD-Cu. 
To determine the contribution of readsorption 
to the OD-Cu profile, we carried out TPD simula-
tions of porous polycrystalline Cu, assuming the 
presence of two binding sites with adsorption 
energies of about 52 and 60 kJ/mol, correspond-
ing to low-index and stepped facets of Cu (de-
scribed in the Supporting Information). As shown 
in Figure S16, increasing the depth of the porous 
layer causes a shift of the polycrystalline Cu foil 
TPD profile to higher temperature. While simu-
lated porous polycrystalline Cu has a major peak 
at 260 K, the overall profile clearly does not fit 
that of OD-Cu. We could only model the experi-
mental TPD profile for the OD-Cu samples by in-
cluding a strong binding site with adsorption en-
ergy of 67 kJ/mol.
Direct quantitative interpretation of the TPD 
profiles shown here is not possible because the 
roughness factor of each sample is different. The 
same CO dosage gives variations in surface cov-
erage and differing degrees of readsorption on 
each sample, both of which affect the relative 
proportions of the low-index, stepped, and 
strong-binding TPD features. In particular, CO 
binds preferentially to the strongest binding site; 
consequently, the proportion
of the high-
temperature feature will exceed the surface 
fraction of the strong binding site at low initial 
coverage. Microkinetic models of CO binding to 
each OD-Cu surface (Fig. 3a-e) enable the de-
coupling of these effects and provide an esti-
mate of the relative abundance of strong binding 
sites. Based on these simulations, OD-Cu–500 
has the largest proportion of strong-binding sites 
with 11% surface coverage. The proportion 
drops to 5% after annealing at 200 °C and 1.5% 
after annealing at 350 °C. While these percent-
ages have large uncertainty due to assumptions 
made about the electrode pore structure, the 
proportion of strong-binding sites is clearly re-
duced through thermal annealing. When plotted 
against electrochemical activity, a linear correla-
tion is obtained between specific CO reduction 
rate and the percentage of strong binding sites 
at the electrode surface (Fig 3f), suggesting that 
these sites are involved in the electrocatalytic 
reaction with CO. 
We hypothesize that low overpotential CO re-
duction occurs at the surface sites with strong 
CO binding. A high density of sites with stronger 
binding to CO may increase the equilibrium cov-
erage of CO at the surface and lower the activa-
tion barrier for C-C coupling30,31, thus enhancing 
the overall rate for CO reduction. However, 
these active sites may be necessary but not suf-

ficient for CO reduction. The completely deac-
tivated form of OD-Cu (350 °C-annealed) retains 
1.5% of the strong binding site despite having 
jCORedn lower than that of polycrystalline Cu foil, 
which has only terrace and step sites (Table S3). 
The broad high-temperature feature observed in 
TPD does not reflect a single surface atomic 
structure; rather it most likely consists of a range 
of strained or defective structures, all of which 
bind CO more strongly within a ~10 kJ/mol 
range. As such, it is possible that only a small 
subset of those defective structures are capable 
of catalyzing the CO reduction reaction. In addi-
tion, CO is simply a probe molecule in these ex-
periments. In electrolyte solution with an ap-
plied potential, the relevant catalytic transition 
state structures and binding energies may not 
scale with the CO binding energy in UHV. 
The reduction in the proportion of strong bind-
ing sites upon thermal annealing qualitatively 
correlates to the microstructural change ob-
served in TEM. The 7-fold drop in strong binding 
percentage is similar to the 7-fold drop in grain 
boundary density observed between OD-Cu-500 
and the electrode after 350 °C annealing. Based 
on these data, we hypothesize that the strong-
binding site is present at defect or grain bounda-
ry surface terminations, which are uniquely ac-
tive for CO reduction electrocatalysis. Previous 
studies have shown that grain boundary surface 
terminations in fcc metals can exhibit significant-
ly altered structures relative to the common low-
index and stepped facets.32 Grain boundary den-
sity has also been correlated to CO2 and CO re-
duction catalytic activity on vapor-deposited 
nanocrystalline Au and Cu supported on carbon 
nanotubes. [cite XF]
Due to uncertainty in the pore structure of the 
high surface area OD-Cu materials, there are 
large error bars in the calculation of surface site 
abundance from the TPD data. However, even 
the rough estimation of 7-15% strong binding 
site on OD-Cu-500 indicate that a much larger 
proportion of the surface is structurally and en-
ergetically perturbed than the TEM images ini-
tially indicate. Based on the nanodiffraction
grain boundary maps and assuming a 1 nm 
boundary width, we estimate that OD-Cu-500 
has 1-2% coverage of grain boundary surface ar-
ea while the 350 °C-annealed electrode has ~0.2
% coverage. The TPD data suggests that the sur-
faces in the vicinity of grain boundaries, encom-
passing a much larger width of 4-10 nm, may al-
so be significantly strained. Alternatively, the 
oxide-reduction process may generate other de-
fects such as dislocations that are not readily ob-
served in the TEM nanodiffraction scans.
In summary, we present evidence that the high 
CO reduction activity on OD-Cu is correlated to 
surface sites that bind CO more strongly than 
low-index and stepped Cu facets. These meta-
stable sites may arise from the disordered sur-
faces at grain boundary and defect terminations, 
which are stabilized by the interconnected nano-
crystalline
network. Further structural and 
mechanistic elucidation of the surface chemistry 
of OD-Cu, in particular regarding the exact na-
ture of the active site, will enable the design and 
synthesis of more efficient catalytic materials for 
CO reduction.
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Supporting Information
Experimental procedures and additional data.
This material is available free of charge via the 
Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
*mkanan@stanford.edu, ibchork@fysik.dtu.dk
Author Contributions
‡These authors contributed equally to this work. 
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial in-
terests.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The Danish National Research Foundation’s Cen-
ter for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality is 

supported by the Danish National Research 
Foundation (DNRF54). We thank the NSF (CHE-
1266401) and the AFOSR for support of this 
work. C.W.L. gratefully acknowledges a Stanford 
Graduate Fellowship. Sample characterization 
was performed at the Stanford Nano Shared Fa-
cilities (SNSF). Work at Lawrence Livermore Na-
tional Laboratory was performed under the aus-
pices of the U.S. Department of Energy under 
Contract No. DE-AC52-07NA27344. The efforts of 
J.T.M .and M.K. were supported by the U.S. De-
partment of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sci-
ences, Division of Materials Science and Engi-
neering under FWP# SCW0939.
REFERENCES
(1)
Hori, 
Y. 
In 
Modern 
Aspects 
of 
Electrochemistry; 
Vayenas, 
C., 
White, 
R., 
Gamboa-Aldeco, M., Eds.; Springer New York: 
2008; Vol. 42, p 89.
(2)
Appel, A. M.; Bercaw, J. E.; Bocarsly, A. 
B.; Dobbek, H.; DuBois, D. L.; Dupuis, M.; Ferry, J. 
G.; Fujita, E.; Hille, R.; Kenis, P. J. A.; Kerfeld, C. 
A.; Morris, R. H.; Peden, C. H. F.; Portis, A. R.; 
Ragsdale, S. W.; Rauchfuss, T. B.; Reek, J. N. H.; 
Seefeldt, L. C.; Thauer, R. K.; Waldrop, G. L. Chem 
Rev 2013, 113, 6621.
(3)
Gasteiger, H. A.; Garche, J. In Handbook 
of 
Heterogeneous 
Catalysis; 
Wiley-VCH: 
Weinheim, 2008, p 3081.
(4)
Rosen, B. A.; Salehi-Khojin, A.; Thorson, 
M. R.; Zhu, W.; Whipple, D. T.; Kenis, P. J. A.; 
Masel, R. I. Science 2011, 334, 643.
(5)
Chen, Y. H.; Li, C. W.; Kanan, M. W. J Am 
Chem Soc 2012, 134, 19969.
(6)
DiMeglio, J. L.; Rosenthal, J. J Am Chem 
Soc 2013, 135, 8798.
(7)
Zhu, W. L.; Michalsky, R.; Metin, O.; Lv, H. 
F.; Guo, S. J.; Wright, C. J.; Sun, X. L.; Peterson, A. 
A.; Sun, S. H. J Am Chem Soc 2013, 135, 16833.
(8)
Manthiram, 
K.; 
Surendranath, 
Y.; 
Alivisatos, A. P. J Am Chem Soc 2014, 136, 7237.
(9)
Kuhl, K. P.; Hatsukade, T.; Cave, E. R.; 
Abram, D. N.; Kibsgaard, J.; Jaramillo, T. F. J Am 
Chem Soc 2014, 136, 14107.
(10)
Mistry, H.; Reske, R.; Zeng, Z. H.; Zhao, Z. 
J.; Greeley, J.; Strasser, P.; Cuenya, B. R. J Am 
Chem Soc 2014, 136, 16473.
(11)
Lu, Q.; Rosen, J.; Zhou, Y.; Hutchings, G. 
S.; Kimmel, Y. C.; Chen, J. G. G.; Jiao, F. Nat 
Commun 2014, 5.
(12)
Porosoff, M. D.; Yang, X. F.; Boscoboinik, 
J. A.; Chen, J. G. G. Angew Chem Int Edit 2014, 
53, 6705.
(13)
Asadi, M.; Kumar, B.; Behranginia, A.; 
Rosen, B. A.; Baskin, A.; Repnin, N.; Pisasale, D.; 
Phillips, P.; Zhu, W.; Haasch, R.; Klie, R. F.; Kral, 
P.; Abiade, J.; Salehi-Khojin, A. Nat Commun
2014, 5, 4470.
(14)
Rasul, S.; Anjum, D. H.; Jedidi, A.; 
Minenkov, Y.; Cavallo, L.; Takanabe, K. A. Angew 
Chem Int Edit 2015, 127, 2174.
(15)
Hori, Y.; Takahashi, R.; Yoshinami, Y.; 
Murata, A. J Phys Chem B 1997, 101, 7075.
(16)
Schouten, K. J. P.; Qin, Z. S.; Gallent, E. P.; 
Koper, M. T. M. J Am Chem Soc 2012, 134, 9864.
(17)
Li, C. W.; Ciston, J.; Kanan, M. W. Nature
2014, 508, 504.
(18)
Li, C. W.; Kanan, M. W. J Am Chem Soc
2012, 134, 7231.
(19)
Fu, S. S.; Somorjai, G. A. Surf Sci 1992, 
262, 68.
(20)
Sandoval, M. J.; Bell, A. T. Journal of 
Catalysis 1993, 144, 227.
(21)
Perez-Alonso, F. J.; McCarthy, D. N.; 
Nierhoff, A.; Hernandez-Fernandez, P.; Strebel, 
C.; Stephens, I. E. L.; Nielsen, J. H.; Chorkendorff, 
I. Angew Chem Int Edit 2012, 51, 4641.
(22)
van der Niet, M. J. T. C.; den Dunnen, A.; 
Juurlink, L. B. F.; Koper, M. T. M. Angew Chem Int 
Edit 2010, 49, 6572.
(23)
Johansson, T. P.; Ulrikkeholm, E. T.; 
Hernandez-Fernandez, P.; Escudero-Escribano, 
M.; 
Malacrida, 
P.; 
Stephens, 
I. 
E. 
L.; 
Chorkendorff, I. Physical Chemistry Chemical 
Physics 2014, 16, 13718.
(24)
In IUPAC Solubility Data Series; Cargill, R. 
W., Ed.; Pergamon Press: Oxford, 1990; Vol. 43.
(25)
Nerlov, J.; Sckerl, S.; Wambach, J.; 
Chorkendorff, I. Applied Catalysis A: General
2000, 191, 97.

(26)
Vollmer, S.; Witte, G.; Woll, C. Catal Lett
2001, 77, 97.
(27)
Makino, T.; Okada, M. Surf Sci 2014, 628, 
36.
(28)
Strunk, J.; d'Alnoncourt, R. N.; Bergmann, 
M.; Litvinov, S.; Xia, X.; Hinrichsen, O.; Muhler, 
M. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2006, 8, 1556.
(29)
d'Alnoncourt, R. N.; Bergmann, M.; 
Strunk, J.; Loffler, E.; Hinrichsen, O.; Muhler, M. 
Thermochim Acta 2005, 434, 132.
(30)
Calle-Vallejo, F.; Koper, M. T. M. 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2013, 
52, 7282.
(31)
Montoya, J. H.; Peterson, A. A.; Nørskov, 
J. K. ChemCatChem 2013, 5, 737.
(32)
Lancon, F.; Radetic, T.; Dahmen, U. Phys 
Rev B 2004, 69.
(33)
Gunter, M. M.; Ressler, T.; Bems, B.; 
Buscher, C.; Genger, T.; Hinrichsen, O.; Muhler, 
M.; Schlogl, R. Catal Lett 2001, 71, 37.
(34)
Behrens, M.; Studt, F.; Kasatkin, I.; Kühl, 
S.; Hävecker, M.; Abild-Pedersen, F.; Zander, S.; 
Girgsdies, F.; Kurr, P.; Kniep, B.-L.; Tovar, M.; 
Fischer, R. W.; Nørskov, J. K.; Schlögl, R. Science
2012, 336, 893.
