University of Groningen
Photopharmacology
Velema, Willem A.; Szymanski, Wiktor; Feringa, Bernard
Published in:
Journal of the American Chemical Society
DOI:
10.1021/ja413063e
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.
Document Version
Final author's version (accepted by publisher, after peer review)
Publication date:
2014
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database
Citation for published version (APA):
Velema, W. A., Szymanski, W., & Feringa, B. (2014). Photopharmacology: Beyond Proof of Principle.
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 136(6), 2178-2191. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja413063e
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum.
Download date: 05-01-2026

 
1 
 
Photopharmacology: beyond proof of principle 
Willem A. Velema, Wiktor Szymanski,* Ben L. Feringa* 
Center for Systems Chemistry, Stratingh Institute for Chemistry, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 4, 9747 
AG, Groningen, The Netherlands, Fax: (+) 3150 363 4296, E-mail: w.c.szymanski@rug.nl; b.l.feringa@rug.nl 
 
ABSTRACT:  
Pharmacotherapy is often severely hindered by issues related to poor drug selectivity, 
including side-effects, environmental toxicity and the emergence of resistance. Lack of 
selectivity is caused by the inability to control drug activity in time and space. 
Photopharmacology aims at solving these issues by incorporating photoswitchable groups into 
the molecular structure of bioactive compounds. These switching units allow for the use of 
light as an external control element for pharmacological activity, which can be delivered with 
very high spatiotemporal precision. This perspective presents the reader with the current state 
and outlook on photopharmacology. In particular, the principles behind photoregulation of 
bioactivity, the challenges of molecular design and the possible therapeutic scenarios are 
discussed. 
 
 

 
2 
 
1. Introduction 
Pharmacotherapy offers the possibility to cure diseases and alleviate symptoms through the 
administration of drugs.1,2 It improves quality of life and has contributed to what our world is 
today. However, there are many drug-related problems that are of a major concern to society. 
Poor drug selectivity can result in toxicity-related side effects,3 but less obvious complications 
are frequent also, such as drug resistance (Figure 1).4,5 These effects decrease the potential and 
limit the application of pharmacotherapy. Increasing the impact of pharmacotherapy requires 
exploration and establishment of novel molecular paradigms towards increasing the 
selectivity of drugs.6 
Poor drug selectivity stems from a drug’s affinity for targets other than that intended.3 This 
limitation is perhaps unsurprising when one considers that drugs interact with processes 
embedded in complex signaling and metabolic pathways.6,7 Cytotoxic anti-neoplastic agents, 
such as vinca alkaloids and taxanes, while widely used in the treatment of various types of 
cancers, are infamous for their severe side effects.8 The mechanism of action by which these 
anti-cancer drugs achieve their effect is usually by impairing mitosis,8 which also affects 
healthy, fast-dividing cells causing adverse events, most notably, hair loss,9 mucositis10 and 
anemia.11 To overcome these side effects, substantial efforts have been devoted to the 
development of targeted therapy,12,13 but selectivity remains a major hurdle.14,15 
Furthermore, poor selectivity lowers the threshold level of toxicity and thereby narrows the 
therapeutic window, leading to a decrease in allowable dose. This enforces suboptimal 
dosage, i.e. not using the full potential of a drug.16 Over 85% of small molecule drugs in 
clinical research are discarded,17 partially because of their limited therapeutic window. This 
means that many interesting drug-candidates, which potentially could improve present 
pharmacotherapy or even treat currently untreatable conditions, are discarded solely due to 
insufficient selectivity. Recent advances in drug discovery show that many effective 
pharmaceuticals act by modulation of multiple targets (network pharmacology).6 This means a 
drug needs to interact with multiple sites simultaneously to gain maximum activity, but 
should still not interact with active sites in a manner that leads to side-effects. This 
polypharmacology complicates the selectivity problem further and calls for dynamic control 
of drug activity.   
Another major issue in modern pharmacotherapy is drug resistance.4,5 In particular, the use of 
antibacterial agents is under pressure because of the emergence of many resistant bacterial 
strains.5,18 Bacterial resistance stems mainly from the build-up of antibiotic agents in the 
environment, both in community and hospital settings. As a result, the survival of sensitive 
bacteria in the environment is inhibited, promoting the growth of resistant strains. This 
phenomenon can be regarded as poor selectivity as well, where the drug is not only selective 
for bacteria causing an infection in a patient, but also acts on bacteria outside the body. 
The problems caused by poor selectivity originate in uncontrolled drug activity in time and 
space, i.e. the drug is active at times and sites in- or outside the organism, when and where 
drug activity is not beneficial (Figure 1). This drawback provides an impetus for the search 

 
3 
 
for novel molecular approaches for dynamically controlling drug activity, bypassing the 
issues surrounding poor drug selectivity. 
 
Figure 1. 
Drug activity over time and space for a conventional drug, prodrug and a 
reversibly photocontrolled drug. For conventional drugs, activity is present throughout the 
body of a patient during the time the drug is present, which may cause adverse effects; after 
excretion, the build-up of active drug can have a negative impact on the environment and/or 
lead to the emergence of drug-resistant pathogens. Some of the adverse effects can be avoided 
by using prodrugs, which liberate the active substance at a later stage. Adverse effects and 
environmental build-up of drugs might be avoided by using drugs whose activity can be 
controlled reversibly in space and time. 
Light offers unparalleled opportunities as a non-invasive regulatory element for biological 
applications.19-27, Firstly, it shows a great degree of orthogonality towards most elements of 
chemical and biochemical systems. In contrast to chemicals, which are used for regulating 
biological processes, photons do not cause contamination of the studied object and have low 
or negligible toxicity. Secondly, light can be delivered with very high spatial and temporal 
precision, which is of paramount importance for controlling the action of bioactive 
compounds (Figure 1). Finally, light can be regulated in a qualitative and quantitative manner, 
by adjusting wavelength and intensity, respectively.  

 
4 
 
The aim of this perspective is to summarize the state of the art and provide an outlook on the 
molecular methods that allow for drug selectivity to be increased by controlling activity with 
light. The first part of this perspective focuses on the design principles while the second part 
serves to illustrate examples from the recent literature. 
2. Using light for controlling biological processes: the concept of photopharmacology 
Remote control over the activity of pharmaceuticals using light has been achieved by 
modifying a functional group within the drug with a photolysable moiety.19,28,29 Examples of 
this approach include a photoprotected prodrug of paclitaxel30 and a light-activated steroid 
hormone.31 However, a major limitation of this approach is that photodeprotection does not 
enable reversible control over the drug’s activity. It only enables an increase or decrease in 
the activity of a drug a single time, but it is not possible to switch between a state of low 
activity and one of high activity reversibly.  
Dynamic control of activity is highly desirable as it enables full control over the activity of a 
drug both temporarily and spatially. Dynamic optical control over biological functions can be 
achieved using optogenetics.32,33 This “Nature method of the year 2010”34 relies on the 
expression of photoresponsive proteins such as bacteriorhodopsin35 and halorhodopsin.36 
Optogenetics has mainly, but not exclusively, proven useful in the field of neuroscience, with 
examples of optical control of brain function in intact brain tissue37 and of the movement of 
animals.38 It is without doubt that optogenetics has made a major contribution to advance our 
understanding of biological processes and has become an important research tool in such 
investigations. However, the necessity for genetic manipulation limits this method currently to 
a research setting. 
Photodynamic therapy (PDT)39 is a clinically applied protocol that relies on the formation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) by using photosensitizers that transfer energy from their 
excited triplet state to 3O2 to generate singlet oxygen (1O2) in living tissue (Figure 2A). ROS, 
primarily 1O2, cause direct and non-specific damage to the cells containing the photosentisizer 
when irradiated with visible light.40 In this respect, PDT is not inherently selective for a 
chosen molecular target, which is connected to the disease. Also, its application is limited to 
situations where cell death must be evoked, such as the destruction of tumors or infected 
tissues. 

 
5 
 
 
Figure 2. Basic principle of photodynamic therapy (PDT) and of photopharmacology. A) 
PDT agent can be excited to the triplet state locally with light. If the triplet state has sufficient 
energy, it will result in the production of single oxygen (1O2), which leads to the death of the 
surrounding cells; B) Light-induced isomerization of a photopharmaceutical agent from an 
inactive to an active state results in abrupt, localized increase in the concentration of the 
active form of the drug, which interacts with its target selectively. 
The principle of photopharmacology is the introduction of a photoswitchable unit into the 
molecular structure of the bioactive compound itself (Figure 2B). Dynamic control is 
achieved through addressing small photoresponsive molecule, and in a sense is comparable to 
classical pharmacotherapy, making this method potentially interesting for medical 
applications. Specificity to the selected target is intrinsic to this approach, as it employs a 
highly optimized design of a selective, bioactive compound, into which a responsive element 
is introduced. 
Photopharmacological treatment is especially suitable in situations where the disease is 
localized. The action on exposed parts, such as skin or eyes, seems the most natural target. 
However, the advances in designing molecular photoswitches that respond to deeper-
penetrating red light make it increasingly viable to treat other localized conditions such as 
infections and solid tumors. 
Molecular photoswitches are compounds that, upon absorption of a photon, may undergo a 
reversible change in their structure and properties. While many classes of such light-
responsive compounds have been developed,41 two basic designs have attracted most 

 
6 
 
attention21 in the field of biological applications: azobenzenes22 (Figure 3A) and 
diarylethenes42 (Figure 3B). 
    
Figure 3. Photoisomerization of (A) azobenzenes and (B) diarylethenes. 
The photoinduced trans-cis isomerization of azobenzenes is accompanied by a large change 
in geometry and a considerable change in polarity (the dipole moment changes by ~3 D). 
Relaxation to the thermodynamically more stable trans-isomer can be achieved by irradiation 
with light at a different wavelength or may proceed spontaneously, i.e. thermal isomerization. 
Diarylethenes contain a hexatriene moiety that can undergo reversible, photochemically 
induced cyclization, changing the flexibility of the molecule and its electronic properties 
(conjugation length). In general, both open and closed isomers are thermodynamically stable 
and can be interconverted using light of different wavelengths.  
A drug’s effectiveness depends on its pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties.43,44 
The pharmacokinetic properties determine how a drug is dispositioned around the body, 
which is determined by absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion and can be 
estimated based on the polarity, lipophilicity and size of a pharmaceutically active compound, 
among other factors.43 By incorporating a molecular photoswitch into the structure of a drug, 
dynamic control over these properties can be achieved using photoirradiation. For example, 
there is a distinct difference in the polarity and size of an azobenzene in its trans and cis 
states.45 For a drug to reach its target, often distinct properties are required at various stages. 
For example, the polarity of a drug has a large influence on its pharmacokinetic properties and 
variation in polarity can be beneficial at various moments during drug distribution.46 Dynamic 
control over these properties could potentially increase drug effectiveness. 
Pharmacodynamic characteristics define how a drug interacts with its target.47 Common drug 
targets are G Protein Coupled Receptors (GPCRs), enzymes and ion channels.7 The molecular 
structure of a drug is often highly optimized to maximize drug affinity for these targets.7 

 
7 
 
When a photoswitchable moiety is introduced into the structure of a drug, its configuration 
can be changed upon switching. If the photoswitch is introduced in an appropriate manner, the 
drug can be switched between states of high and low affinity. In this way, a drug can be 
present in a state of low affinity when this is beneficial, reducing adverse effects. The drug 
can be switched to a state of high affinity when required, i.e. when a drug has reached its site 
of action (Figure 2B). This strategy can be employed to control the pharmacodynamic 
properties of a drug externally in order to increase selectivity. 
 
3. Design principles for creating photocontrolled drugs 
In the following discussion on the design of photocontrolled drugs the focus is primarily on 
azobenzenes, since they are the most widely applied of photoresponsive elements in bioactive 
compounds. It is of note, however, that the discussion in regard to applications and design 
principles can be extended to other photochromic systems also.41 
3.1. Pharmacological considerations 
When incorporating a photoswitchable moiety within the structure of a pharmaceutically 
active compound, biological activity needs to be retained in at least one of the photoisomeric 
states. The structure of drugs is often highly optimized to attain maximum potency and 
efficacy.48 Introducing a photoswitch into such an optimized structure will frequently lead to a 
decrease in activity. This might be a potential limitation when employing this method in the 
pharmaceutical industry, when moving beyond the proof of principle setting in academic 
laboratories. Therefore, further optimization of the structure is necessary once a photoswitch 
has been successfully introduced in order to regain high potency and efficacy. Furthermore, in 
order to minimize overall activity loss or maximize activity loss in only one of the 
photoisomeric states, it is sensible to study structure activity relationships (SARs) or perform 
crystal structure analysis of the drug-receptor complex to guide the design of a 
photoswitchable compound that shows a large difference between the two photoisomeric 
states. Finally, one has to consider the possible existence of and potential differences in the 
off-target effects of both photoisomeric forms of the drug. 
Two strategies are generally taken when designing photopharmaceuticals. The first strategy is 
to couple a photoswitch to the pharmacophore (Figure 4A). The photoswitchable moiety can 
be partially incorporated into the pharmacophore, as was shown by the groups of Trauner49 
and Feringa50 or appended to the pharmacophore, as reported by Fischer and coworkers.51 
These strategies rely on high affinity of the drug to the receptor in one of the photoisomeric 
states. Photoisomerization alters the shape and polarity of the drug, interfering with drug-
receptor interactions, thereby resulting in a decrease in binding affinity. It may also be caused 
by a drug’s inability to reach the receptor active site, because its shape, size or polarity after 
switching may not permit entrance to the binding pocket. In either case, the 
photopharmaceutical can be switched between a state of high and low activity. 

 
8 
 
A second strategy is applicable to multivalent drugs. These drugs consist of two or more 
pharmacophores, which are connected by a spacer unit.52 The spacer provides the required 
rigidity and distance between the pharmacophores for optimal activity. Examples of 
multivalent drugs include bivalent opioid receptor agonists53 and chromones.54 A photoswitch 
can be introduced as the spacer, altering the rigidity of the spacer and the distance between 
pharmacophores upon photoisomerization, which leads to a change in drug activity (Figure 
4B). This method has been exploited for the development of photoswitchable mast cell 
activation inhibitors55 and photoswitchable ITAM peptidomimetics.56 Since the optimal 
distance between the pharmacophores is of utmost importance to attain high activity, 
photoswitches that can realize a large change in this distance, and a concomitant change in 
activity, are necessary for this strategy to be feasible. Therefore, azobenzenes are the most 
widely used of switches for this purpose. 
One potential problem, encountered when applying photopharmacology, is that the drug 
molecule might be prevented from switching when it is bound to the pharmacological target. 
Especially in cases were one isomer binds tightly to the receptor, the isomerization efficiency 
might not be large enough to realize photoisomerization. However, in most cases receptor 
binding is a dynamic event. At the moment the drug molecule leaves the binding pocket it will 
immediately be photoisomerized. 
 
Figure 4. Schematic representation of the two major strategies employed for designing 
photopharmaceuticals. A) A photoswitch bound to a pharmacophore changes its properties 
upon switching and prevents binding in one of the states; B) A photoswitch is introduced 
between two ligands that interact with a multivalent target; isomerization of the photoswitch 
changes the distance between the ligands and prevents the multivalent interaction in one of 
the states. 
 
3.2. Photoisomer ratio at photostationary state (PSS) 

 
9 
 
One of the crucial factors, that need to be considered when designing a responsive drug by 
incorporation of a photochromic unit, is the difference in relative concentration of the two 
isomers that can be addressed by light. For most of the used photoswitches, it is not possible 
to transform completely from the thermodynamically favored state to the unstable state upon 
irradiation.  
In the case of azobenzenes, the trans-form is usually > 10 kcal/mol57 more stable than the cis-
form, which means that in a thermally equilibrated sample only the former is present to any 
extent. Irradiation with light at a suitable wavelength causes a part of the population of 
molecules to switch to the cis-state. Recently a number of bidirectional azobenzenes has been 
reported in which this process is especially efficient and the irradiated state consists almost 
exclusively (>95%) of the thermodynamically less stable isomer.58-60 
Bistable switching is of paramount importance for many applications of molecular 
photoswitches, in which the degree of isomerization translates directly to the biological effect. 
If one considers, for example, photocontrol of the catalytic activity of an enzyme by the 
covalent attachment of a molecular photoswitch,21,25 it becomes apparent that, even if the 
isomerization of a single, enzyme-bound photochrome results in an on-off change in activity, 
the overall change in activity will be directly correlated to the percentage of the 
photochemically active compounds that undergo isomerization. This situation is represented 
in Figure 5a, in which the color intensity represents biological activity, and which is inspired 
by similar considerations with regard to photocaged compounds by Deiters.24  
 
Figure 5. Photoswitching (purple arrow) between two states that differ in biological activity. 
The activity increases from yellow to dark red. a) When the molecular photoswitch is attached 
covalently to the target, there is a linear correlation between the percentage of photoswitches 
that undergo the isomerization and the change in catalytic activity; b-d) when the 
stoichiometry between the photoswitch and the target is not fixed, it is possible to achieve 
higher changes in activity by increasing the dose of a photoswitchable drug (from b to d). 
Even in the initial state (left sphere) some of the active form might be present, increasing its 
concentration, albeit below certain activity threshold (dashed black line), will not result in the 
biological response. Due to the steepness of the sigmoidal-shaped dose-response curve, it is in 
principle possible to find conditions (d) where the concentration of the active state (right 
sphere) is beyond the saturation point (dashed orange line) and complete on-off control can be 
achieved. 

 
10 
 
On the other hand, the use of photoswitches for controlling the bioactivity of drugs is, by 
definition, a non-covalent approach, i.e. it does not rely upon direct attachment of the 
photoactive compound to the drug’s target. It means that the stoichiometry of the two is not 
fixed and by changing the concentration of the drug it is possible to optimize the response 
(Figure 5b-d) even if only part of the population of the photoswitchable drug undergoes 
isomerization. This effect is especially enhanced in the case of the steep, sigmoidal dose-
response curves (Figure 5b-d), observed in pharmacology. These special features render 
photopharmacology an attractive approach among the numerous methods21 that rely on using 
molecular photoswitches for the optical control of biological processes. 
 
3.3. Wavelength tuning 
The possibility of tuning the wavelength of light needed for photoisomerization of the 
photopharmacological agent is of crucial importance. Two factors determine the range of the 
spectrum that can be used: the damage caused by irradiation with UV light and the 
wavelength-dependence of the depth of tissue penetration. 
The toxicity of UV light has been studied extensively and it has been shown that it is 
carcinogenic,61 can cause mutations,62 and induce cell apoptosis.63,64 Therefore, UV light 
should be avoided in therapies and UV-switchable compounds cannot be used in the clinic for 
applications that involve the direct irradiation of a living tissue. 
The depth of penetration of light into tissues is limited by both optical scattering and 
absorption by the endogenous chromophores.65 In principle, the available wavelength range is 
between 600 and 1200 nm, with the absorption of hemoglobin preventing the use of shorter 
wavelengths and the absorption of water limiting the use of longer wavelengths.65 While these 
values are strongly tissue-dependent, it is assumed that light at 630 nm can penetrate 1 cm of 
tissue, while for 800 nm the depth of penetration is approximately 2 cm.66 While this is 
usually not enough for completely non-invasive irradiation, light can be delivered to most 
organs in the body using an optic fiber inserted through a small incision.67 
An ideal situation would be offered if switching in both directions could be achieved with 
non-toxic and deep-penetrating light. This would enable therapeutic scenarios described in 
Figure 6, which require the use of two distinct wavelengths of light to 'turn on’ and 'turn off’ 
activity. Scenario A (1, Figure 6) represents the case of a normal pharmacological agent, 
which is excreted in an active, non-metabolized form. The case of a drug that undergoes 
partial metabolic degradation is represented by the second scenario (B, Figure 6). In both 
situations the drug is still present in its active form in spaces and times in which it is 
unnecessary, or may even be harmful.  

 
11 
 
 
Figure 6. Possible therapeutic scenarios using photoswitchable bioactive compounds which 
can be switched between an on- and off-state with light of different wavelengths: A) Activity 
profile of a conventional drug that is not metabolized in the body; B) Activity profile of a 
conventional drug that is metabolized in the body; C) Photoactivation of a switchable drug on 
the site of action, followed by inactivation when it is being cleared from the body; D) 
Photoactivation of a switchable drug prior to administration, followed by inactivation when it 
is cleared from the body; E) Inactivation of a switchable drug prior to administration, 
subsequent activation at the site of action and final inactivation when it is being cleared from 
the body. 
For example, cytotoxic compounds used in the chemotherapeutic treatment of cancers cause 
adverse effects,68 which could be avoided by local activation of the drug within the tumor 
(Scenario C, Figure 6). A further problem is caused by the build-up of bioactive compounds 
in the environment, which has severe consequences in case of antibiotics5 and hormones.69,70 
In such cases, using light to turn off the drug before it leaves the body (Scenario C, Figure 6) 
would prevent the excretion of active component. Alternatively, if the drug needs to be 
activated with potentially harmful UV light, this can be achieved safely by irradiation prior to 
administration (Scenario D, Figure 6). It has to be noted that upon excretion to the 
environment the compound would potentially be exposed to sunlight. This exposure is, 
however, not efficient enough for the buildup of significant content of the photoswitched 
form. Also, one has to consider that the access of sunlight to the spots in the environment such 
as soil or sewage systems is severely limited. 
Both applications envisioned in scenarios C and D rely on the use of a compound, which 
exhibits activity in the thermodynamically unfavorable state. In the opposite case, where the 
isomer present after thermal equilibration is more active, one could envision using light of 
different wavelengths to sequentially turn the activity off before administration, turn it on 

 
12 
 
again at the place of action and again turn it off outside the place of action to avoid toxicity in 
other parts of the body (Scenario E, Figure 6). 
 
Figure 7. Visible-light-switchable azobenzene-based photoswitches 1-7. 
In recent years, major advances have been made in understanding the design principles for the 
synthesis of azobenzenes that can be switched with visible light. Selected representative 
examples are shown in Figure 7. The optical properties of compounds 1-7 are summarized in 
Table 1. In every case, isomerization in both directions can be achieved by irradiation with 
visible light. 
Table 1. Photochemical properties of azobenzene-based photoswitches 1-7. 
Compound 
transcis 
cistrans 
half life 
reference 
1 
500-550 
407 nm 
4.8 h* 
59 
2 
635 nm 
450 nm 
3.5 h 
71 
3 
530 nm / 635 nm 460 nm 
2.4 d 
71,72 
4 
423 nm / 635 nm nd 
25 min 
73 
5 
>450 nm 
410 nm 
700 d 
60 
6 
>500 nm 
440 nm 
nd 
60 
7 
>500 nm 
410 nm 
nd 
60 
* cis isomer is the thermodynamically stable one. 
In particular, the tetra-ortho-substituted azobenzenes, introduced only recently, are notable, as 
it is possible to induce their trans to cis isomerization using light of longer wavelengths, e.g. 
by irradiating the red-shifted n-π* band of the trans isomer.71-73 In a seminal study,71 Woolley 
and co-workers have shown that a short, fluorescent, reporter peptide, cross-linked with 
compound 2 could be photoisomerized with red light ( = 635 nm), even in zebrafish 
embryos.  

 
13 
 
Based on these recent results, we envision the possibility of tuning the optical properties of 
photoswitches to match the “therapeutic spectral window” for photopharmaceuticals, building 
on important lessons learned from the field of clinically used photodynamic therapy.74 Further 
developments in the use of two-photon absorption processes for molecular photoswitches that 
would directly enable the use of near-IR light in photopharmacology are equally important in 
this field.75,76 
 
3.4. The half-life of thermodynamically unstable isomer 
Tuning the rate of the thermal relaxation of the switched state constitutes one of the main 
advantages over using traditional approaches, as it opens the possibility of temporal control of 
drug activity, in addition to approaches based on the use of two different wavelengths of light 
(vide supra). Figure 8 presents possible therapeutic scenarios one can envision when 
exploiting thermal relaxation of a photoswitchable drug.  
 
Figure 8. Possible therapeutic scenarios using photoswitchable bioactive compounds with a 
controlled half-life, that show their activity either in the thermodynamically unstable (A-C) or 
stable (D-E) state: A) Irradiation prior to administration; B) Irradiation at the point of action; 
C) Multiple irradiation cycles of a drug with a short half-life for the on-state; D) Irradiation 
prior to administration; E) Irradiation prior to administration and while the drug is being 
cleared.  
The simplest scenario (Scenario A, Figure 8) involves the use of a photopharmaceutical agent 
that is biologically active in its thermally unstable state. Irradiation of the drug prior to its 
administration would result in its temporal activation. If the half-life of this state is chosen 
properly, the activity would be retained during the time the drug resides in the body of the 

 
14 
 
patient and would be lost by the time it is excreted. Since the irradiation occurs prior to 
administration, the lack of transparency of human tissue to the required wavelength is not a 
limitation. This scenario is especially attractive for preventing the build-up of active 
compounds in the environment (see Section 3.3). Alternatively, if the optical properties of the 
photopharmaceutical agent allow the activation within the body, scenario B (Figure 8) can be 
utilized to the same end. In cases where the drug exhibits severe cytotoxicity and precise 
control over its localization is required, installing a photoswitch with short half-life would 
allow scenario C (Figure 8) in which repeated activation (pulsing) in the desired area would 
result in spatially selective action. 
The other scenarios (D and E, Figure 8) apply when the photopharmaceutical agent is active 
in its thermodynamically stable state. The adverse side effects could in this case be limited by 
irradiation-promoted, temporal inactivation prior to administration. If the timescale of the 
thermal relaxation is chosen correctly, the compound would regain most of its activity upon 
reaching the target (Scenario D, Figure 8). Additionally, irradiation could temporally 
inactivate the compounds before being cleared from the body to prevent toxicity in other 
tissues (Scenario E, Figure 8). 
In recent years, major advances have been made in understanding the factors that determine 
the thermal stability of the photoswitched states, especially for azobenzenes. Previous 
approaches at constructing azobenzenes that can be switched with visible light focused on 
installing push-pull systems, which resulted in very fast thermal relaxation in polar solvents. 
While such systems are highly useful for approaches in which a fast drop in activity is desired 
(such as Scenario C, Figure 8), their general applicability is limited (Scenarios A, B, D and E, 
Figure 8).77,78 Recently, the wavelength of absorption was decoupled from the stability of the 
thermodynamically unstable state. Molecular photoswitches were constructed in which the 
possibility of visible light trans-cis switching results from the red shift of the n-π* band of the 
trans isomer, and its separation from the n-π* transition of the cis isomer. This enables 
switching in both directions with visible light, while the thermal stability of cis-isomer is not 
compromised (Table 1). For example, compound cis-4 relaxes thermally with a half-life in the 
range of minutes,73 cis-3 has a half-life of 53 h72 and cis-5 shows an unprecedented half-life of 
700 d, i.e. it is thermally stable.60 
The final factor that has to be considered when designing photopharmaceutical agents is that 
the kinetics of their thermal relaxation measured in vitro might not be the same as in the 
intercellular space and inside cells. This is caused mainly by reversible attack of cellular thiols 
(see section 3.5) on the cis-azobenzene, which leads to increased relaxation rates.79-81 
Furthermore, environmental effects in cells have been reported to affect this process.82 
3.5. Stability in the cellular environment 
The possible degradation of azobenzenes via enzyme83,84- or glutathione (GSH, Scheme 1)81 -
mediated reduction to the respective hydrazobenzenes is a source of ongoing concern. 
Especially the second possibility has been studied in more detail, since glutathione is present 
in cells in concentration of up to 10 mM.85,86 Prompted by the observation that proteinogenic 

 
15 
 
thiols reduce azobenzenes,87,88 the group of Moroder80 conducted a thorough study on the 
stability of an azobenzene 8, incorporated into a backbone of a short peptide, in the presence 
of varying concentrations of glutathione and over a wide pH range. They observed that 
reduction of azobenzene indeed proceeds at neutral and basic pH, and it is 100 times faster for 
the cis-isomer of 8. 
 
Scheme 1. Mechanism of the reduction of a model, azobenzene-bearing tripeptide, 8 by 
glutathione.81 
The mechanism of the reduction, presented initially by Kosower,89 is a two-step process, 
which involves a nucleophilic attack of the thiol(ate) on the diazo bond to form an adduct 9 
(Scheme 1),81 which reacts further with GSH to form the hydrazo compound 10 and GSSG,81 
an oxidized form of glutathione. Introduction of electron-donating substituents to the 
azobenzene could prevent the first step from occurring, by decreasing the electrophilicity of 
the diazo system. Indeed, the use of mildly electron-rich p-amido substituents by Woolley and 
co-workers, for example in compound 1, resulted in systems that showed remarkable stability 
at high glutathione concentrations.59,82 On the other hand, in the tetra-ortho-substituted 
azobenzenes71,72 2 and 3, an opposite trend was observed: compound 2, bearing four chloro 
substituents proved to be stable to reduction, while compound 3 with four strongly electron 
donating methoxy groups was slowly bleached by glutathione (t1/2 ~1h at 10 mM GSH).71 
This difference was rationalized by the higher basicity of the latter compound, which upon 
protonation undergoes the thiolate attack more rapidly.71 By using methylthio groups instead 
of methoxy groups in compound 4 the reduction could be prevented.73  
These examples show that, in general, azobenzene-based photopharmaceuticals are stable in 
reducing, cellular environment, at least on the timescale relevant for therapeutic applications, 
and that their stability can be tuned by variation in the substitution pattern. This is further 
supported by their use in in vivo experiments,71,82 including the photoisomerization of azonium 
switches, based on compound 3, in whole blood.90 However, attention must be paid to the 
electronic properties of the substituents, as installing electron-withdrawing groups might lead 
to higher susceptibility to reduction within the cells. In any case, testing newly developed 
photoswitchable compounds for their stability in the presence of milimolar concentrations of 
glutathione is strongly advised. 
 
3.6.Toxicity 

 
16 
 
The toxicity of azobenzenes, which have been used as dyes and manufactured on large scale, 
has been a subject of numerous studies and general guidelines for the design of non-toxic 
compounds have been established.91 Briefly, the toxicity of azobenzenes may stem from three 
sources: (i) the cleavage to carcinogenic aromatic amines, which upon oxidation form species 
that bind to DNA covalently, (ii) metabolic oxidation of amine-bearing azobenzenes to toxic 
species, and (iii) oxidation to strongly electrophilic diazonium salts.91 Therefore, in 
considering the toxicity of azo-based photopharmacological agents, not only the toxicity of 
the parent structure should be considered, but also the effects caused by the corresponding 
amines. 
Despite these limitations, it should be mentioned that azobenzene-based compounds have 
been successfully applied as pro-drugs in therapies, as exemplified by sulfasalazine92 and 
balsalazide,93 food/drug/cosmetic additives, e.g. allura red AC94 and diagnostic aids, such as 
anazolene.95 These examples of successful applications of azobenzenes in medicinal contexts 
show that careful consideration of possible toxicity may allow the construction of biologically 
safe compounds. 
3.7. Design principles: concluding remarks. 
A photoswitchable drug must fulfill a set of requirements in order to demonstrate its potency 
in enabling the use of light to control biological activity, : (i) the change in concentration of 
the more active isomer upon irradiation must be sufficient to provide a large difference in 
response; (ii) the isomerization should preferentially be achieved using deep-penetrating light 
of low cellular toxicity; (iii) the thermal re-isomerization to the thermodynamically stable 
form should proceed on the timescale relevant for the intended application; the 
photoswitchable drug should be (iv) water soluble in both photoisomeric states and (v) 
metabolically stable enough to reach its intended target; finally, vi) neither the drug, nor its 
metabolites should show general toxicity. 
While in recent years major advances have been made in understanding factors that govern 
each of these requirements separately, it remains a challenge to fulfill all of them within one 
molecule. We envision that continued research efforts towards understanding the principles 
underlying the factors discussed above would result, in the years to come, in establishing 
primary architectures of photochromic elements that can be successfully incorporated into 
drugs to render them photoresponsive. There are also, of course, ample opportunities for 
employing other molecular photoswitches besides the azobenzenes, and we expect major 
developments in this regard. While the field of photopharmacology is still in its infancy, it is 
highly promising due to the versatility provided by molecular design. 
4. Illustrative examples 
The second part of this perspective describes selected examples of photopharmaceuticals, 
with the focus on the design principles used (see section 3.1) and the attempts at making the 
compounds compatible with the requirements for successful therapeutic use (see Sections 3.2-
3.6). For a more comprehensive overview on the photocontrol of biological systems by the 
application of molecular switches, the reader is referred to other reviews.21,96 

 
17 
 
Pioneering work in the field of photopharmacology has been conducted by the group of 
Erlanger and Nachmanson, who studied azobenzene-based inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase 
in the 1960s.97,98 In the following decades, important contributions included photoswitchable 
inhibitors of proteases99-101 and mitochondrial complex I.102 
Recently, several successful examples49,77,103-107 were reported by Trauner and co-workers, 
including the development of a photoswitchable propofol analog.49 Propofol (Figure 9A) is 
widely used as an anesthetic and it derives its effect by potentiating GABA-induced 
currents.49 The first strategy outlined above was taken in the design of the photoswitchable 
compound i.e. coupling of a photoswitch to the pharmacophore of propofol (Figure 4A). 
Compound 11 (Figure 9B) was obtained by introducing a 4-aminophenyldiazo group at the 
para position of the aromatic moiety of propofol. The amino substituent in the para position 
caused a red-shift in the absorption spectra of the azobenzene and 11 could be switched from 
the trans to the cis isomer by irradiation with 360-450 nm light. The electron-donating 
substituent on the azobenzene resulted in a significant decrease in the thermal-stability of the 
cis-isomer, and as a consequence a fast, thermal cis-trans isomerization occurred once the 
360-450 nm light source was removed. The anesthetic effect of both photoisomers of 
compound 11 was evaluated using Xenopus laevis tadpoles. In this experiment, the animals 
were studied for loss of righting reflex (LORR).108 This reflex corrects the orientation of the 
body when it is taken out of its normal position and the loss of this reflex is a standard assay 
for anesthesia. The tadpoles placed in aqueous media containing compound 11 showed an 
LORR with an EC50 of 1.1 µM, which was comparable to the EC50 of propofol itself. When 
the tadpoles were irradiated with light (360-370 nm), the EC50 increased by more than 4-fold 
to 4.6 µM (Figure 9C). In a second experiment, tadpoles were placed in medium containing 3 
µM of compound 11, which resulted in LORR. Subsequently, the medium was illuminated 
with UV-light and all animals spontaneously righted themselves. This experiment shows that 
even though both photoisomers have similar biological activity, an on/off event can be 
realized by carefully control of the concentration (Figure 5D). Additionally, it proves that an 
existing drug can be converted into a photoswitchable analog and drug activity can be 
regulated in vivo. 

 
18 
 
 
Figure 9. A photoswitchable anesthetic. A) Structure of propofol; B) Structure of compound 
11; C) Dose-response curve of compound 11 in its trans-form (squares) and in its cis-form 
(crosses). Figure adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
In another recent example by the groups of Trauner and Kramer, a photoswitchable 
nociception regulator was described.105 Nociception is involved in the processing of noxious 
stimuli by nociceptors.109 These receptors are expressed in neurons and contain ion channels 
that can be blocked by quaternary ammonium groups. The first design strategy was again 
taken in developing a photoswitchable nociception regulator (Figure 4A), where an 
azobenzene moiety was incorporated into a lidocaine analog, to yield compound 12 (Figure 
10A). The effect of compound 12 on pain sensation in vivo was evaluated using a pain-
avoidance experiment with rats. The von Frey hair test was conducted, which assays the 
blinking response after mechanical stimulation of the cornea.110 Compound 12 was applied 
topically in combination with capsaicin to one eye and capsaicin alone to the other. Then, 
increasing force was applied to the eye. In the dark, a force of almost 0.6 g was necessary to 
make the eye blink in the presence of 20 mM of compound 12, while the control eye without 
compound 12 already blinked when a force of 0.3 g was applied, indicating that compound 12 
could alter pain sensation in vivo. When the eye was irradiated at 380 nm, which switches 
compound 12 from the trans to the cis isomer, the eye with compound 12 already blinked at a 
force of 0.3 g, as with the control eye without compound 12 (Figure 10B). In a follow-up 
report106 the structure of compound 13 was modified to allow it to undergo photoisomerization 
using visible light, instead of UV light, i.e. an ortho,ortho’-dimethoxy analog of 13 (Figure 

 
19 
 
10C). This compound could be photoisomerized from its trans to its cis form with visible 
light at 420 nm. To test its activity, Shaker-IR K+ currents were recorded in the presence of 
350 µM compound 13 in the dark or when irradiated at 420 nm on HEK293 cells using 
voltage-clamp recordings (Figure 10D). A significant increase in current was observed when 
the cells were irradiated at 420 nm light as compared to the dark. These studies show how a 
previously designed photoswitchable drug can be further developed to optimize its 
photochromic properties while still maintaining its biological activity.  
 
Figure 10. Photoswitchable nociception stimulation by azobenzenes 12 and 13. Molecular 
structures of compound 12 and 13 and their biological activity. A) Molecular structure of 
compound 12. B) The threshold of eye blinking in the dark and when exposed to 380 nm light 
when capsaicin (grey line) or capsaicin and compound 12 (black line) were applied topically 
to the eye of a rat. C) Molecular structure of compound 13 D) Voltage clamp recordings of 
Shaker-IR K+ channels in HEK293 cells incubated with compound 13 in the dark and 
irradiated at 420 nm. Figures adapted with permissions from refs. 105 and 106. Copyright 
2012 Nature Publishing Group (ref. 105); Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
KGaA (ref. 106). 
Recently, Feringa and co-workers reported a photoswitchable antibiotic.50 SARs of the 
derivatives of the well-known (fluoro-)quinolones were used to design a series of compounds, 
which were prepared using the first design strategy also(Figure 4A). Quinolones are broad-
spectrum antibiotics that are frequently used in pharmacotherapy.111 An azobenzene 

 
20 
 
photoswitch was incorporated into the quinolone pharmacophore and various substituents 
were introduced on the aromatic ring of the azobenzene. The minimum inhibitory 
concentration (MIC) was determined for all compounds in the dark and after irradiation at 365 
nm, which switches the compound from the trans to the cis isomer. Compound 14 (Figure 
11A) had a MIC value of 16 µg/mL before irradiation and 2 µg/mL after irradiation when 
tested on the Gram-positive bacterium M. lutues. Additionally, compound 14 showed to be 
more active in the irradiated form against E. coli, indicating that this photoswitchable 
quinolone retained its broad-spectrum character. The thermodynamically unstable cis-form 
was the most active isomer. Irradiating the stable trans-isomer at 365 nm resulted in 
temporary activation only, as its activity decreased in the absence of light due to thermal cis-
trans isomerization (Figure 8, scenario A) with a half-life of ca. 2 hours. The authors showed 
that the cis-trans isomerization lead to a loss in activity by determining the antibacterial 
activity over time after irradiation (Figure 11B). This temporary activation means that, in the 
case of use in vivo, the activity is likely to be lost before the drug is excreted from the body, 
preventing the build-up of an active antibacterial substance in the environment and avoiding 
the emergence of resistance. By variation of the substituents on the aromatic ring, it might be 
possible to tune the half-life for optimal activity in the body and minimal activity outside the 
body. 
Furthermore, it was shown that antibacterial activity could be locally increased by irradiating 
a section of an agar-plate containing compound 14.50 After irradiation, E. coli was streaked on 
the plate and incubated overnight. Bacterial growth was only observed at the section that was 
not exposed to light (Figure 11C). This shows how precisely a drug can be activated in time 
and space using this method. When photoswitches are used that can be addressed with longer 
wavelengths, activation of drugs can, in principle, be achieved inside the body. This example 
also shows how the half-life of cis-trans isomerization can be exploited to lose drug-activity 
over time (see Section 3.4). 

 
21 
 
 
Figure 11. Photocontrol of antibiotic activity. A) Molecular structure of compound 14; B) 
Bacterial growth curves of E. coli incubated with 40 µM of compound 14 at various times 
after irradiation. After 3 hours, antibacterial activity was lost completely due to thermal cis-
trans isomerization; C) Irradiation of compound 14 in an agar plate resulting in local 
activation of antibiotic activity, preventing bacterial growth locally.50  
In 2007 Abell and co-workers described photoswitchable anticataract agents.112 A cataract is a 
condition that is characterized by clouding of the lens in the eye which impairs vision. This 
disease can be caused by over-activation of a protease, called calpain, which catalyzes the 
breakdown of lens proteins.112 Photoswitchable calpain inhibitors were designed based on 
modeling of the active site of calpain. The inhibitory activity of compound 15 (Figure 12) was 
tested on calpain using a standard, fluorescence-based assay. The non-irradiated compound 15 
had an IC50 value of 45 nM, while after irradiation at 340 nm the IC50 value was 175 nM. 
Such a design could be used to first deactivate the inhibitor by irradiation with UV-light, 
avoiding side-effects and subsequently activating the drug when it has reached the target. The 
elegance of this approach stems from the fact, that the target is the lens in the eye and the drug 
could be naturally activated by illumination with visible light, minimizing toxicity-related 
problems (see section 3.3). 

 
22 
 
 
Figure 12. Molecular structure of compound 15 
The 
group 
of 
de 
Mol 
and 
Liskamp 
have 
reported 
photoswitchable 
ITAM 
peptidomimetics.56,113 Spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) plays an important role in immunological 
receptor signaling and therefore is involved in allergic reactions and immune responses.114 
Syk is activated by binding to a so-called ITAM motif on the IgE receptor, which is possible 
only when the motif is diphosphorylated. Over-activation of Syk induces allergic responses, 
which renders Syk an interesting target for anti-allergic therapy. To develop a 
photoswitchable ITAM peptidomimetic, the second design strategy was used, where two 
pharmacophores were linked by a photoswitch moiety (Figure 4B), in this case an 
azobenzene. The ITAM motif consists of a small peptide comprising of amino acids that are 
essential for Syk binding, which were considered as the pharmacophores, and of amino acids 
that are not essential for binding, which were considered as the spacer. Taking this in 
consideration, compound 16 (Figure 13A) was designed, featuring an azobenzene at the 
center of the molecule, flanked by binding peptides.56 SPR competition experiments were 
performed to test if there was a difference in binding affinity between the trans and cis isomer 
(Figure 13B). A dose-response curve was obtained for compound 16 before and after 
irradiation at 366 nm, showing a small, yet significant, change in binding affinity upon 
irradiation. However, irradiation at 366 nm resulted in a maximum of only 60% cis isomer. If 
this percentage could be increased, the difference in binding affinity would be larger. 
Nevertheless, this example shows how the second design strategy (Figure 4B) can be 
successfully exploited to provide a photoswitchable pharmaceutical. 
 
Figure 13. A photoswitchable ITAM peptidomimetic A) Molecular structure of compound 16 
B) SPR competition experiment with Syk (50 nM) with compound 16 when irradiated at 366 

 
23 
 
nm (white circles) and non-irradiated (black circles). Figure adapted with permission from ref. 
56. Copyright 2008 Elsevier B.V. 
This design, in which a molecular photoswitch is used in a drug as a linker that binds two 
moieties that interact with the target (Figure 4B), is not limited to multivalent targets. 
Carbonic anhydrases are a family of zinc-containing enzymes, which have been used as 
targets in many pharmacological therapies of conditions such as hypertension, convulsion, 
epilepsy and diabetes, among others.115 The groups of König and Branda have described116 
compound 17 (Figure 14A), a photoswitchable inhibitor of human Carbonic Anhydrase I 
(hCAI), whose design is inspired by the observation115 that the inhibitory activity of 
sulfanilamide (Figure 14B) is enhanced by covalent attachment of a copper complex. The 
sulfanilamide residue interacts with the active site, while copper is believed to coordinate to 
the imidazole side chains of the histidine residues that are present on the surface of hCAI. 
Since the distance between the ZnII ion in the active site and the histidines is fixed, it was 
assumed that installing a diarylethene linker between the sulfonamide and the Cu complex in 
compound 17 might allow for the photocontrol of drug activity. 
 
         
Figure 14. Photocontrolled inhibition of hCAI; A) Photoisomerization of compound 17. B) 
Sulfanilamide, a weak inhibitor of hCAI; C) Activity profile; ● – open 17; ■ – closed 17; ♦ - 
Sulfanilamide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Irradiation of the open form of 17 at 312 nm (Figure 14A) resulted in complete (>99%) 
photocyclization to the closed isomer, which could be reversed fully by irradiation with 
visible light. Remarkably, as shown in Figure 14C, closed-17 showed very high hCAI 
inhibitory activity (IC50 = 8 nM) when compared with the parent compound, sulfanilamide 
(IC50 = 460 nM), and the photocyclization resulted in a significant loss of activity (closed-17 

 
24 
 
shows IC50 value of 400 nM). This effect was attributed to the large difference in 
conformational flexibility between the closed and open forms of 17 and the bidirectional 
switching (see Section 3.2). This example highlights the strength of the second approach to 
designing photopharmaceuticals (Figure 2B). It also shows the as of yet unexplored potential 
of diarylethenes as photoregulating agents used in photoswitchable drugs. 
Both major design strategies (Figure 4A and B) were employed by Fischer and coworkers51 to 
obtain a photoswitchable immunosuppressant, using a cyclic non-ribosomal peptide, 
cyclosporine A, as a template. This immunosuppressive drug binds to the protein cyclophilin 
and the resulting cyclosporin A-cyclophilin complex inhibits calcineurin. Under normal 
conditions, calcineurin is responsible for immuno-activation117 and its inhibition results in 
immunosuppression. The initial design (compound 18, Figure 15A) was based on the first 
strategy (Figure 4A); an azobenzene photoswitch was conjugated with cyclosporin A. Based 
on SAR studies, it was known that modification at residue 8 (Figure 15A) of the cyclic 
peptide of cyclosporine A would not result in total loss of activity. Compound 18 could be 
switched by irradiation at either 370 nm or 740 nm, using two photon photoisomerization, 
resulting in almost 95% cis-isomer. When testing the inhibitory potencies of compound 18, 
only a moderate difference in activity was observed between the two photoisomers.51 To 
further increase this difference, another compound was synthesized using the second design 
strategy (Figure 4B). Two cyclosporine A molecules were linked together by an azobenzene 
moiety resulting in compound 19 (Figure 15A). To test its activity, inhibition of endogenous 
cyclophilin in blood lysate was measured (Figure 15B). The trans-isomer was able to inhibit 
cyclophilin activity up to 50% at 200 nM concentration. When the samples were irradiated at 
370 nm, the same results were obtained as without exposure to light (Figure 15B). However, 
when the samples were irradiated at 740 nm, an increase to 70% inhibition was found (Figure 
15B). This increase can be attributed to a higher activity of the cis-isomer. Because the 
experiments were conducted in blood lysate, light at 370 nm is unable to penetrate the sample 
and photoisomerize compound 19 (see Section 3.3). At 740 nm, the penetration depth is 
greater and for this reason, trans-cis isomerization can occur and higher inhibitory activity is 
observed. This remarkable example shows how longer wavelength light can be used to switch 
between states of different activities in a biological sample and demonstrates the potential for 
medical applications. 

 
25 
 
 
Figure 15. A photocontrolled immunosuppressant. A) Molecular structures of compound 18, 
compound 19 and cyclosporine A; B) Cyclophilin activity after incubation with different 
concentrations of compound 19 in blood lysate irradiated with 370 nm light, 740 nm light or 
no irradiation. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2009 Nature 
Publishing Group. 
 
 
5. Outlook 
Regulating biological processes with light, by employing photochromic molecules, offers 
fascinating possibilities, with far-reaching implications in chemical biology, pharmaceutical 
research and medicine. Although the idea of using photoswitchable enzyme inhibitors has 
been demonstrated as early as 1969,97 it is only recently that this approach is emerging to the 
stage where it shows its potential in future therapeutic applications. The development of novel 
or improved photochromic compounds, in the last years, is particularly promising and 
provides important tools for photopharmacology, as highlighted by the development of visible 
(less harmful) light-switchable azobenzenes with long lifetimes of the cis-isomer, by precise 
positioning of substituent on the photochromic unit.59,60,71-73 It is accompanied, in parallel, with 
the introduction of novel approaches towards application of photopharmaceuticals in medical 
treatment of e.g. bacterial infections, without inducing microbial resistance.50 Alternatively, 

 
26 
 
the interference with neural processes such as nociception regulation,105 offers fascinating 
prospects for control of more complex behavioral functions.  
Major developments in the design of light-responsive molecular tools are needed to fulfill all 
the prerequisites for pharmacotherapy, but we have only started to explore the vast structural 
space of molecular photoswitches (see Section 3.7). In particular, molecular photoswitches 
are needed that could be photoisomerized in both directions with light in the therapeutic 
window (600-1200 nm) with good control over the thermal stability of the less stable isomer. 
The use of two-photon excitation processes provides a viable alternative. Other requirements 
in molecular design include water solubility, low toxicity and metabolic stability, without 
compromising the selectivity for the biological target. The control of the thermal stability of 
the isomers of the bistable chromophore will also be a key design issue. Interference with for 
instance, neural processes might require short-living cis-isomers and pulsed sequences upon 
irradiation, allowing for fast back-isomerization. Developments in these areas are eagerly 
awaited and will set the milestones on the way to applicable photocontrolled drugs. 
The search for novel and unconventional approaches to dynamically controlling the activity of 
drugs in time and space has just started. With a plethora of optical molecular switches and 
pharmacophores available and a multitude of drug targets, the possibilities for smart and 
responsive pharmaceuticals are numerous. Merging the fields of photoswitches and potential 
drugs requires an exquisite molecular design, but offers a great playground to control 
biological function in a non-invasive way, including receptors, enzymes, replication and 
transcription, metabolic pathways, cellular networks, transport and sensory and neuronal 
processes. An obvious prerequisite for the success rate of these approaches is the design of the 
photopharmaceuticals which would differ considerably in their biological activity between the 
two photoisomeric states. 
Implementing photopharmacology in the pharmaceutical industry to attain photoswitchable 
drugs that could be used in clinical practice will be presented with limitations and challenges, 
certainly those common in drug development. An important additional one is that 
optimization of the molecular structure of the drug to obtain high activity has a limitation, 
because a photoswitchable moiety needs to be present in the structure. However, 
photopharmacology might be an attractive option for certain cases where drug activity is only 
locally desired, because of severe side effects, like in the case of cancer therapy. Furthermore, 
introduction of a photoswitchable moiety into the structure of a known drug does not 
necessarily lead to activity loss as was shown in certain examples discussed above. 
We envision that, in the years to follow, numerous new applications for photopharmaceuticals 
will emerge. With optimized architectures of photoswitches in hand and the advantage of high 
spatiotemporal control, it will provide both the incentive and the means to bring 
photopharmacology to a bright future, beyond the current state of “proof-of-principle” and in 
the realm of novel therapeutic applications in the clinic. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:  

 
27 
 
This work was supported financially by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research 
(NWO-CW), The Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), the European 
Research Council (ERC; advanced grant no. 227897 to B.L.F.) and the Ministry of Education, 
Culture and Science (Gravity program no. 024.001.035). The authors thank Prof. W. R. 
Browne for discussions. 
 
 
References  
1. Goodman, L. S. Goodman and Gilman's the pharmacological basis of therapeutics; 
Pergamon Press New York: 1990; Vol. 1157.  
2. Chisholm-Burns, M. A.; Wells, B. G.; Schwinghammer, T. L.; Malone, P.; Kolesar, J.; 
Rotschafer, J.; Dipiro, J. Pharmacotherapy principles & practice; McGraw-Hill: 2010; .  
3. Edwards, I. R.; Aronson, J. K. Lancet 2000, 356, 1255-1259.  
4. Longley, D. B.; Johnston, P. G. J. Pathol. 2005, 205, 275-292.  
5. Carlet, J.; Collignon, P.; Goldmann, D.; Goossens, H.; Gyssens, I. C.; Harbarth, S.; Jarlier, 
V.; Levy, S. B.; N'Doye, B.; Pittet, D.; Richtmann, R.; Seto, W. H.; van der Meer, J. W. 
M.; Voss, A. Lancet 2011, 378, 369-371.  
6. Hopkins, A. L. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2008, 4, 682-690.  
7. Overington, J. P.; Al-Lazikani, B.; Hopkins, A. L. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 2006, 5, 993-
996.  
8. Malhotra, V.; Perry, M. C. Cancer Biol Ther. 2003, 2, S2-S4.  
9. Paus, R.; Haslam, I. S.; Sharov, A. A.; Botchkarev, V. A. Lancet Oncol. 2013, 14, E50-
E59.  
10. Sonis, S.; Elting, L.; Keefe, D.; Peterson, D.; Schubert, M.; Hauer-Jensen, M.; Bekele, B.; 
Raber-Durlacher, J.; Donnelly, J.; Rubenstein, E. Cancer 2004, 100, 1995-2025.  
11. Ludwig, H.; Van Belle, S.; Barrett-Lee, P.; Birgegard, G.; Bokemeyer, C.; Gascon, P.; 
Kosmidis, P.; Krzakowski, M.; Nortier, J.; Olmi, P.; Schneider, M.; Schrijvers, D. Eur. J. 
Cancer 2004, 40, 2293-2306.  
12. Langer, R. Nature 1998, 392 (6679 Suppl), 5-10.  
13. Nicolaides, N. C.; Sass, P. M.; Grasso, L. Expert Opin. Drug. Discov. 2010, 5, 1123-1140.  
14. Raschi, E.; Vasina, V.; Ursino, M. G.; Boriani, G.; Martoni, A.; De Ponti, F. Pharmacol. 
Ther. 2010, 125, 196-218.  

 
28 
 
15. Sawyers, C. L. Nature 2008, 452, 548-552.  
16. Lehar, J.; Krueger, A. S.; Avery, W.; Heilbut, A. M.; Johansen, L. M.; Price, E. R.; 
Rickles, R. J.; Short,Glenn F.,,III; Staunton, J. E.; Jin, X.; Lee, M. S.; Zimmermann, G. 
R.; Borisy, A. A. Nat. Biotechnol. 2009, 27, 659-666.  
17. DiMasi, J. A.; Feldman, L.; Seckler, A.; Wilson, A. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 2010, 87, 272-
277.  
18. Martinez, J. L. Science 2008, 321, 365-367.  
19. Brieke, C.; Rohrbach, F.; Gottschalk, A.; Mayer, G.; Heckel, A. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.  
2012, 51, 8446-8476.  
20. Mayer, G.; Heckel, A. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2006, 45, 4900-4921.  
21. Szymanski, W.; Beierle, J. M.; Kistemaker, H. A. V.; Velema, W. A.; Feringa, B. L. 
Chem. Rev. 2013, 113, 6114-6178.  
22. Beharry, A. A.; Woolley, G. A. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 4422-4437.  
23. Gardner, L.; Deiters, A. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2012, 16, 292-299.  
24. Deiters, A. ChemBioChem 2010, 11, 47-53.  
25. Riggsbee, C. W.; Deiters, A. Trends Biotechnol. 2010, 28, 468-475.  
26. Deiters, A. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2009, 13, 678-686.  
27. Young, D. D.; Deiters, A. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2007, 5, 999-1005.  
28. Ellis-Davies, G. C. R. Nat. Methods 2007, 4, 619-628.  
29. Klan, P.; Solomek, T.; Bochet, C. G.; Blanc, A.; Givens, R.; Rubina, M.; Popik, V.; 
Kostikov, A.; Wirz, J. Chem. Rev. 2013, 113, 119-191.  
30. Skwarczynski, M.; Noguchi, M.; Hirota, S.; Sohma, Y.; Kimura, T.; Hayashi, Y.; Kiso, Y. 
Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 2006, 16, 4492-4496.  
31. Cruz, F.; Koh, J.; Link, K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2000, 122, 8777-8778.  
32. Deisseroth, K. Nat. Methods 2011, 8, 26-29.  
33. Williams, S. C. P.; Deisseroth, K. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2013, 110, 16287-16287.  
34. Nat. Methods 2011, 8, 1-1.  
35. Oesterhelt, D.; Stoeckenius, W. Nature-New Biol. 1971, 233, 149-152.  
36. Matsuno-Yagi, A.; Mukohata, Y. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 1977, 78, 237-243.  

 
29 
 
37. Deisseroth, K.; Feng, G.; Majewska, A. K.; Miesenbock, G.; Ting, A.; Schnitzer, M. J. J. 
Neurosci. 2006, 26, 10380-10386.  
38. Adamantidis, A. R.; Zhang, F.; Aravanis, A. M.; Deisseroth, K.; De Lecea, L. Nature 
2007, 450, 420-424.  
39. Triesscheijn, M.; Baas, P.; Schellens, J. H. M.; Stewart, F. A. Oncologist 2006, 11, 1034-
1044.  
40. Sharman, W.; Allen, C.; van Lier, J. Methods Enzymol. 2000, 319, 376-400.  
41. Feringa, B.; Browne, W. R., Eds.; In Molecular switches; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 2011.  
42. Irie, M. Chem. Rev. 2000, 100, 1685-1716.  
43. Mager, D. E. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2006, 58, 1326-1356.  
44. Holford, N. H.; Sheiner, L. B. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 1981, 6, 429-453.  
45. Bandara, H. M. D.; Burdette, S. C. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41, 1809-1825.  
46. Gourlay, G. K.; Cherry, D. A.; Plummer, J. L.; Armstrong, P. J.; Cousins, M. J. Pain 
1987, 31, 297-305.  
47. Drusano, G. L. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 2004, 2, 289-300.  
48. Jorgensen, W. L. Acc. Chem. Res. 2009, 42, 724-733.  
49. Stein, M.; Middendorp, S. I.; Carta, V.; Pejo, E.; Raines, D. E.; Forman, S. A.; Sigel, E.; 
Trauner, D. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.   2012, 51, 10500-10504.  
50. Velema, W. A.; van der Berg, J. P.; Hansen, M. J.; Szymanski, W.; Driessen, A. J. M.; 
Feringa, B. L. Nat. Chem. 2013, 5, 924-928.  
51. Zhang, Y.; Erdmann, F.; Fischer, G. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2009, 5, 724-726.  
52. Chittasupho, C. Ther Deliv. 2012, 3, 1171-1187.  
53. Portoghese, P. S. J. Med. Chem. 2001, 44, 2259-2269.  
54. Cairns, H.; Fitzmaurice, C.; Hunter, D.; Johnson, P. B.; King, J.; Lee, T. B.; Lord, G. H; 
Minshull, R.; Cox, J. S. G. J. Med. Chem. 1972, 15, 583-589.  
55. Velema, W. A.; van der Toorn, M.; Szymanski, W.; Feringa, B. L. J. Med. Chem. 2013, 
56, 4456-4464.  
56. Kuil, J.; van Wandelen, L. T. M.; de Mol, N. J.; Liskamp, R. M. J. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
2008, 16, 1393-1399.  

 
30 
 
57. Dias, A.; Dapiedada, M.; Simoes, J.; Simoni, J.; Teixeira, C.; Diogo, H.; Yang, M.; 
Pilcher, G. J. Chem. Thermodyn. 1992, 24, 439-447.  
58. Szymanski, W.; Wu, B.; Poloni, C.; Janssen, D. B.; Feringa, B. L. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.  
2013, 52, 2068-2072.  
59. Samanta, S.; Qin, C.; Lough, A. J.; Woolley, G. A. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.  2012, 51, 
6452-6455.  
60. Bleger, D.; Schwarz, J.; Brouwer, A. M.; Hecht, S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 20597-
20600.  
61. Brash, D.; Rudolph, J.; Simon, J.; Lin, A.; Mckenna, G.; Baden, H.; Halperin, A.; Ponten, 
J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1991, 88, 10124-10128.  
62. Protic-Sabljic M.; Tuteja, N.; Munson, P.; Hauser, J.; Kraemer, K.; Dixon, K. Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 1986, 6, 3349-3356.  
63. Banerjee, G.; Gupta, N.; Kapoor, A.; Raman, G. Cancer Lett. 2005, 223, 275-284.  
64. Kamarajan, P.; Chao, C. Biosci. Rep. 2000, 20, 99-108.  
65. Kalka, K.; Merk, H.; Mukhtar, H. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 2000, 42, 389-413.  
66. Frazier, C. C. Int. J. Dermatol. 1996, 35, 312-316.  
67. Agostinis, P.; Berg, K.; Cengel, K. A.; Foster, T. H.; Girotti, A. W.; Gollnick, S. O.; 
Hahn, S. M.; Hamblin, M. R.; Juzeniene, A.; Kessel, D.; Korbelik, M.; Moan, J.; Mroz, 
P.; Nowis, D.; Piette, J.; Wilson, B. C.; Golab, J. CA-Cancer J. Clin. 2011, 61, 250-281.  
68. Meyer, U. A. Lancet 2000, 356, 1667-1671.  
69. Zheng, W.; Yates, S. R.; Bradford, S. A. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42, 530-535.  
70. Yamamoto, A.; Kakutani, N.; Yamamoto, K.; Kamiura, T.; Miyakoda, H. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2006, 40, 4132-4137.  
71. Samanta, S.; Beharry, A. A.; Sadovski, O.; McCormick, T. M.; Babalhavaeji, A.; Tropepe, 
V.; Woolley, G. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 9777-9784.  
72. Beharry, A. A.; Sadovski, O.; Woolley, G. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 19684-19687.  
73. Samanta, S.; McCormick, T. M.; Schmidt, S. K.; Seferos, D. S.; Woolley, G. A. Chem. 
Commun. 2013, 49, 10314-10316.  
74. Allison, R. R.; Sibata, C. H. Photodiagnosis Photodyn. Ther. 2010, 7, 61-75.  
75. Pawlicki, M.; Collins, H. A.; Denning, R. G.; Anderson, H. L. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2009, 48, 3244-3266.  

 
31 
 
76. Bort, G.; Gallavardin, T.; Ogden, D.; Dalko, P. I. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 4526-
4537.  
77. Mourot, A.; Kienzler, M. A.; Banghart, M. R.; Fehrentz, T.; Huber, F. M. E.; Stein, M.; 
Kramer, R. H.; Trauner, D. ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2011, 2, 536-543.  
78. Nishimura, N.; Sueyoshi, T.; Yamanaka, H.; Imai, E.; Yamamoto, S.; Hasegawa, S. Bull. 
Chem. Soc. Jpn. 1976, 49, 1381-1387.  
79. Standaert, R. F.; Park, S. B. J. Org. Chem. 2006, 71, 7952-7966.  
80. Renner, C.; Moroder, L. ChemBioChem 2006, 7, 868-878.  
81. Boulègue, C.; Löweneck, M.; Renner, C.; Moroder, L. ChemBioChem 2007, 8, 591-594.  
82. Beharry, A. A.; Wong, L.; Tropepe, V.; Woolley, G. A. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 
1325-1327.  
83. Zbaida, S. Drug Metab. Rev. 1995, 27, 497-516.  
84. Levine, W. G. Drug Metab. Rev. 1991, 23, 253-309.  
85. López-Mirabal, H. R.; Winther, J. R. Biochim. Biophys. Acta-Mol. Cell Res. 2008, 1783, 
629-640.  
86. Kosower, N. S.; Kosower, E. M. Int. Rev. Cytol. 1978, 54, 109-160.  
87. Behrendt, R.; Schenk, M.; Musiol, H.; Moroder, L. J. Pept. Sci. 1999, 5, 519-529.  
88. Milbradt, A.; Löweneck, M.; Krupka, S. S.; Reif, M.; Sinner, E.-K.; Moroder, L.; Renner, 
C. Biopolymers 2005, 77, 304-313.  
89. Kosower, E.; Kanety-Londner, H. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1976, 98, 3001-3007.  
90. Samanta, S.; Babalhavaeji, A.; Dong, M.; Woolley, G. A. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 
52, 14127-14130.  
91. Brown, M. A.; De Vito, S. C. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 1993, 23, 249-324.  
92. McGirt, L. Y.; Vasagar, K.; Gober, L. M.; Saini, S. S.; Beck, L. A. Arch. Dermatol. 2006, 
142, 1337-1342.  
93. Kruis, W.; Schreiber, S.; Theuer, D.; Brandes, J. W.; Schutz, E.; Howaldt, S.; Krakamp, 
B.; Hamling, J.; Monnikes, H.; Koop, I.; Stolte, M.; Pallant, D.; Ewald, U. Gut 2001, 49, 
783-789.  
94. Abramsson-Zetterberg, L.; Ilback, N.-G. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2013, 59, 86-89.  
95. Taylor, S. H.; Shillingford, J. P. Br. Heart J. 1959, 21, 497-504.  

 
32 
 
96. Willner, I.; Rubin, S. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 1996, 35, 367-385.  
97. Bieth, J.; Vratsanos, S. M.; Wassermann, N.; Erlanger, B. F. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 
A. 1969, 64, 1103-1106.  
98. Deal, W. J.; Erlanger, B. F.; Nachmansohn, D. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1969, 64, 
1230-1234.  
99. Westmark, P. R.; Kelly, J. P.; Smith, B. D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 3416-3419.  
100. Harvey, A. J.; Abell, A. D. Tetrahedron 2000, 56, 9763-9771.  
101. Pearson, D.; Alexander, N.; Abell, A. D. Chem.- Eur. J. 2008, 14, 7358-7365.  
102. Fujita, D.; Murai, M.; Nishioka, T.; Miyoshi, H. Biochemistry 2006, 45, 6581-6586.  
103. Banghart, M. R.; Mourot, A.; Fortin, D. L.; Yao, J. Z.; Kramer, R. H.; Trauner, D. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 9097-9101.  
104. Stawski, P.; Sumser, M.; Trauner, D. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 5748-5751.  
105. Mourot, A.; Fehrentz, T.; Le Feuvre, Y.; Smith, C. M.; Herold, C.; Dalkara, D.; Nagy, 
F.; Trauner, D.; Kramer, R. H. Nat. Methods 2012, 9, 396-402.  
106. Fehrentz, T.; Kuttruff, C. A.; Huber, F. M. E.; Kienzler, M. A.; Mayer, P.; Trauner, D. 
ChemBioChem 2012, 13, 1746-1749.  
107. Stein, M.; Breit, A.; Fehrentz, T.; Gudermann, T.; Trauner, D. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
2013, 52, 9845-9848.  
108. Stewart, D. S.; Savechenkov, P. Y.; Dostalova, Z.; Chiara, D. C.; Ge, R.; Raines, D. E.; 
Cohen, J. B.; Forman, S. A.; Bruzik, K. S.; Miller, K. W. J. Med. Chem. 2011, 54, 8124-
8135.  
109. Julius, D.; Basbaum, A. I. Nature 2001, 413, 203-210.  
110. De Castro, F.; Silos-Santiago, I.; De Armentia, M. L.; Barbacid, M.; Belmonte, C. Eur. 
J. Neurosci. 1998, 10, 146-152.  
111. Adriaenssens, N.; Coenen, S.; Versporten, A.; Muller, A.; Minalu, G.; Faes, C.; 
Vankerckhoven, V.; Aerts, M.; Hens, N.; Molenberghs, G.; Goossens, H. J. Antimicrob. 
Chemother. 2011, 66, vi3-vi12.  
112. Abell, A. D.; Jones, M. A.; Neffe, A. T.; Aitken, S. G.; Cain, T. P.; Payne, R. J.; 
McNabb, S. B.; Coxon, J. M.; Stuart, B. G.; Pearson, D.; Lee, H. Y.-Y.; Morton, J. D. J. 
Med. Chem. 2007, 50, 2916-2920.  
113. Kuil, J.; van Wandelen, L. T. M.; de Mol, N. J.; Liskamp, R. M. J. J. Pept. Sci. 2009, 15, 
685-691.  

 
33 
 
114. Kumaran, S.; Grucza, R. A.; Waksman, G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2003, 100, 
14828-14833.  
115. Banerjee, A. L.; Eiler, D.; Roy, B. C.; Jia, X.; Haldar, M. K.; Mallik, S.; Srivastava, D. 
K. Biochemistry 2005, 44, 3211-3224.  
116. Vomasta, D.; Högner, C.; Branda, N. R.; König, B. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2008, 47, 
7644-7647.  
117. Fischer, G. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 1994, 33, 1415-1436.  
 
 

 
34 
 
TOC ENTRY: 
 
 
 
