Registered charity number: 207890
rsc.li/chem-soc-rev
Featuring work from the research groups of Dr Tatiana Besset, 
CNRS Rouen, France, Prof. Bert U. W. Maes, University of 
Antwerp, Belgium, Dr Joanna Wencel-Delord, Université de 
Strasbourg, France, and Assoc. Prof. Michael Schnürch, 
TU Wien, Austria.
A comprehensive overview of directing groups applied in 
metal-catalysed C–H functionalisation chemistry
The present review is devoted to summarizing the recent 
advances (2015–2017) in the field of metal-catalysed 
group-directed C–H functionalisation. Additionally, directions 
for future research are proposed by identifying areas in which 
more research could lead to more generally applicable, more 
environmentally benign, and also more industry friendly 
transformations. Such investigations are ongoing in the 
groups of all PIs co-authoring this manuscript.
As featured in:
See Michael Schnürch et al.,
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603.

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6603
Cite this: Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018,
47, 6603
A comprehensive overview of directing groups
applied in metal-catalysed C–H functionalisation
chemistry†‡
Carlo Sambiagio,
a David Scho¨nbauer,b Remi Blieck,c Toan Dao-Huy,b
Gerit Pototschnig,b Patricia Schaaf,
b Thomas Wiesinger,b
Muhammad Farooq Zia,b Joanna Wencel-Delord,d Tatiana Besset,c
Bert U. W. Maes
a and Michael Schnu¨rch
*b
The present review is devoted to summarizing the recent advances (2015–2017) in the field of metal-
catalysed group-directed C–H functionalisation. In order to clearly showcase the molecular diversity that
can now be accessed by means of directed C–H functionalisation, the whole is organized following
the directing groups installed on a substrate. Its aim is to be a comprehensive reference work, where a
specific directing group can be easily found, together with the transformations which have been carried
out with it. Hence, the primary format of this review is schemes accompanied with a concise explanatory
text, in which the directing groups are ordered in sections according to their chemical structure. The
schemes feature typical substrates used, the products obtained as well as the required reaction conditions.
Importantly, each example is commented on with respect to the most important positive features and
drawbacks, on aspects such as selectivity, substrate scope, reaction conditions, directing group removal,
and greenness. The targeted readership are both experts in the field of C–H functionalisation chemistry
(to provide a comprehensive overview of the progress made in the last years) and, even more so, all
organic chemists who want to introduce the C–H functionalisation way of thinking for a design of
straightforward, efficient and step-economic synthetic routes towards molecules of interest to them.
Accordingly, this review should be of particular interest also for scientists from industrial R&D sector.
Hence, the overall goal of this review is to promote the application of C–H functionalisation reactions
outside the research groups dedicated to method development and establishing it as a valuable reaction
archetype in contemporary R&D, comparable to the role cross-coupling reactions play to date.
1. Introduction
Metal catalysed C–H functionalisation chemistry is a rapidly
expanding field with research going into many different
directions.1–21 Due to the ubiquity of C–H bonds in organic
molecules, selective functionalisation of a specific C–H bond is
highly challenging. In aromatic heterocycles, the heteroatoms
usually guide the regioselectivity of C–H functionalisation
reactions due to their influence on the electron density of the
different C–H positions.22–26 On arenes or aliphatic compounds,
such intrinsic reactivity differences are significantly less pro-
nounced, and selective cleavage of a specific C–H bond is more
difficult, even though substituents in arenes can obviously have a
significant effect. One way to overcome this problem is the
assistance of directing groups (DGs), consisting of a coordinating
moiety (an ‘‘internal ligand’’), which directs a metal catalyst into
the proximity of a certain C–H bond in the molecule, leading to its
selective cleavage and subsequent functionalisation.17,27–33 This
strategy allows to overrule innate reactivity in (hetero)arenes.
A schematic example of this is shown in Fig. 1 for a number of
common unsaturated heterocycles, where a comparison with
classical electrophilic substitution is given.34
DG-assisted C–H functionalisation started to gain momentum
in the mid-1990s after a landmark contribution by the group of
Murai.35 In this paper, a ketone DG enabled the Ru(II)-catalysed
ortho-alkylation of arenes with alkenes, clearly illustrating that
a Organic Synthesis (ORSY), Department of Chemistry, University of Antwerp,
Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium
b Institute of Applied Synthetic Chemistry, TU Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/163,
A-1060 Vienna, Austria. E-mail: michael.schnuerch@tuwien.ac.at
c Normandie Univ, INSA Rouen, UNIROUEN, CNRS, COBRA (UMR 6014),
76000 Rouen, France
d Laboratoire de Chimie Mole´culaire (UMR CNRS 7509), Universite´ de Strasbourg,
ECPM 25 Rue Becquerel, 67087 Strasbourg, France
† Dedicated to the memory of Prof. Walther Schmidt.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00201k
Received 14th March 2018
DOI: 10.1039/c8cs00201k
rsc.li/chem-soc-rev
Chem Soc Rev
REVIEW ARTICLE
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
View Journal | View Issue

6604 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
the regioselectivity issued might be selectively tackled if
formation of a metallacyclic intermediate occurs. Since then,
a huge number of papers on the topic have been published,
expanding the scope of potential DGs and of chemical trans-
formations which can be carried out.
1.1.
Limitations to the use of C–H functionalisation in
molecules for R&D or in total synthesis
Most of the published contributions can be classified as method-
ological papers. Typically, substrates are designed which align
themselves nicely in order to allow a selective C–H cleavage. The
complexity of these substrates is typically limited, since they are
usually from the pool of readily available small molecules
featuring a standard functional group (FG) compatibility.
Applications in the field of R&D36–38 and total synthesis of
complex molecules39–45 have been reported, however those
remain the exception. For the former it is of course difficult
to get an objective view on the situation as most results
obtained in fine chemicals industry are never published. However,
when comparing the number of cross coupling reactions and
direct C–H functionalisations disclosed in the scientific litera-
ture by industry, one can safely conclude that the area is still
in its infancy. This is somewhat surprising, considering
the amount of transformations, which have been reported so
far from academia and the wide variety of DGs which can
potentially promote them. You might think that in a retro-
synthesis, you frequently run into situations, in which transi-
tion metal-catalysed C–H functionalisation would be a potential
and even the preferred option. So what are the reasons why
C–H functionalisation has not yet reached the level of general
applicability which related transformations, e.g. cross-coupling
reactions,
have
achieved
already
quite
some
time
ago?
Carlo Sambiagio
Carlo Sambiagio studied chemistry
at the University of Cagliari (IT),
acquiring his Master’s degree in
2011. He then moved to the Univer-
sity of Leeds (UK), completing his
PhD on Cu-catalysed cross-couplings
in 2015, under the supervision of
Prof. Patrick McGowan. After that
he spent two year as a postdoc in
the Maes group in Antwerp (BE),
mostly exploring aerobic oxidation
chemistry.
Carlo
has
recently
moved to the Eindhoven University
of Technology (NL) as a EU Marie
Curie fellow to work on flow chemistry with Prof. Timothy Noe¨l. His
interests generally include metal-catalysed transformations and the
development of new methodologies for organic synthesis.
David Scho¨nbauer
David Scho¨nbauer was born 1989
and is currently working towards
his PhD at Technische Universita¨t
Vienna in the Institute of Applied
Synthetic Chemistry, where he
also finished his Master studies
2017. His current research in the
field of C–H functionalisation is
supervised by Professor Michael
Schnu¨rch and focuses on the acti-
vation of C(sp3)–H bonds.
Joanna Wencel-Delord
Joanna
Wencel-Delord
was
educated in chemistry at the Ecole
Nationale Supe´rieure de Chimie de
Rennes, France and she received her
PhD in 2010 from the University of
Rennes 1, France (Dr C. Cre´visy and
Dr M. Mauduit). After postdoctoral
studies with Prof. F. Glorius at the
Westfa¨lische
Wilhelms-Universita¨t
Mu¨nster (Germany) and temporary
assistant professor position (ATER)
at the University of Strasbourg
(Prof. P. Compain), she joined
CNRS in 2013 as an associate
researcher in the group of Prof. F. Colobert (University of Strasbourg,
France). Her research focuses on the transition metal-catalysed
asymmetric C–H activation.
Tatiana Besset
Dr Tatiana Besset obtained her
doctoral
degree
in
organic
chemistry
(2009)
at
Grenoble
University
(Dr
Greene’s
group,
France).
She
then
moved
to
Mu¨nster WWU (Germany) as a
postdoctoral fellow in the group of
Prof. Glorius. In 2011, she joined
the group of Prof. Reek (Amsterdam
University, Netherlands), as a post-
doctoral fellow in collaboration
with
Eastman
company.
Since
2012, she is working as a CNRS
Associate Researcher in the team
headed by Prof. Pannecoucke, UMR 6014-CNRS, Rouen University,
INSA (France). Her research program is focused on transition metal-
catalysed C–H activation and the development of new strategies to
access fluorinated molecules.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6605
Considering cross-coupling reactions, it can be noticed that the
majority of coupling partners organometals and (pseudo)halides
(Suzuki–Miyaura, Stille, Negishi, Hiyama), or (pseudo)halides
and olefins (Heck) or alkynes (Sonogashira) in order to create
new C–C bonds without regioselectivity issues. Hence, in retro-
synthetic analysis, cross-coupling reactions are quickly identified
and nowadays these are standard transformations frequently
applied in all contexts of synthesis, also including the most
complex area of total synthesis of natural products. Additionally,
the metals applied are also only a few with Pd being the single
most important one dominating the field, followed by Cu and Ni
(recently). All other metals play only relative minor roles at the
moment, although research in this field is also increasing.
In case of C–H functionalisation, the situation is much more
complex due to the higher diversity in coupling partners which
often react via distinctively different reaction mechanisms, and
a large variety of specific additives which these reactions
require (often complex mixtures of reagents and additives are
required for each transformation). To facilitate the understanding
and the choice of a specific procedure, below are listed the
different types of additives and their roles in C–H functionalisa-
tion reactions. It is important to stress that, although the main
classes of additives and roles are relatively clear, many com-
pounds can have more than one distinct role in the reaction,
therefore their choice and combinations is not straightforward.
 Oxidants: most often Cu salts (commonly Cu(OAc)2), and
Ag salts (sometimes Mn salts) are used in stoichiometric
or superstoichiometric amounts in oxidative reactions. Other
oxidants, used alone or in combination with Cu or Ag are
benzoquinones, peroxides, O2/air, K2S2O8 or hypervalent iodine
compounds.
 Catalytic Ag salts: catalytic amounts of Ag salts are often
used in combination with groups 8 or 9 metal halide dimers,
commonly used as catalysts (e.g. [RhCp*Cl2]2). In these cases
the Ag acts as a halide scavenger, and the counteranion (usually
OTf, NTf2, or SbF6) promotes the in situ formation of cationic
metal catalysts in solution. When a suitable preformed cationic
metal catalyst is used, the addition of such additives is generally
not required.
 Carboxylates: carboxylates (acetates, benzoates, pivalates,
adamantanecarboxylates, trifluoroacetates and others) are very
Fig. 1
Examples of classical reactivity versus DG approach.
Bert U. W. Maes
Bert Maes obtained his PhD from
UAntwerpen
and
subsequently
received a prestigious post doc
position of the National Science
Foundation
in
Belgium
(FWO-
Flanders).
He
performed
post-
doctoral work in France at the
E´cole Normale Supe´rieure in Paris
with Prof. Anny Jutand, studying
fundamental
mechanisms
in
catalysis.
In
2003
he
was
appointed
assistant
professor
(docent) in the Department of
Chemistry
at
UAntwerpen.
He
currently is a full professor of Organic Chemistry and spokesman of
the Organic Synthesis division (ORSY). His research interests include
heterocyclic
chemistry,
organometallic
chemistry,
homogeneous
catalysis and sustainable chemistry.
Michael Schnu¨rch
MS received his PhD in 2005 from
TU Wien (supervisor Prof. Peter
Stanetty).
During
his
PhD-
studies, he was on a 4 month
sabbatical in the group of Prof.
Victor
Snieckus
at
Queens
University
(Kingston,
Ontario).
He was then post doc with Prof.
Dalibor
Sames
at
Columbia
University as Erwin Schro¨dinger
fellow. Then, he became Assistant
Professor
at
TU
Wien
and
completed
his
habilitation
in
2013.
Subsequently,
he
was
promoted to Associate Professor for Organometallic Chemistry in
2016, a position he still holds. Additionally, he is currently the Chair
of the COST Action CHAOS (C–H Activation in Organic Synthesis).
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6606 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
common additives in many C–H functionalisation protocols.
Their role is mostly related to their ability to deprotonate the desired
C–H bond, often via a concerted metallation–deprotonation (CMD)
pathway (also termed ambiphilic metal ligand activation
(AMLA)).2,46,47 These additives are generally added as acids in
stoichiometric or catalytic amounts, often in combination with
bases, or can be added as their Cu, Ag, Zn, Na salts.
 Ligands:
although
typically
no
external
ligands
are
required in C–H functionalisation reactions (the DG acts as
an ‘‘internal ligand’’), in some cases an external auxiliary
(catalytic amounts) is required to facilitate the reaction. These
can be phosphines, carbenes, mono-protected aminoacids (MPAA)
or other bidentate ligands. Noteworthy, the choice of the ligand will
strongly depend on the mechanism of a targeted transformation
(for instance Pd(II)/Pd(0) catalysis vs. Pd(II)/Pd(IV) catalytic cycle).
 Lewis acids: in this category many compounds can fall,
including some of the above. Although most often simple
compounds are used, such as Zn salts, the applied Lewis acids
span over a wide range of reagents also including more exotic
In/Gd salts or BPh3, as can be seen in the examples in this
review. These can display diﬀerent roles, including the activa-
tion of coupling partners (e.g. activation of ketones/aldehydes
in alkylation reactions), and can be added in stoichiometric
or catalytic amounts.
 Bases: a number of diﬀerent bases, usually inorganic
ones, e.g. carbonates are used to neutralize acids formed during
the reaction, or to facilitate deprotonation of the starting
materials/reactants/additives used. It is worth noting that common
bases used for cross coupling reactions, such as Cs2CO3, are
instead not often encountered in C–H functionalisation, while
Na, K, or Li counterparts are generally more effective (Ag2CO3 is
often used as both oxidant and base).
The variety of additives and reaction conditions encountered
in this field is also reflected by the range of metals which
are applied as catalysts. There is no such thing as a single
dominant metal species, but Pd,48,49 Rh,50,51 and Ru52–54 share
together the top spot. Moreover, increasing examples using
Ni,55–58 Co,55,59–64 Ir,64–66 Cu,67–69 Fe,3,55,63,70,71 and Mn72–74 are
appearing in the literature.
Naturally, such a manifold of metals with often distinctively
diﬀerent properties adds a lot of complexity to the field. This is
of course an advantage for method development, since it is only
logical that a larger pool of catalyst candidates allows also for a
larger variety of possible transformations. On the other hand,
the complexity has reached a level where it is very diﬃcult to
keep track of the developments and to get an overview of what
is actually possible in C–H functionalisations.
What does this mean for a synthetic chemist planning a
multistep synthesis of a molecule? The retrosynthetic disconnec-
tions might frequently lead to situations in which C–H function-
alisation chemistry could be applied. However, because of the
diversity of the field and the lack of a general and easy to
consult overview, its application is unfortunately not even
considered in many cases. This is the shortcoming which the
authors attempted to address by this review. So overall, this
review aims at giving a comprehensive overview on the types of
FGs available for transition metal-catalysed C–H cleavage
reactions and the types of transformation they allow, and the
associated required ‘‘reaction cocktail’’. This should be very
useful for taking this research field to the next step, the more
frequent application in syntheses, also at late stages of prolonged
synthetic sequences.
1.2.
Structure and scope of the review
Our aim in this review was to present the DGs and possible
transformations in a concise way so that all readers can easily find
the specific transformation looked for. Hence, the review is divided
in sections dedicated to specific types of DGs: (i) monodentate
carbonyl-containing DGs, (ii) bidentate DGs, (iii) heterocyclic DGs,
and (iv) heteroatom-based DGs (N, S, P, Si...). These main sections
are further subdivided into specific functional groups (e.g. ketones,
amides, etc.), and then into alkylations, alkenylations, arylations,
etc. In turns, for each of these subsections, the diﬀerent procedures
reported in the literature have been summarised in schemes,
making it easier to compare them with each other. To facilitate
this task, a list of advantages/disadvantages has been added for
each procedure, concerning issues such as selectivity, substrate
scope, reaction conditions, DG removal, and overall greenness.
We realise that said advantages/disadvantages can be some-
what subjective, and what is good for one purpose may not be
so good for another. For example, the use of halogenated
solvents has been considered as a drawback in this review.
This has not the aim of criticising the research methodology,
neither reducing the value of the results reported, but the use of
such solvents is a no-go in chemical manufacturing, and there-
fore is something that necessarily has disadvantages in terms of
that procedure being used for such a purpose. The same
reasoning applies to the other advantages/disadvantages con-
sidered in the review. In particular, among the drawbacks, the
following have been specifically listed: toxic solvents; reaction
temperatures 4 120 1C; reaction time 4 24 h; (most) yields o 70%;
superstoichiometric amounts of (metal) oxidants in oxidative
couplings; regio- or stereoisomeric mixtures; specific limitations
in scope or FG tolerance (e.g. sensitivity to steric hindrance); use
of additional ligands, unless in stereoselective reactions (the DG
is already a ligand, and most non-stereoselective procedures do
not require additional ligands). As positive aspects, the following are
instead considered: green(er) solvents; reaction temperature o
50 1C; reaction times o 10 h; (most) yields 4 80–90%; particularly
good FG tolerance (halide, methoxy, alkyl, ester and cyanide are
considered generally standard substituents, if something more
advanced, such as alkene, alkyne, boryl, silyl, or free NH/OH
groups are also tolerated, this has been mentioned as an
advantage); other substrates and other DGs available for the
reaction; DG removal (when specifically mentioned); in situ,
one-pot, or cascade processes; scalability. Other aspects have
not been mentioned as specific advantages/disadvantages,
mostly because of the lack of a real distinction between the
two; a catalyst loading up to 10 mol% metal has been considered
standard, as most protocols use these amounts, though it does
not mean this is what is acceptable for chemical development
purposes (higher than 10 mol% metal for expensive catalyst has
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6607
been considered specifically as a disadvantage); characteristic
of reactants have also not been generally considered (e.g.
availability or cost), as a large variety exist and price is heavily
depending on the scale required.
Another important aspect of the review is the stress that has
been placed on the DG removal. The removal of DGs is an
important drawback in C–H functionalisation chemistry, as the
DG might not be required after the directed step, and its removal
is therefore necessary (which is an extra synthetic step). Several
DGs are actually not removable (depending on the substrate as
well) which is no problem when they anyway constitute a
(precursor) part of the target molecule, while others are easily
removed or modified. We tried to incorporate all the possible
protocols for the removal or modification of the DGs in each
section, so that the reader will be immediately aware of what can
currently be done with the DG in use. This information is often
not reported in reviews dealing with C–H functionalisation. The
removal of the DG has also been listed as a specific advantage in
each procedure, in case this is specifically investigated by the
authors. So not being mentioned does not mean it could not be
done, it is just not reported in the original publication.
It has to be mentioned that sometimes diﬀerent publica-
tions use diﬀerent terms for the very same transformation. For
the sake of simplicity, in this review each transformation has
the same name in all entries. For example, the coupling of
olefins with arenes to give alkylated arenes is either classified
as alkylation or hydroarylation in literature. It was decided for
this review to look at the reaction product and see what
happened to the part of the molecule which carried the DG.
Hence, in case the arene carried the DG, the reaction is always
classified as an alkylation reaction.
This review aims at being comprehensive in the regard that
all DGs and potential transformations with the DG are listed,
however, reporting every single variant of a given transforma-
tion would just be beyond the scope of this review. In such
cases a selection had to be made by critically looking at the
reported protocols and choosing representative examples to
give a clear flavour on chemical diversity searched for by the
synthetic chemist. It is clear that such a selection will always be
biased and readers might find that one or the other example
should have been selected diﬀerently.
The speed in which new contributions are brought forward
in the field is amazing. This shows the high relevance of this
area of research and the potential of the field. For writers of a
review it brings certain problems as well, most importantly
which time frame to cover and which examples to include? As a
starting point, we used the very comprehensive review by
Zhanxiang Liu and Yuhong Zhang published in early 2015,
which covers literature until the end of 2014.17 Hence, our
review starts at the beginning of 2015 until the end of 2017.
2. Ketone DGs
The carbonyl group in ketones was historically amongst the
first DGs to be used in C–H functionalisation chemistry.
Already in 1993, a pioneering work for ketone-directed alkyla-
tions was published by Murai et al.35 In this landmark con-
tribution, the first highly efficient and selective C–H cleavage
with a simultaneous C–C bond formation mediated by a Ru
complex on different aromatic ketones (e.g. naphtyl, furan,
thiophene) with mono- and di-substituted olefins was shown.
The mechanism proposed in this paper served as blueprint for
many more contributions to come, and can be considered as
one of the most important starting points for the field of C–H
functionalisation chemistry, as we experience it today. It was
proposed that the carbonyl function first pre-coordinates the
metal catalyst, which brings it into a position in close proximity
to the C–H bond ortho to the ketone function (Fig. 2). This
allows C–H insertion of Ru into the C–H bond. Then, one PPh3
ligand is replaced by the olefin, first via p- then via s-bonding.
Finally, reductive elimination forms the new C–C bond and the
catalyst dissociates again.
25 years later, the field is still very active and new contribu-
tions are brought forward continuously and even though the
field has been recently reviewed,75 a significant number of new
contributions has been published, which will be treated in this
section. This is certainly due to the manifold of opportunities of
further manipulation a ketone allows, and also the ease of
introduction via various methods, e.g. Friedel–Crafts acylation.
From the very beginning, Ru proved to be especially well suited
for ketone-directed C–H activation reactions followed by Rh,
with other metals playing only a minor role.
2.1.
Arylation
Kakiuchi and co-workers tackled the problem of arylating
sterically demanding diaryl and aryl–alkyl ketones by designing
Ru catalysts of the general structures [RuHCl(CO)(PAr3)3] and
[RuH2(CO)(PAr3)3].76 3,30,5,50-Tetramethylbenzophenone served
as model substrate and a boronic acid ester as the aryl source.
Fig. 2
Murai’s ketone-directed alkylation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6608 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
For this substrate, [RuHCl(CO)(P(4-MeO-3,5-Me2C6H2)3)3] turned
out to be the best performing catalyst, whereas for the pivalo-
phenone derivative 1-(3,5-dimethylphenyl)-2,2-dimethylpropan-
1-one [RuH2(CO)(P(3-MeC6H4)3)3] performed best (Scheme 1A).
Again using boronic esters as aryl sources, Lu and Sun
developed a Rh catalysed protocol for arylating alkyl–aryl ketones
exclusively at the C(sp2)–H bond.77 Di-arylated products were not
observed, even in the absence of steric bulk. Additionally, yields
were generally excellent and frequently 490% (Scheme 1B).
Rao reported on a dimerization of aromatic ketones leading
to
2,20-dicarbonylated
biaryls
via
a
Pd(II)–Pd(IV)
catalytic
cycle (Scheme 1C).78 Substituted benzophenone derivatives
and also alkyl–aryl ketones worked well towards the homo-
dimers. More importantly, the authors showed that also two
different ketone substrates can be applied leading to hetero-
coupling
products
in
yields
between
61–82%.
In
these
cases, the more electron-rich ketone had to be used in excess.
This is a significant improvement to traditional routes towards
the same type of products.79,80 Furthermore, the method was
not limited to ketones as DG but also esters and carbamates
were applied.
An example which can be counted to arylation reactions
as well is the synthesis of [60]fullerene-fused tetralones via a
Pd catalysed protocol.81 [60]Fullerene reacted with a series of
alkyl–aryl ketones. Even though the yields were low (10–31%),
this is an interesting example showing the diversity of possible
coupling partners (Scheme 1D).
Ramana investigated the C3-arylation of 2-arylbenzofurans
using either arylboronic acids or the corresponding potassium
trifluoroborates as the aryl source.82 Almost the same conditions
as for their alkylation protocol could be used (see Section 2.2)
but interestingly AgOAc had a detrimental eﬀect and only in its
absence, high yields were obtained and also excellent FG
tolerance was observed (Scheme 1E).
2.2.
Alkylation
In 2015, the group of Prabhu reported on the addition of
maleimides mainly to acetophenones, which is formally an
alkylation reaction (Scheme 2A).83 Also 2-acetylthiophene was
a suitable starting material, however with a decreased yield of
54%, whereas two benzophenone derivatives were as eﬃcient
as the acetophenones. Noteworthy are the DFT studies in this
contribution, which strongly favour a CMD mechanism over an
electrophilic aromatic substitution or a mechanism involving
an oxidative addition. One year later, Kim and Kim reported a
similar protocol applied to chromones and xanthones.84 By
switching to a Rh catalyst, they could reduce the catalyst
loading significantly (Scheme 2B). Acetyl-directed alkylation
(as well as amidation and alkenylation) was also reported by
Zhang (Scheme 2C).85 Relatively high catalyst and ligand loadings
were required but on the upside, an uncommon substrate,
tetraphenylene, was used in this transformation.
Recently, an Fe catalysed alkylation protocol was published
by Kakiuchi and co-workers (Scheme 2D).86 Using simple
Fe(PMe3)4 as catalyst without any additional ligand or other
additives, alkyl–aryl ketones were alkylated with substituted
olefins (mainly alkenyl silanes) in excellent yields under neat
conditions. Also cyclic alkyl–aryl ketones (e.g. 2,2-dimethyltetralone)
could be used as substrates. Diaryl ketones did not react as
efficiently and required higher catalyst loading and trialkylation
was observed as the major product. The proposed mechanism
followed the initial suggestion by Murai.35
One rare example of ortho methylation was recently disclosed
by Ilies and Nakamura (Scheme 2E).87 AlMe3 served as alkyl
source and simple Fe(acac)3 as catalyst. However, the addition of
a less common ligand, Me2N-TP (see Scheme 2E) was necessary.
As usual in most of such alkylation reactions, mixtures of mono-
and di-alkylated products were obtained if permitted by the
Scheme 1
Ketone-directed arylations.
Scheme 2
Ketone-directed alkylations.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6609
substrate structure. In the same paper also carboxylic acids
were used as DGs (see Section 4).
All examples so far gave exclusively the synthesis of linear
products. However, Ramana and co-workers showed that
tuning the catalytic system allowed to switch between linear and
branched products in the C3-alkylation of 2-aroylbenzofurans
with acrylates (Scheme 3A).88 Whereas the selectivity for branched
products was generally in the 9/1 (branched/linear) range, for
linear products it was often significantly lower. Recently, the
group published a follow-up paper trying to elucidate via DFT
calculations how the linear/branched selectivity was controlled.89
They calculated transition states leading either to the linear or
to the branched products, which are both feasible pathways.
The transition state towards the branched product turned
out to be significantly lower in energy, which goes in line with
the experimental observations. Furthermore, the method was
extended to the C2-alkylation of 3-aryloxybenzofurans.89 On
this second type of substrates, the linear product was preferred
with high selectivity (20/1) and no protocol for the branched
products was disclosed (Scheme 3B).
The
very
same
reagent
was
also
used
for
another
functionalisation/cyclisation sequence using 3-ketoindoles as
substrates (Scheme 3C and D).90 Initially, the authors found
two products, the one alkylated in C4, and one derived from
alkylation and subsequent cyclisation in C2. At the beginning,
they could successfully optimise the reaction towards selective
formation of the C4 alkylated products with good to excellent
yields (36–98%). Subsequently, also the second type of products
could be obtained selectively, however, generally in lower yields
(B10% lower) for similar examples. In both cases, [RhCp*Cl2]2
was used as the catalyst, but the additives differed, as can be
seen in Scheme 3C and D.
An interesting example has been reported by Wan and Li.91
Using phenylacyl ammonium salts as substrates (which can
also be produced in situ) in combination with a-diazo esters
led to benzocyclanone products (Scheme 3E). Key was the
unprecedented presence of an oxidizing C–N bond in the
substrates which allowed this overall redox-neutral process.
Detailed mechanistic studies were carried out, including
DFT calculations.
The group of Zhu used enaminone starting materials for the
synthesis of naphthalene derivatives using either a-diazo-b-
ketoesters (Scheme 3F) or alkynes (Scheme 4H) as coupling
partners.92 In case of a-diazo-b-ketoesters as coupling partners
the initial step is an alkylation and good FG tolerance on
the substrate was observed. Synthetically useful yields between
50–85% were reported and various alkyl residues including
cyclopropyl can be in position R2.
2.3.
Alkenylation
Yu explored the application of distal weakly coordinating DGs,
including ketones (Scheme 4A).93 In this report, the ketone
functionality is not directly attached to the aromatic ring but
separated by a –CH2–, or in one case a –CH2CH2– spacer. Yields
for the reaction with acrylates are moderate and selectivity
between mono- and di-alkenylation is an issue.
Bakthadoss et al. showed that basically the same reaction
conditions could be applied for the alkenylation of chroma-
nones as well, in this case in dioxane as solvent (Scheme 4B).94
Yields were commonly good (60–81%) and the typical range of
FGs was tolerated.
Again on tetraphenylenes, Zhang also reported alkenylation
reactions (Scheme 4C).85 In this case, the catalyst loading could
be significantly reduced and no ligand was required, although
2 equiv. of Cu had to be used. Besides acrylates, also alkenyl
sulfoxides and -phosphates as well as styrene derivatives could
be used.
Szostak’s group showed the ketone-directed hydroarylation of
internal alkynes leading to alkenylated arenes (Scheme 4D).95
A low Ru loading could be applied; however the E/Z ratio left
room for improvement. In this contribution, the DG showed
significant variation as opposed to many contributions which
relied primarily on the acetyl group. Further elaboration of the
obtained alkenylated products to a series of useful compounds
was also demonstrated.
Prabhu and co-workers showed that a ketone DG in position
3 of indoles leads to alkenylated products either at the C2- or
C4-position.96 The source of this regioselectivity is primarily
the electronic nature of the DG. For R = Me/Et, alkenylation
took place in C2-position under Ru catalysis (Scheme 4E).96
Scheme 3
Ketone-directed alkylation on carbo- and heterocycles.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6610 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Also an amide DG gave the same regioselectivity. In case of
R = t-butyl, di-alkenylation in C2- and C4-position was observed
and for R = phenyl di-alkenylation in C2-position and on the DG
occurred. For R = CF3 and using a Rh catalyst, exclusive C4
alkenylation was observed (Scheme 4F).96 Trying to elucidate
the origin of this regioselectivity, the authors have reason to
believe that COCF3 is the weaker coordinating DG, which
eventually does not direct C–H activation by precoordination
but rather stabilizes a metal–arene s complex that forms due to
electrophilic metallation. An ester or an aldehyde as DG also
gave C4 alkenylation. Such examples, giving guidelines for
achieving different regioselectivity, are of significant importance
for further promoting the application of C–H functionalisation
in complex syntheses.
Another peculiar ketone DG was developed by Lan and Li,
namely phenylacyl ammonium salts (Scheme 4G).91 Using a
Rh catalyst, ortho alkenylation was obtained in good yields
with styrene derivatives. However, also alkyl substituted olefins
could be applied with the drawback that sometimes, mixtures
of E and Z isomers were obtained. It is noteworthy that the
ammonium group was cleaved during the reaction, overall leading
to ortho alkenylated acetophenone derivatives. Noteworthy,
the reaction does not require an external oxidant since the
ammonium salt of the DG takes over this role.
The group of Zhu used enaminone starting materials for the
synthesis of naphthalene derivatives using either alkynes
(Scheme 4H) or a-diazo-b-ketoesters (Scheme 3F) as coupling
partners.92 In the case of alkynes, only 1,2-diphenylacetylene
was used as reaction partner but good FG tolerance on the
substrate was observed and synthetically useful yields between
50–85% were reported. According to the proposed mechanism,
the initial step is a Rh-catalysed alkenylation.
2.4.
Alkynylation and acylation
One example of an alkynylation reaction was reported by Jiang
and Huo (Scheme 5A).97 TIPS protected bromo acetylene was
used as alkyne source under Ir(III) catalysis. Aromatic and
heteroaromatic ketones worked equally well and a range of
substituents were tolerated with good yields (generally B70%).
On the downside was the large amount of a mixture of three
diﬀerent Ag salts and the requirement for halogenated solvents.
Esters can be used as alternative DGs, although the ketone
showed a better directing eﬀect, whereas an amide or pyrazole
DG were superior to the ketone. Such studies, allowing the
ranking of directing ability of diﬀerent DGs, are unfortunately
rare but extremely important for the application of C–H
functionalisation to the synthesis/modification of complex
molecules, carrying many FGs.
Decarboxylative acylation was reported by Yu and co-workers
(Scheme 5B).98 As acyl source, a-oxocarboxylic acids were used
Scheme 4
Ketone-directed olefinations on various substrates.
Scheme 5
Ketone-directed
alkynylation,
acylation
and
C–N
bond
formation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6611
under Pd catalysis. The authors suggested an acyl radical as
important intermediate, which was supported by a radical
trapping experiment with TEMPO.
2.5.
C–N bond formation
Ackermann disclosed Ru catalysed imidation of aryl–tbutyl
ketones using N-tosyloxyphthalimides (Scheme 5C).99 The obtained
products were easily transformed to the corresponding amines
using standard conditions (N2H4), which gave valuable 2-amino-
phenones. Those can be converted to a series of nitrogen
containing heterocycles.
Using aromatic or aliphatic sulfonyl azides, it was again
Zhang who showed amidation of terpenylenes with high FG
tolerance (Scheme 5D).85
Dioxazolones became popular amidating agents in recent
years in the field of C–H activation. Interestingly, two groups
almost simultaneously exploited this reagent on enaminones.
Zhu and co-workers developed a Co(III)-catalysed protocol,100
whereas Li developed Co(III)-and Rh(III)-catalysed reactions.101
The two Co(III)-catalysed protocols used both [Cp*Co(CO)I2] as
catalyst (Scheme 5E). The substrate scope and yield (typically
480%) were comparable and all common FGs seemed to
be tolerated. The amidated product was then transformed to
4-quinolones under acidic conditions (not shown).
3. Aldehydes as DGs
Aldehydes are frequently applied in C–H functionalisation
chemistry in case of the formation of so-called ‘‘transient’’
DGs, where a DG is formed and cleaved in situ. A prominent
example is the formation of imines from aldehydes (or ketones)
and amines. Since this subject has been reviewed very
recently,102,103 this type of chemistry is not included in this
chapter and only examples where the aldehyde function is the
actual DG are discussed. Hence, in the timeframe covered by
this review, only three examples have been reported and only in
one example the aldehyde function remains in the final products,
whereas in the other two examples it acts as traceless DG.
The first example used the aldehyde function as a traceless
DG in a Rh catalysed reaction with alkynes (Scheme 6A).104
2-Aryl-3-formylindoles were used as starting materials. In the
first
step
(according
to
the
proposed
mechanism),
the
aldehyde-directed an alkenylation at C2-position of the indole
core. Rh was then suggested to be involved in the decarbonyla-
tion process and further activation of a C–H bond of the N-aryl
group as well leading overall to indolo[1,2-a]quinolones in high
yields (up to 94%, frequently 480%), which is overall an
elegant access to this system.
Also in the second example, the aldehyde DG was removed
under the applied reaction conditions, this time in an arylation
protocol (Scheme 6B).105 Initially, salicylaldehyde was used as
the starting material and aryl iodides as coupling partner.
Arylation took place ortho to the formyl group, which was
cleaved under the applied reaction conditions leading overall
to meta substituted phenols in yields around 50%. Regarding the
mechanism, experiments actually pointed towards a reaction
sequence in which the first step is the oxidation of the salicyl-
aldehyde to salicyclic acid (which would mean that the actual DG
is the acid function), which is then removed via decarboxylation.
The advantage of starting from the aldehyde function is that
salicylic aldehyde derivatives could be prepared much more
easily from the corresponding phenols than salicylic acids.
The one example keeping the aldehyde function reported
sulfamidation of indoles in position 4 (Scheme 6C).106 This Ir
catalysed method could be run at room temperature and delivered
typically high yields of the desired products. Noteworthy, the
application of the method to a gram scale synthesis was reported
showing the scalability of this transformation.
4. Carboxylic acids as DG
Even though carboxylic acids are a frequently occurring FG, it
has been added rather late to the repertoire of DGs. The
majority of contributions regarding carboxylic acid-directed
ortho C–H functionalisation were only made since the late
2000s and the field has been recently reviewed.107,108
The benefits of carboxylic acids as DGs are quite striking as
they are naturally abundant and relatively easy to introduce. They
can either be cleaved or further transformed via decarboxylative
coupling reactions, often possible to perform in situ or in one-pot
fashion.109,110 Furthermore, the possibility to remove the group
catalytically led to the development of its use as a traceless
DG.111 However, carboxylates are usually weakly coordinating
to the catalyst and are often disfavoured in comparison to
stronger DGs (e.g. pyridines, bidentate amides). They can also
undergo undesired side reactions such as hydrodecarboxyla-
tion as these are also catalysed by transition metals,112 which is
an additional diﬃculty in developing carboxylic acid-directed
C–H functionalisation processes.
4.1.
C(sp2)–H activation
4.1.1.
Arylation. Within this section, the recent advances in
directed ortho arylation reactions are divided into: (i) arylations
keeping the carboxylic acid moiety intact, (ii) arylations with
carboxylates as traceless DGs, and (iii) methods in which the
arylated product undergoes a consecutive ring-closing reaction
with the carboxylate DG. Before 2015 arylations were widely
Scheme 6
Aldehyde-directed C–H functionalisation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6612 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
catalysed by Pd, with other metals applied only scarcely.17
Recent years showed more and more other transition metals
such as Rh, Ir or Ru becoming of greater importance.
For example, the group of Gooßen developed a protocol
using aryldiazonium salts as aryl sources, which was catalysed by
Ir and proceeded at a mild temperature of 60 1C (Scheme 7A).113
Additionally, only a sub-stoichiometric amount of base and
Ag salt was needed and acetone was used as solvent. Notably
the weakly coordinating carboxylic acid controlled the regio-
selectivity even if ‘‘stronger’’ DGs are present (e.g. o-acetamide).
The regioselectivity was greatly influenced by steric factors. If
meta substituted acids were the substrates, the easier accessible
position was arylated exclusively and if both meta positions
were occupied, no conversion took place. The parent benzoic
acid gave a 1 : 1 mixture of mono- and di-arylated product. The
transformation converted a wide range of diﬀerent diazonium
salts. However, heterocyclic salts did not react.113
Coupling with aryl halides was achieved with both Pd
(Scheme 7B and C) and Ru (Scheme 7D–G). Ren (Scheme 7B)
reported a selective mono-arylation with aryl iodides in water
(with the use of TWEEN 20 as a surfactant).114 The yields were
generally good to excellent. However, some sensitivity to steric
hindrance in ortho substituted benzoic acids was observed. For
instance, in comparison to 4-chlorobenzoic acid (88% yield),
the 2-chloro acid reacted more slowly, and only 73% yield
was reported.
Weiping Su reported another Pd catalysed arylation115
(Scheme 7C). The reaction used a mono-protected amino acid
(MPAA) as a ligand, proceeded at room temperature and tolerated
a broad range of substrates. However, this reaction was more
sensitive to substitution in the ortho position to the acid moiety.
Even the relative small methyl group reduced the yield by 20%
compared to its para and meta regioisomers. The authors stated
that the formation of the palladacycle might be prevented due to
steric reasons, which also explains the exclusive monoarylation of
this transformation.
Ru-Catalysed approaches were investigated by several groups
(Scheme 7D–F). For example, Larrosa reported an arylation using
aryl iodides in t-BuCN as a solvent (Scheme 7D).116 Several
different aryl iodides were used as reactants in this protocol.
Generally, para and meta substituted iodides gave better yields
and electronic properties seemed to have a minor influence on
the reactivity. Acids substituted in ortho position gave usually
excellent yields. Remarkably, 3,6-disubstituted benzoic acids
provided the arylated products as well, despite the considerable
steric hindrance. However, if meta substituted acids were used
3.0 equiv. of water had to be added and di-arylation became an
issue. Its extent depended mainly on steric congestion of the
substituents. para substituted acids gave the di-arylated products
exclusively. The protocol was also applicable to indole carboxylic
acids in various positions and even in certain cases without any
protection of the indole nitrogen.
With the help of Ru catalysis, significant improvement was
made in making aryl bromides and chlorides applicable for this
kind of chemistry: Gooßen developed a catalytic system with
[Ru(p-cymene)Cl2]2 and PEt3HBF4, which gave good yields with
aryl bromides as substrates (Scheme 7E).117 The corresponding
chlorides could be transformed as well, when pipecolinic acid
was used as ligand instead of triethyl phosphine. Both protocols
converted a broad range of diﬀerent substrates. Synthetically
useful was as well the possibility to protodecarboxylate the
product in situ using a Cu catalyst. A very similar system
Scheme 7
Arylation with carboxylic acids as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6613
by Weix (Scheme 7F) used aryl iodides (and bromides) as
substrates.118 Even a broad scope of heteroaryl halides was reported
for this transformation. Furthermore, when 2-iodophenols were
used as substrates, an additional lactone formation oﬀered an
access to benzochromenones (see also Scheme 8A). Interestingly in
both protocols, ketones or amides did not act as competing DGs,
which opened possibilities for consecutive C–H functionalisation.
Ackermann reported a protocol with PCy3 as ligand and
([Ru(MesCO2)2( p-cymene)]) as precatalyst (Scheme 7G).119 Aryla-
tion with the corresponding aryl bromides proceeded smoothly.
Additionally, alkenes and alkynes were suitable substrates to
achieve alkenylations/alkynylations similar to the transforma-
tions shown in the previous section. Both methods used NMP as
solvent and K2CO3 as base.
All mentioned Ru catalysed protocols did not need any
halogen scavenger (e.g. Ag salt) to facilitate the reaction
(Scheme 7D–G). However, di-arylation could not be suppressed
by neither of the protocols, which made the use of ortho
substituted acids mandatory. This is in contrast to the Pd
catalysed reactions (Scheme 7B and C). In such cases if a meta
substituent at the carboxylic acid was used, the reactions
proceeded regioselectively due to steric reasons.
In the field of oxidative C–H activations, transformations
with the retention of the DG and also annulations were
reported (Schemes 7H, I and 8A–C). Chao-Jun Li reported an
cross-dehydrogenative Rh catalysed homocoupling of benzoic
acid derivatives.120 The protocol was later improved to achieve
heterocoupling between electron-rich and electron-poor acids
(Scheme 7H).121 Another cross-dehydrogenative C–H activation
developed by You122 used thiophene and furan derivatives as
coupling partners (see Scheme 7I). The reaction was again
catalysed by a Rh species and showed good FG tolerance.
Notably, a subsequent intramolecular Pd catalysed oxidative
coupling between the acid and the C3 position of the hetero-
cycle gave the corresponding lactones.
Arylation could also be achieved using phenylacetic acid
derivatives under Pd catalysis via 6-membered metallacyles.
One contribution used –OH protected mandelic acid to func-
tionalise in ortho position to the residue (Scheme 7J).123 As
expected under Pd catalysis, mono-arylation was observed and
substrates with ortho substituents to the DG failed to react. It
is noteworthy that the stereochemistry in case of a chiral
substrate is completely retained.
Regarding arylations that are followed by a ring closing
reaction, the already mentioned protocol developed in the
group of Weix (see Scheme 7F) yielded chromenones if a
hydroxy group was present ortho to the halide (Scheme 8A).124
In the group of Jingsong You an oxidative Pd catalysed aryla-
tion, followed by in situ ring closure via acylation (Scheme 8B)
was developed.125
A rather unusual double C–H activation reaction also
formed polycycles upon lactonization (Scheme 8C).126 Quite
interestingly, the first C–H activation is actually directed by
the sulfur atom of a thioether and only at a later stage of the
catalytic cycle coordination to the carboxylic acid occurred.
As previously mentioned, carboxylic acids could also be
applied as traceless DGs. The first (although in a separate
reaction after workup) protocol using this idea was developed
by Daugulis in 2007.127 The development towards a one-pot
protocol in 2011 could be seen as the start of the quest towards
the application of carboxylic acids as traceless DGs.128 This
approach is very convenient and enhances the utility of directed
C–H functionalisation, since the removal of DGs can be diffi-
cult. Recent progress in the traceless carboxylic acid-directed
arylations over the last years are summarized in Scheme 9A–D.
The coupling of aryl iodides with salicylic acid derivatives was
achieved by the use of PdPEPPSI-IPr as catalyst (Scheme 9A).129
Both electron-poor and -rich aryl iodides were good coupling
partners in this regioselective protocol, although meta sub-
stituted iodides were not well tolerated, possibly due to steric
reasons. Diﬀerent salicylic acid derivatives could be converted
with good yields. However, very electron-rich substrates gave
lower yield, due to protodecarboxylation. Industrially appealing
is the option to substitute the sub-stoichiometric amount of Ag
salt with environmentally more benign tetramethylammonium
chloride. In a previous study the same group showed that the
typically required Ag salts, which are regenerating the catalyst
after the catalytic cycle, can be replaced with a quaternary
ammonium salt.130
Notably, pyridine carboxylic acids could also be function-
alised (Scheme 9B), which is remarkable since C–H function-
alisation on electron-poor heterocycles is rarely reported.131
Scheme 8
Annulation reactions.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6614 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
The protocol was applicable with retention of the carboxylic
acid. However, a decarboxylative protocol (Cu catalysis) was
also reported in the same contribution. A competing experi-
ment with 6-phenylpyridine-3-carboxylic acid showed that the
carboxylic acid overrules the DG ability of pyridine. The com-
pound is arylated in 4-position (43%) and only small amounts
(4%) of arylation at the phenyl moiety were observed.
Oxidative heteroarylation (mainly with thiophenes) was
established with [RhCp*Cl2]2 as catalyst and Ag2CO3 as oxidant
(Scheme 9C and D).132,133 Both methods showed a good sub-
strate scope, including nitriles, acetamides or halides, but
diﬀered in their use of additives and solvent.
4.1.2.
Alkylation and allylation. The addition to maleimides
with the carboxylate as traceless DG has been reported rather
recently. Ackermann and co-workers used a Ru carboxylate
catalyst for this transformation (Scheme 10A).134 The reaction
conditions were optimised with the support of DFT calculations.
They commenced their theoretical studies with the Ru catalysed
alkenylation with alkynes (Scheme 13B–D). In contrast to
the already mentioned computational study by the group of
Hong135,136 their calculations showed no significant solvent
effect of this reaction. They continued the study towards the
alkylation with maleimides for which they calculated also a
negligible solvent effect. The reaction tolerated several FGs (CN,
F, Br, I, NO2) and also heteroaromatic acids were converted.
The
scope
included
several
ortho-
and
para-substituted
acids, which gave only one product. Additionally, one example
with a phenyl residue meta to the acid was given. In this
case, functionalisation in C6-position occurred exclusively.
Additionally, also cyclohexenecarboxylic acid and different
acrylic acids were convertible by this transformation (61–81%
yield, Scheme 10A).134 Baidya also used a Ru catalyst for the
same transformation, obtaining very similar results regarding
yields, scope and regioselectivity (Scheme 10B).137 Interestingly
with
[Ru(p-cymene)Cl2]2
as
precatalyst,
the
addition
of
base is necessary. A Rh catalysed protocol was also reported
(Scheme 10C).138 This rather fast reaction also worked on
substituted acrylic and heteroaromatic acids as substrates.
However, no electron-deficient acids were reported. This time
the addition of acetic acid to the reaction mixture was
necessary. Interestingly, the three mentioned protocols differed
in their need of acid or bases. Whereas in the first transforma-
tion (Scheme 10A) neither acid nor base was needed. The other
two needed either base (Scheme 10B) or acid (Scheme 10C) in
the reaction mixtures.
Quite interesting was an intramolecular allylation (Fujiwara–
Moritani reaction) catalysed by an electron poor Rh complex
(Scheme 10D).139 Presumably, the carboxylate-directed the ortho
C–H functionalisation.
The ketone-directed methylation reported in Scheme 2 was
also eﬀective using carboxylic acids (Scheme 10E).140 This rare
example of Fe catalysis proceeded under mild conditions with
good FG tolerance. Furthermore, this transformation was also
applicable with esters and amides.
4.1.3.
Alkenylation. In the area of alkenylation reactions, two
main reaction types can be distinguished: (i) oxidative reactions with
olefins or alkynes followed by annulation to yield the corresponding
lactones, typically employing Ag or Cu as oxidants (Scheme 11)141
(ii) secondly, oxidative couplings with olefins without annulation
(Scheme 13A and E–G), and (iii) hydroarylation reactions with
alkynes under redox-neutral conditions (Scheme 13B–D).142
Major advances were made in the use of Ru catalysis and also
a reaction with Co was published. Ackermann and co-workers
reported a quite interesting example of a mild reaction, that used
only oxygen as oxidant (Scheme 11A).143 The transformation gave
good to excellent yields with good FG tolerance at 45 1C in
methanol. Importantly, unsymmetrical alkyl–aryl alkynes gave a
single regioisomer placing the alkyl group in the C4 position of
the final product.
Scheme 9
Arylation with carboxylic acids as traceless DG.
Scheme 10
Alkylation and allylation reactions directed by carboxylic
acids.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6615
A Rh catalysed annulation developed by Tanaka also pro-
ceeded under very mild conditions (Scheme 11B).144 However,
the use of DCM made this protocol environmentally less
attractive. The authors classified the used alkynes into three
groups depending on their coordination ability to the catalyst
and developed three diﬀerent protocols accordingly. They diﬀer
in the amount of Cu salt and the use of diﬀerent additives and
solvent. These variations enlarge the scope of applicable alkynes
and might make the protocol applicable in the synthesis of more
complex molecules and can be used as a guideline for a devel-
opment of specific reaction conditions. Despite the low tempera-
ture, the reaction showed limited FG tolerance on the substrates
and gave regioisomeric mixtures if unsymmetrical alkynes were
used. Notably, though, the reaction also worked with hetero-
aromatic acids and methacrylic acids as substrates.144
The first carboxylic acid-directed C–H functionalisation with
(mainly) diaryl alkynes catalysed by Co was reported by Sundar-
araju (Scheme 11C).145 Different acids could be converted with
good to excellent yields (61–92%). Unsymmetrical alkyl–aryl
alkynes gave regioisomeric mixtures with a preference for the
isomer with the alkyl residue in C4-position and the aryl moiety
in C3-position of the products. Quite interestingly, if a strong
chelating group such as an azaindoyl moiety was installed at
the para position to the carboxylic acid, the directing effect was
still ensured by the acid. Similar to the Rh catalysed annulation
by Tanaka (Scheme 11B), the protocol also converted methacrylic
acids with good yields. Notably, unsubstituted acrylic acid could
also be converted, albeit with low yield (33%).
One example for the formation of isocoumarines without the use
of alkynes, was reported by Ting-Bin Wen 2016 (Scheme 11D).146
This protocol utilises vinyl acetates and is a rare example of
a
C–H
functionalisation
with
electron-rich
olefins.
Both
electron-rich and -poor carboxylic acids were tolerated and no
di-alkenylated product was observed. The reaction proceeded
smoothly with arylvinyl acetates as reactants. However, if
alkylvinyl acetates were used, a five membered lactone with
an exocyclic double bond (Z selective) was observed as a side
product in considerable amounts (not shown).
The same Rh species gave the aforementioned 5-membered
lactones as the main products, if electron-deficient olefins were
used instead. Acrylic esters were transformed regioselectively
with moderate to good yields into 5 membered lactones with
exocyclic olefins with E selectivity (Scheme 11E).147 Although
dialkenylation did not occur, ortho unsubstituted acids gave
usually lower conversions.
Both mentioned protocols used stoichiometric amounts of
Cu or Ag salts as oxidants, which is clearly a disadvantage
regarding environmental sustainability. An interesting alterna-
tive to several transformations regarding the oxidant was
reported by the group of Wang.148 N–O containing molecules
were used as an external oxidant and might be an alternative
approach to certain transformations.
A
special
decarboxylative
annulation
to
six-membered
lactones of a-ketoacids with Cu(OAc)2 as oxidant was also
reported under Ru catalysis (Scheme 11F).149 The reported
substrate scope included chloro and free hydroxy substituents
on the acid moiety. However, only internal symmetric alkynes
were reported (alkyl as well as aryl residues).
This reaction proceeds via the formation of an initial eight-
membered ruthenacycle. After uptake of oxygen, incorporated
Scheme 11
Alkenylations directed by carboxylic acids to access lactones.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6616 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
in the carbonyl group of the product, carbon dioxide is
released, and the catalytic Rh(II) species is reformed by oxida-
tion (Scheme 11, bottom right).
As an example of an activation at a non-aromatic C(sp2)–H
bond, the formation of a-pyranones was reported by Gogoi and
co-workers (Scheme 11G).150 The reaction proceeded under Ru
catalysis and the b carbon of a cinnamic acid derivative was
activated. Subsequent insertion of an alkyne and reductive
elimination furnished the six-membered ring. This transforma-
tion converted heteroaromatic cinnamic acids as well with
good yields and accepted both diaryl as well as dialkyl alkynes.
However, the use of unsymmetrical alkynes gave mixtures.
Under diﬀerent reaction conditions, saturated lactones can
be formed instead of unsaturated ones, depending on the use
of oxidant and/or the used coupling partners (alkynes, olefins)
of the protocols. As can be seen in Scheme 12, ortho-directed
alkenylations and subsequent nucleophilic attack of the car-
boxylate group, followed by protonation, resulted in saturated
5-membered lactones. Shishido reported a transformation with
unsymmetrical internal alkynes under ZrO2 supported Ru
catalysis (Scheme 12A).151 Notably, the catalyst could be
recycled for at least five runs and the reaction required only a
catalytic amount of base. The regioselectivity was generally
good. However, not a broad FG tolerance was reported.
Substantially milder reaction conditions were suﬃcient for
the oxidative coupling with acrylates (Scheme 12B).152 Under O2
atmosphere and a reaction temperature of 60–80 1C, bromo and
iodo substituents were tolerated and no di-alkenylated product
was observed. A similar cyclisation was also reported by Zhu for
cyclic acrylic acids (Scheme 12C).153 The reaction was catalysed
by a Rh complex and Cu(OAc)2 was used as oxidant. Quite
interestingly, under the reaction conditions (acidic, metal salts
and 120 1C) N-Boc protected substrates were converted with
moderate yields without any cleavage of the carbamate.
Alkenylation without annulation and subsequent decarboxylation
could be achieved with alkenes under oxidative conditions or with
alkynes under redox-neutral conditions. These transformations
make meta substituted aryls more easily accessible if an ortho
substituted acid is used as substrate and in situ protodecarboxylated.
In recent literature, alkenylation protocols by the Ackermann154
(Scheme 13B), Hartwig/Zhao155 (Scheme 13C) and Gooßen156,157
groups (Scheme 13D) have appeared.
All three protocols used Ru complexes that catalysed the
alkenylation as well as the in situ decarboxylation. Ackermann
also included a report of an oxidative coupling between salicylic
acids
and
electron-poor
olefins,
using
V2O5
as
oxidant
(Scheme 13A).154 For this transformation, the FG tolerance
regarding the olefin was quite good. However, the alkenylation
with internal alkynes (Scheme 13B) converted also benzoic acid
derivatives and was not restricted to salicylic acids.154 Further-
more, examples with aryl and alkyl (also unsymmetrical)
alkynes were provided. Interestingly, nitro-, fluoro- and bromo
groups ortho to the acid were tolerated and gave moderate to
good yields. Both para and ortho residues to the acid naturally
gave the corresponding meta products. However no example
of meta substituted acids (to potentially generate the para
alkenylated product) was reported.
A very similar protocol by Hartwig and Zhao (Scheme 13C)
demonstrated a broad substrate scope.155 The same substitu-
tion pattern regarding the acid was reported with comparable
yields (ortho and para substituents to COOH). As expected, meta
substituted substrates delivered mixtures of regioisomers. However,
if sterically more demanding substituents (e.g. –NMe2, –iPr, –tBu)
Scheme 12
Alkenylation directed by carboxylic acids and subsequent
annulation to alkylated lactones.
Scheme 13
Alkenylation directed by carboxylic acids.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6617
were used, the para substituted product (after decarboxylation)
was formed regioselectively.
Interestingly, in comparison to Ackermann’s protocol, nitro
groups on the acid were not tolerated, but the unsubstituted
benzoic acid gave a much higher yield (80% vs. 43% in
Ackermann’s protocol). Upon the addition of 20 mol% Cu(OAc)2,
good regioselectivity of aryl–alkyl alkynes was achieved (placing
the aryl residue on the sterically less demanding position of the
olefin product).
Gooßen developed a similar protocol for methyl aryl alkynes
(not shown)157 that was tailored towards a larger substrate
scope (see Scheme 13D).156 Additionally, a considerably faster
version under microwave irradiation was also reported. The
scope for both protocols was broad and no additional additives
were necessary to convert asymmetric alkynes.
Regarding the mechanism of the reported Ru catalysed
alkenylation reactions, a computational study by Hong gave
possible insights to the selectivity of these transformations.135
It was shown, that the chemoselectivity (i.e. consecutive
annulation versus decarboxylation) was strongly depending on
the size of the ruthenacylce prior to the decarboxylation and the
polarity of the solvent used.
The alkenylation of indoles was achieved via Rh catalysis
under relatively harsh conditions, since DCM had to be heated
to 100 1C (Scheme 13E).158 This transformation made fluorescence-
active indoles easily accessible as it gave the di-alkenylated
compounds exclusively.
One example of a decarboxylative annulation was the
formation of polyarenes by C–H functionalisation of diphenyl
acetic acids (Scheme 13F).159 The transformation was catalysed
by Pd(OAc)2 with a MPAA as ligand. First the substrate
was alkenylated via typical carboxyl-directed C–H activation.
Subsequently, the ortho C–H bond of the second ring was
activated and an intramolecular annulation occurred. The
oxidation was mediated by benzoquinone under O2 atmosphere.
Notably, this method constructed different (hetero)anthracene
derivatives in a direct way.
The previously described mono-arylation of OH protected
mandelic acids (see Scheme 7J) was not only accepting aryl
halides but also electron poor olefins as substrates (among
them one example with phosphonates) (see Scheme 13G).123
More importantly, the reaction proceeded also with N-protected
a-phenylglycine instead of mandelic acid, which enabled a fast
route to unnatural amino acids. The yield of the corresponding
alkenylated amino acids was generally good to excellent (62–88%).
4.1.4.
Alkynylation. Alkynylation directed by carboxylates
has not been extensively studied and is mostly realized with
(bromoethynyl)triisopropylsilane. Zen reported two protocols
(Scheme 14A and B). Protocol A involved Ir catalysis160 and
tolerated FGs such as OH, NMe2 or halides. Generally, the
conversion of electron-rich acids was high (76–93%). For electron-
poor substrates, the yield was significantly lower (35–50%).
Additionally, if both ortho positions to the acid were unsubsi-
tuted, di-alkynylated products were observed. The ratio of this
twofold C–H functionalisation depended on the sterical demand
of the remaining substituents and on the general reactivity of
the acid. Notably, phenylacetic acids were also tolerated under
slightly different conditions. The reaction was also performed
with unprotected indolyl- and thiophenyl-3-carboxylic acids
yielding 2-alkynylated products in moderate yields (49–67%).
Protocol B, the alkynylation catalysed by [RuCl2(p-cymene)]2
showed a similar substrate scope (see Scheme 14B).161 The
conversion for electron-poor substrates was also lower than for
more activated compounds.
A similar procedure was reported by Dorel (Scheme 14C).162
This time DCE instead of an alcohol was used as solvent, a
disadvantage regarding green chemistry eﬀorts. As the protocol
was also applied in a phenol-directed peri alkynylation, free
phenols were also accepted as substrates for this protocol.
Additionally, also nitro groups and unprotected aldehydes were
tolerated FGs for this transformation.
Ackermann reported a transformation with a Ru carboxylate
as the catalytic species (Scheme 14D).163 In comparison to the
transformations above, this protocol showed slightly better
yields for electron-poor substrates. However, the reaction con-
ditions were not as mild and di-alkynylation still remained a
problem. A decarboxylative protocol was also reported. Under
elevated temperatures and addition of acetic acid after the
product formation, the carboxyl group was removed without
the typically employed Ag or Cu salts.
One example of alkynylation/lactonisation was reported making
use of terminal alkynes and Ag2O as oxidant (Scheme 14E).164 This
very fast reaction gave moderate to good yields with a relatively
broad substrate scope. Notably, only stoichiometric amounts of
alkyne were used and the reaction gave the Z isomer exclusively.
However, both positions ortho to the acid were alkenylated and
the alkylated lactone was formed as a side product.
4.1.5.
Aminocarbonylation. The synthesis of meta-substituted
aromatic amides can be achieved by an ortho amidation
and subsequent decarboxylation of benzoic acid derivatives
(Scheme 15A).165 This Rh catalysed transformation used
Scheme 14
Alkynylation directed by carboxylic acids.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6618 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
isocyanates to install the amide group and the carboxylate was
subsequently removed using CuO. The methodology was
applicable to ortho and para substituted acids, which gave the
same meta amidated product.
Arylisocyanates could also be applied in a synthesis of cyclic
N-aryl imides (Scheme 15B).166 In this case, a substituted
acrylic acids reacted with the isocyanates under Rh catalysis
via a b vinyl C–H activation.
4.1.6.
C–Heteroatom bond formation. ortho-Directed C–H
functionalisation of benzoic acid derivatives with sulfonyl azides
under Ir catalysis yielded N-sulfonyl substituted anthranilic acids
(see Scheme 16A).167 A one-pot procedure for protodecarboxylation
(either with Pd or Cu), giving access to N-sulfonyl substituted
anilines was also disclosed. Furthermore, also cyclic olefins were
transformed under these reaction conditions.
Selenation and thiolation could be achieved by reaction with
diselenides or disulfides under Ru catalysis (Scheme 16B).168
The process proceeded generally to mono-chalcogenation for
meta substituted arenes. However, apart from MOM-protected
4-hydroxybenzoic acid, para substituted acids were functiona-
lised in both ortho positions to the acid. Diﬀerent substituted
diselenides could be transformed with good yields and the
protocol also tolerated diphenyl disulfides. More importantly,
this method provides the possibility to synthesise chalco-
genxanthones via an intramolecular Friedel–Craft acylation by
addition of triflic acid to the crude mixture after the reaction.
For this annulation benzoic acids carrying halides, ethers, alkyl,
and aryl groups were tolerated and also thiophene carboxylic acid
was used as substrate giving good yields (58–86%) over two steps.
4.2.
C(sp3)–H activation
Advances have been made in the b-C(sp3)–H activation and
arylation of propionic (also a-amino) acids. Zhao,169 Yu170 and
van Gemmeren171 all reported Pd catalysed protocols for this
transformation (Scheme 17A–C).
Zhao (Scheme 17A) focused on the arylation of N-phtaloyl
alanines to synthesise non natural amino acids in a one-step
procedure.169 Generally, the scope of the transformation
regarding aryl iodides was good, and the yields reported are
in the 62–90% range. The reactions covered a wide range
of para- and meta-substituted aryl iodides, one example of
ortho substitution was also reported (1-fluoro-2-iodobenzene).
Notably, different substituents in the a position of the acids
were also accepted, and gave good yields if the aryl iodide was
the limiting substrate (45–75%). Interestingly, it was even
possible to arylate substrates with a quaternary a carbon.
Limitations were shown with acids substituted in b position
as they gave only traces of the product.169
The protocol developed by Yu (Scheme 17B) focused again
on N-phtaloyl alanine as substrate.170 Here instead of a MPAA a
fused pyridine ligand was used. This protocol also accepted
acids with a quaternary carbon adjacent to the site of activation.
An improvement regarding the generality of the method of
Zhoa has been achieved with the use of another MPAA as ligand
and by using a diﬀerent base and Ag salt (Scheme 17C).171
This protocol showed a broad substrate scope regarding the
propionic acid derivatives and also tolerated a quaternary centre
at the a position to the acid. In contrast to the above method, the
acid derivatives were used as limiting substrate here.
5. Esters as DGs
The ester group is omnipresent in natural as well as synthetic
organic molecules. Furthermore, esters can be introduced or
interconverted by a variety of methods and the need for
the development of reliable ester-directed C–H functionalisa-
tion
procedures
is
therefore
obvious.
Pioneering
work
was performed in the 90s by Trost172 and Murai.173 However,
esters coordinate weakly to metal catalysts, which make the
development
of
successful
protocols
difficult.
Therefore,
not many contributions have yet been reported in the field.
Compared to the free acids much fewer examples have been
disclosed in the last three years, which will be discussed in the
following section.
Scheme 15
Aminocarbonylation directed by carboxylic acids.
Scheme 16
C–Heteroatom bond formation directed by carboxylic acids.
Scheme 17
Functionalisation of C(sp3)–H bonds directed by carboxylic
acids.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6619
5.1.
C(sp2)–H activation
5.1.1.
Alkylation. Mn could be successfully applied as
catalyst for an alkylation reaction (Scheme 18A).174 This borane
promoted transformation used epoxides and methyl benzoates
to furnish five-membered lactones. Diﬀerent aromatic esters
could be converted. Notably, the authors also showed that the
protocol was applicable on more complex molecules. One
example of a sugar and steroid derivative were provided. With
regard to the reagent, the oxiran and arylated derivatives were
also reported as eﬀective coupling partners.
Also 2,2-diphenyloxiran was converted, albeit with low yield
(23%). If the aryl residue was replaced with a t-butyl group the
unsubstituted furanone was formed. Presumably a Meinwald
rearrangement leads to the formation of formaldehyde that is
incorporated into the five membered ring.
5.1.2.
Alkenylation.
Oxidative
alkenylations
with
a,b-
unsaturated olefins to alkyl phenylacetates could be achieved under
Pd catalysis with MPAAs as ligands (Scheme 19A).175 The protocol
could also be applied to amides, Weinreb amides and ketones as
DGs (see Sections 2, 6 and 7). If electron rich esters were used, the
reported yields were good (52–87%). Compared to Weinreb amides,
the reaction proceeded with better mono-selectivity (6:1 for ester DG
in comparison to 1:2 for Weinreb amide DG on phenylacetate). The
authors argued that the products were easier released by the metal
species and hence di-alkenylation did not preferentially occur.
Also under Pd catalysis, Zhao and co-workers reported a
similar transformation, with quite an broad substrate scope
(Scheme 19B).176 Ac-Gly-OH was replaced with 1,10-phenantroline
as bidentate ligand, and instead of alkyl esters, they employed a
2-(1,3-dimethoxy)propyloxy handle. The authors speculated that
this residue enhanced the coordination ability of the substrate
(compared to methyl, ethyl or 2-methoxyethyl residues) to prevent
an unselective Fujiwara–Moritani reaction and mono selectivity of
the reaction (33:1) was achieved.
Notably, with this method also synthetically useful yields
were reported for starting materials carrying electron with-
drawing groups (60–82%). Heterocyclic esters also proved to
be good substrates. Additionally different esters were converted
with good yields: instead of phenyl acetates, also phenyl-
propionic acid esters and a substituted phenylacetates were
possible substrates. Additionally, the method was not limited
to acrylates but also a,b unsaturated nitriles, amides, and
ketones were applicable as reaction partners.
Loh reported alkenylations of a-substituted acrylates with
olefins (mostly acrylates) (Scheme 19C).177 The vinylic C–H
activation was catalysed by Ru and used Cu(OAc)2 as oxidant.
Different alkyl and aryl substituents were reported as possible
substrates for the transformation. To achieve full conversion of
the a-substituted acrylate, 2 equiv. of the coupling partner were
necessary, as homodimerization of the unsubstituted acrylate
was also observed. The stereoselectivity (Z/E) was usually about
9 : 1 and increased if a bulkier a substituent (R1) was used
as coupling partner. Regarding olefin coupling partners,
a,b-unsaturated sulfones (56%) and phosphonates (22%) could
be also converted.
Alkenylation reactions with consecutive annulation were
also reported with ester DGs as depicted in Scheme 20.
The synthesis of indenones under Co catalysis was reported by
Li (Scheme 20A)178 and Zhang (Scheme 20B).179 Both protocols
employ [CoCp*(CO)I2] as precatalyst and a Ag salt as additive.
The method developed by Li et al. used additionally Zn(OAc)2 to
enhance reactivity by coordination of the metal to the ester. If
the substrate carried a meta substituent, the regioselectivity
depended on the size and ligating ability of the residue. A meta-
methoxy ester gave a regioisomeric mixture of 1.2/1, whereas
the smaller fluorine atom also coordinated to the catalyst,
directing the alkyne into the more hindered position (15/1
regioisomeric ratio).179
The second Co catalysed annulation (Scheme 20B) seemed
to be more sensitive to the electronic eﬀects of the aryl
substituents. Activating (OMe, Me) residues led to good yields,
whereas low yields were observed if esters, –CF3 or other
Scheme 18
Mn-Catalysed lactonization directed by esters.
Scheme 19
Ester-directed oxidative alkenylation reactions.
Scheme 20
Ester-directed alkenylation and consecutive annulation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6620 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
electron-withdrawing substituents were present in the substrate.
Different symmetrical aryl alkynes were converted in moderate
to good yields (44–72%). Additionally, the authors provided one
example of an unsymmetrical alkyne (methyl, phenyl). In this
case the regioisomer with the phenyl group a to the carbonyl was
preferred (2: 1).
Lactones can also be used as DGs. Patel et al. reported on an
oxidative
annulation
of
alkynes
to
2-arylbenzoxazinones
(Scheme 20C).180 The authors suggest the opening of the
oxazinone to N-benzoylanthranilic acid under AgOAc/AcOH
mediation. The free acid is then coordinating to the Rh catalyst
to give a five membered ruthenacycle, which directs the alkyne
to be incorporated into the desired position. The coordinating
ability of the nitrogen in the substrates did not hinder the
transformation in any way and the use of diﬀerent internal
alkynes (alkyl, aryl and alkoxy substituted) were demonstrated.
Furthermore, it was also shown in one example that an unsym-
metrical alkyne gives only one regioisomer. In this case the
smaller residue was situated para to the carbonyl group.
Diﬀerent FGs on the lactone were tolerated such as halides
and SMe. Annulation with 2-phenylquinolin-4(1H)-one as sub-
strate was also demonstrated.
Cui reported a Rh catalysed alkenylation/cyclisation directed
by peroxyesters, serving as internal oxidant (Scheme 20D).181
Several diﬀerent peroxyesters were used in the reaction.
However, only limited FG tolerance was observed. Diﬀerent
internal alkynes (alkyl and aryl) were also used as substrates.
Additionally, also unsymmetrical alkynes were converted with
very good regioselectivity (again the smaller residue is situated
adjacent to the aromatic ring).
5.1.3.
Borylation. The C–B bond is of great importance in
organic chemistry, mainly due to cross-coupling chemistry. However,
methods for DG assisted C–H borylations are relatively rare.31
Li reported on a N,B ligand that enables ortho-directed C–H
borylations with esters as DGs (Scheme 21A).182 In combination
with [IrCl(cod)]2 as precatalyst, the authors reported high yields
for the C–H borylation with B2pin2. Di-borylation could be
excluded if large alkoxy groups (tBu) were used at the ester.
Although not strictly a group-directed reaction (the ester
moiety does not coordinate to the catalyst itself but to its
ligand), para selective borylation was achieved by the group
of Chattopadhyay (Scheme 21B).183 This reaction was also
catalysed by Ir. The excellent para selectivity was achieved
by non-covalent interaction between the ester moiety of the
substrate and the ligand (see TS in Scheme 29B). Diﬀerent
aryl esters were borylated with good to excellent yields. The
transformation was also applicable to electron poor and rich
heteroaryls. The authors showed, that esters were necessary to
direct the C–H activation, since ketones, aldehydes, and carboxylic
acids were all reduced under the reaction conditions, and did not
yield the desired product.
6. Monodentate amides as DGs in C–H
functionalisation reactions
Substituted as well as unsubstituted amides proved to be
extremely valuable as DGs in C–H activation. The first example
utilizing a primary amide (CONH2) in C–H activation was
presented by Li et al. in 2012.184 By now, amides are amongst
the most frequently applied DGs in C–H functionalisation
chemistry. The largest part of these contributions takes advan-
tage of bidentate DGs including an amide moiety. However,
these groups are treated in a separate chapter (see Section 14).
Within this chapter, solely amide DGs are treated which use a
mono-dentate binding mode.
Due to the plethora of examples reported since 2015 con-
tributions with great variations regarding the introduced residue
have been disclosed, and also the substrate variety is significant
including the activation of C(sp2)–H and C(sp3)–H bonds alike.
Most contributions still take advantage of precious metals, but it
can be seen that base metal catalysis is moving forward and
becomes more and more important.
6.1.
C(sp2)–H functionalisation
6.1.1.
Arylation. Arylation reactions are the most frequently
reported transformation in C–H activation chemistry. A variety
of different aryl sources can be used as coupling partner, which
is also reflected in the examples for amide-directed arylation
reactions displayed in Scheme 22. In contrast to alkylation
reactions, the reports on arylation reactions mainly relied on
a Pd species as catalyst. One exception was the Ir catalysed
arylation with diaryliodonium salts published by Shi and Yuan
(Scheme 22A).185 In this contribution, they applied a protocol
previously reported for ortho arylation of O-methyl ketoximes186 to
N-aryl-2-pyrrolidinone as substrate. FG tolerance was excellent,
but electron withdrawing residues reduced the yields to the 50%
range, whereas electron donating ones gave yields also 490%.
On the Mes-I-Ar+OTf species, which was used as coupling
partner, also bromo and iodo were tolerated and Ar could also
be thiophene or naphthalene.
The group of Kianmehr introduced arylsulfonyl chlorides as
aryl source in amide-directed ortho arylation (Scheme 22B).187 The
reaction system was rather simple comprising of PdCl2 and
Li2CO3 but required 10 mol% catalyst loading. Still, yields were
high (71–96%) and the reaction gave only mono-arylated products.
Scheme 21
Ligand-assisted ortho and para borylation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6621
In fact, the presence of an ortho methyl group shut down the
reaction completely.
A quite peculiar transformation was reported by Park
and Hong. They developed an eﬃcient strategy to build up
triphenylene frameworks by using a cyclic diaryliodonium salt as
aryl source, which basically resulted in ortho and meta arylation
of mainly N-phenyl pivalamide substrates (Scheme 22C).188
The reaction required the presence of a substituent in one of
the ortho position for obtaining high yields (71–95%), since
otherwise only a maximum of 30% was obtained. Switching to
N-aryl-2-pyrrolidinone as substrate allowed a two-fold reaction
with the iodonium salt species leading to heptacyclic products in
moderate yields.
Dimerisation of benzamides towards 5H-dibenzo[c,e]azepine-
5,7(6H)-diones was reported by the group of Bao (Scheme 22D).189
Since the reaction required a relatively strong oxidant to proceed,
the authors favoured a Pd(II)/Pd(IV) catalytic cycle, however, they
did not carry out mechanistic investigations. Regarding the
benzamide substrate, meta and para substitutents were tolerated
(Me, OMe, tBu, F, Br, Cl) but ortho substitution shut down
the reaction.
Kumar and co-workers used primary phenylacetamides as
substrates, which suggested that in this case not a 5-membered,
but a 6-membered palladacycle was involved in the catalytic
cycle.190 In this case, aryl iodides were the coupling partners,
which allowed the presence of bromide in the substrate
(Scheme 22E). Otherwise, mainly ‘‘inert’’ FGs were used such
as Me, OMe, Cl, F and NO2. Noteworthy was the good selectivity
for mono-arylation and a gram scale experiment which showed
the potential for scale up.
Tan and co-workers focused on the arylation of 3-carboxamido
thiophene and aryl bromides (Scheme 22F).191 The amide nitrogen
contains a pentafluorphenyl. Arylation took initially part in
position two and in some cases 2,4-diarylated compounds were
observed (maximum 15%). Also heterocyclic bromides could be
used as coupling partner and it has to be mentioned that
2 equiv. of halide were applied in order to get good yields
(51–87%, 15 examples). Besides the thiophene substrate, in one
case also a 3-furancarboxamide was arylated using phenyl
iodide (59% mono, 17% diarylation). Additionally, gram scale
experiments were carried out as well and starting from 2-aryl-3-
thiophencarboxamide, bromination conditions for selectively
brominating either in position 4 or 5 were disclosed.
A cascade of C(sp3)–H and C(sp2)–H activation has been
reported by Stamos and Yu (Scheme 23 see also Section 15.5).192
According to the proposed catalytic cycle, the first step was
a pyrazole-directed arylation of a t-butyl group (Scheme 23,
blue bond formed), whereas the second step was an oxidative
coupling between position 4 of that same pyrazole and the
introduced aryl ring (Scheme 23, red bond formed). This C–H
activation step of the pyrazole was indeed amide-directed. Both
steps were Pd catalysed and could be run under air, not
uncommon for an oxidative coupling step. The range of FGs
on the aryl iodide was remarkable and yields between 45–78%
were obtained. The t-butyl group could be substituted for other
quaternary centres, whereas the arylation always took place at a
methyl group.
6.1.2.
Alkylation and allylation. Alkylation reactions are
generally less frequently reported as arylation reactions. Still,
a series of interesting alkylation reactions has been reported
using quite a variety of alkyl sources.
The group of Glorius reported Co catalysed allylation using
methyl allyl carbonate as the allyl source (Scheme 24A).193 Besides
using pyrimidine as DG, N-alkylated amides were applied as well
and it was shown that mono- and di-alkylated amides worked as
well and that steric bulk on the amide was well tolerated,
including a t-butyl group. Besides substituted benzamides, also
acrylamides and 3-furan- and 3-thiophencarboxamides could be
allylated as well. In most cases yields were in the 60–80% range.
Another allylation procedure was reported by Yan, this time
using allyl bromides and a Rh catalyst (Scheme 24B), which
made the procedure less attractive but the advantage was the
commercial availability of the Rh catalyst, which is unfortunately
not yet the case for many Co species.194 Additionally, the reaction
was carried out at room temperature. Yields were in a preparatively
useful range (34–93%) but in this case also di-allylated products
were formed. Further cyclisation of the allylated products to
tetrahydroisoquinolin-1-ones was reported as well.
A significant challenge are typically methylation reactions
since the often applied alkyl sources, namely olefines, are not
an option and alternative methyl sources need to be found. Ilies
and Nakamura have published a Mn catalysed protocol using
Scheme 22
Amide-directed arylation reactions.
Scheme 23
Tandem amide-directed arylation-oxidative coupling.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6622 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
MeMgBr as alkyl source, which worked with remarkable low
catalyst loading (0.01–1 mol%) (Scheme 24C).195 Amongst the
advantages of this protocol was the simplicity of the catalyst,
MnCl2LiCl without any ligand, the mild conditions, and high
TONs. The use of Grignard species as methyl source naturally
raised the question of FG tolerance. Remarkably, even bromide
was tolerated. A disadvantage was again the formation of
mono- and di-methylated products in case the substrate
allowed a second methylation.
The group of Ackermann reported alkylation using methyl
vinyl ketone as alkyl source, introducing a butanone side chain
on an aryl ring (Scheme 24D).196 The reaction was Ru catalysed
and required MesCOOH (1 equiv.) and MesCOOK (0.3 equiv.)
as additives but water could be used as solvent. Yields were
preparatively useful (45–81%) and electron donating and elec-
tron withdrawing substituents on the aryl ring are tolerated
as well as bromine. Further cyclisation of the initial products to
2-methylquinolines was reported as well.
An Ir-catalysed reaction of aromatic amides with diazomalonates
has been reported by the group of Wang (Scheme 24E).197 Using
dimethyl diazomalonate led to the formation of products with
both ester moieties still in place. Switching to methyl t-butyl
malonates led to methyl esters of arylacetic acids, since the
t-butyl group was cleaved under the reaction conditions
with subsequent decarboxylation. The reaction worked also
on electron rich heterocycles and tolerated the presence of
halides (F, Cl, Br, I) and series of other FGs without significant
influence on the yields (typically 480%!).
Very recently, they expanded this method, most importantly
to methylation reactions as well.198 In this case the alkyl source
was a sulfonium salt and stoichiometric amounts of Cu(OAc)2
were required. Yields were mediocre in most cases, but still it
was one rare example for a methylation reaction (not shown).
N-Substituted succinimides have been used as alkylation
source in the broader sense as well. Naturally, this allowed
only the introduction of a very specific group. Prabhu and
co-workers showed that this transformation works under Ru
catalysis and several additives (Scheme 24F).199 The FG tolerance
was not that broadly investigated, but iodine was tolerated
which was important for further elaboration of the scaﬀold. In
competition experiments it was shown that in presence of other
potential DGs (ketone, aldehyde, acid, ester) it was still the
amide which exhibited the directing eﬀect.
The group of Novak disclosed a Pd catalysed protocol for the
trifluoroethylation of N-aryl-anilides with an iodonium salt
(Scheme 24G).200 The introduction of fluorine moieties onto
molecules is of course highly interesting in context of medicinal
chemistry projects and drug development. The protocol showed
high yields (typically 470% and up to 95%) and remarkable FG
tolerance. Most remarkable, esters, boronic acid esters and NO2
were tolerated. In the presence of an acetyl group it was still the
amide which directed the trifluoroethylation.
A special case was the enamide directed a-alkylation with
unactivated alkenes reported by Dong (Scheme 25A).201 As
mentioned, the starting material was a cyclic enamide, which
was first alkenylated. Adding afterwards hydrochloric acid
to the reaction mixture cleaved the DG in situ and delivered
a-alkylated ketones as products. With unactivated olefins, the
new C–C bond is formed towards the C2 position of the olefin
substrate, and not to C1 as it is the case with often applied
acrylate species. Only few FGs were present in the starting
materials and yields ranged from 20–73%.
Scheme 24
Amide-directed alkylation and allylation reactions.
Scheme 25
Amide-directed enamide and aldehyde alkylation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6623
The group of Willis reported that also a formyl C–H bond
can be alkylated and alkenylated.202 The carbonyl oxygen of the
amide was in this case involved in the formation of an inter-
mediate rhodacycle using b-amido aldehydes as substrates
(Scheme 25B). However, the amide DG can be replaced by a
keto- or ester group as well. FG tolerance on the alkene was quite
good (Br, OH, acetal, ester, carbamate, aryl) and frequently yields
490% were observed.
A special case are alkylation reactions in which the alkylated
product immediately cyclised under the applied reaction
conditions to heterocyclic ring systems. Several such examples
have been reported in the last three years. Patel and Borah
reported the synthesis of oxindoles from acetanilides und Ir(III)
catalysis.203 The diazo derivative of Meldrum’s acid was the
required reaction partner (Scheme 26A). Initially, the acid was
attached with its C2 carbon to the ortho position of the amide
function. Subsequent proton induced (formed from NaOAc)
intramolecular cyclisation with the amide group delivered the
target compounds.
Huang and co-workers reported an allylation–cyclisation
sequence to tetrahydroquinoline derivatives.204 Overall, they
carried out a complex four component reaction using aniline
derivatives, an anhydride (in most cases acetic anhydride),
allylic
alcohol,
and
2,2,2-trifluoroethanol
(Scheme
26B).
The anhydride and the aniline derivative form in situ the
corresponding amide, which directed the allylation with the
allylic alcohol leading to a 3-arylpropanal derivative. Next,
this intermediate cyclised to a 2-hydroxy-N-acetyl tetrahydro-
quinoline derivative and after a final etherification with tri-
fluoroethanol (or other alcohols) the desired products were
obtained. Due to this complex sequence there was a larger
variation in yields (41–91%) but excellent functional group
tolerance was observed.
Kapur and co-workers reported a similar sequence, but in
absence of a second alcohol.205 Hence, the etherification did
not occur but elimination of water and further aromatisation to
quinoline derivatives (Scheme 26C). More than 30 examples
have been reported in this contribution.
The group of Wei Zeng reported an alkylation/annulation
sequence
towards
pyrimido[1,6-a]indole-1(2H)-ones
under
[Cp*RhCl2]2
catalysis
with
a-diazocarbonyl
reagents
(Scheme 26D).206 The method gave good access to this scaﬀold
with the majority of examples in yields 470%. In the indole
substrate Br and COOMe was tolerated amongst other less
reactive FGs. The scope in R1 was mainly limited to carboxylic
acid esters whereas R2 seemed to tolerate a wide range of alkyls
and aryls.
6.1.3.
Alkenylation. Alkenylation reactions are of significant
importance since the introduced double bond can be used as
handle for subsequent elaboration of a scaﬀold. Often, the
alkenylated product is not the final target, but in situ further
transformed via cyclisation reactions to diﬀerent heterocyclic
products. Such examples will be treated in the following section.
Here, only procedures will be discussed in which no further
reactions took place and the alkenylated product was isolated.
Alkenylation using vinyl acetate was reported by Zhang and
Wen under Rh catalysis.207 This Fujiwara–Moritani reaction
required only 2.5 mol% [Cp*RhCl2]2 as catalyst and was carried
out under air (Scheme 27A). Hence, 0.3 equiv. of Cu(OAc)2 were
sufficient to get to good yields. Many FGs were tolerated
including bromine. ortho and meta substituted N-arylacetanilides
gave only mono-alkenylated products, however, the unsubstituted
or para-substituted derivatives gave mixtures of mono- and
di-alkenylated products. The reaction was also carried out on
a 7 mmol scale and it was shown that the products can be
further cyclised to N-acetylindoles by adding 6 M HCl.
Huang and Zhao showed that acrylates could be used to
alkenylate N-acylindolines and tetrahydroquinolines in positions 7
and 8, respectively, under Ru catalysis (Scheme 27B).208 ortho
alkenylation of N-arylpivalamides was also demonstrated under
the same conditions. Besides acrylates, many other olefinic
substrates carrying an electron withdrawing group could be
Scheme 26
Amide-directed alkylation/allylation–cyclisation sequences.
Scheme 27
Amide-directed alkenylation reactions.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6624 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
used as olefin source as well. Generally, good to excellent yields
(typically 70–95%) were obtained.
Shortly thereafter, Xu and Pan showed another remote
alkenylation, this time of indazoles and under Rh catalysis in which
they also demonstrated the cleavage of the DG (Scheme 27C).209
An interesting example was reported by Yoshino and Matsunaga.
In this example, the DG actually migrated from the indole nitrogen
to the C2 carbon of the introduced olefin group (Scheme 27D).210
Usually, proto demetallation would deliver the N-acylated
2-alkenylated indoles using alkynes as olefin source. Slowing
down this proto demetallation step was key in order to allow
DG migration. [Cp*CoIII(CH3CN)3](SbF6)2 was identified as best
performing catalyst and regarding the DG, morpholine amide
performed significantly better as compared to other N-disubstituted
amides. Good FG tolerance was observed and yields were frequently
above 70% (up to 99%).
A second Co catalysed protocol was reported by Ellman
(Scheme 27E).211 The first step was again an alkenylation reaction
with a terminal alkyne. However, in the presence of NXS (mainly
NIS), the olefine moiety was immediately halogenated. Mainly
thiophene substrates were used (see Scheme 27E), but furan and
pyrrole were also tested in single examples. The reaction performed
at low temperature (40 1C) and the halide was incorporated on the
C2 of the former alkyne with high regioselectivity.
If N-arylbenzamides were the substrates, the question arises
whether the N-aryl or the C-aryl ring gets functionalised. Wang
et al. found that in a [Cp*RhCl2]2 catalysed alkenylation
reaction, the key to control the alkenylation side was the
presence of a non-coordinating anion, here introduced by
AgOTf (Scheme 28).212 Initially, N-tolylferrocencarboxamide
was used in a test reaction and in the absence of AgOTf
the ferrocene moiety was alkenylated exclusively with methyl
acrylate. When adding 20 mol% AgOTf the regioselectivity
switched completely and only the tolyl ring was alkenylated. This
arylation of the N-aryl ring was then further explored with N-aryl–
C-ferrocenyl substrates as well as with N-aryl–C-aryl substrates.
C-Ring alkenylation with methyl acrylates led to isindolinones
due to intramolecular cyclisation.
So far, only alkenylation of aromatic systems has been
discussed. However, also olefinic systems have been alkenylated
via amide-directed C–H activation. Zhang and Zhong reported
two protocols for a,b-unsaturated amides, naturally in the
b-position giving rise to products of 2Z configuration.213,214 In
their first contribution (Scheme 29A), allyl acetate was the
reaction partner, leading to (2Z,4E)-dienamide products. As
could be expected, the allylated byproduct was formed as well
but under the optimised conditions a selectivity of 95 : 5
or better for the desired product was reached. Also for the
2Z,4E configuration the reaction was not perfect, giving Z/E
selectivities between 72 : 28 and 92 : 8 with typical yields in the
60–70% range. The second protocol used internal alkynes as
alkenylation agent (Scheme 29B), which naturally eliminated
the possibility for allylated byproducts giving 2Z,4Z configured
products preferentially (frequently with 499 : 1 selectivity,
depending on the nature of R3).
Also
Bouillon
and
Poisson
contributed
to
this
field
(Scheme 29C). In their case, 2-bromo-3,3,3-trifluoropropene
was the coupling partner and gave the 2Z configuration.215
This is a rare case in which a bromide is the leaving group since
typically oxidative couplings (e.g. with acrylates) are predomi-
nant. Position 2 of the substrate was mainly substituted by aryl
groups and substituents on the aryl moiety had only little
impact on the yield (typically B65%). Interestingly, when this
position was not substituted, i.e. N,N-diisopropylacrylamide
was used as the substrate, the configuration was E and not Z.
The authors suggested that a Pd catalysed isomerisation might
take place rapidly in this case.
The group of Willis disclosed an impressive amount of work
on the C–H activation of aldehydes, mainly directed by amides
but also examples for keto- and acid ester direction were
reported.202 They showed that switching between two Rh
catalysts they could either get the linear (Scheme 30A) or the
branched olefin (Scheme 30B) when terminal alkynes were the
coupling partner. Linear products were obtained in excellent
yields, frequently 490%. However, relatively few FGs were
present. For the branched products, yields were a bit lower
and the branched: linear ratio varied between 2 : 1 and 17 : 1.
Using olefins as coupling partner alkylated products were
obtained (not shown).
Scheme 28
Amide-directed alkenylation with acrylates.
Scheme 29
Amide-directed alkenylation of non-aromatic C(sp2) centres.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6625
6.1.4.
Alkenylations with further cyclisation. This section
focuses on examples where the alkenylated compound is
immediately further transformed to a cyclised product. In such
reactions, the amide DG is sometimes also involved in the
cyclisation and one or more atoms end up in the cyclised
products. The most common source for the olefin moiety in
such alkenylation reactions are alkynes or acrylates, respec-
tively derivatives thereof.
Several protocols have been reported in which the final pro-
duct is a quinoline. In all these cases, the amide was attached via
its nitrogen to the aryl moiety and the amide nitrogen ends up as
the heterocyclic nitrogen. Within a few weeks, the groups of
Li (Scheme 31A)216 and Glorius (Scheme 31B)217 reported Co
catalysed protocols for this type of quinoline synthesis. The
conditions are quite similar, Li used [Cp*CoCl2]2 as catalyst
whereas Glorius used [Cp*CoI2]2 both in DCE as solvent and a
Ag salt as additive. Li’s protocol required 1 equiv. AgNTf2 whereas
Glorius used 20 mol% AgSbF6 combined with 10 mol% Fe(OAc)2
at slightly higher catalyst loadings. The yields and the substrate
scope in both protocols were comparable as both reported that
halides (amongst other FGs) were well tolerated. Typically, sym-
metrically substituted alkynes were used as coupling partners and
in the few cases where unsymmetrically substituted alkynes were
used, mixtures of regioisomers were obtained. In most examples
acetamide was the DG, but also examples with other alkyls were
reported to work, unless steric bulk was too large. In two
examples, Glorius showed that addition of 1 equiv. Ag2O gave
N-acylated indole products (Scheme 31C) but better yields for this
product class were obtained with urea derived DGs (see Section 9).
If the amide DG was attached to the aryl system the other
way round, i.e. via the carbonyl carbon, reactions with alkynes
led upon cyclisation to isoquinolones (or a related system,
depending on the specific substrate). Chuang and Chen reported
such a protocol under quiet environmentally benign conditions,
since the reaction could be carried out in water under air with a
Rh catalyst (Scheme 31D).218 Again, symmetric aryl–aryl alkynes
were the coupling partners in most cases but in three examples
aryl–alkyl alkynes were used. The regioselectivity was actually
quite good (87 : 13 up to 98: 2) and the aryl ring always ended up
in position 3 in the main product. One exception was the
reaction of N-methyl-4-methoxybenzamide and N,N-dimethyl-3-
phenyl-prop-2-yn-1-amine, where the regiochemistry was reversed
and the aryl moiety was exclusively in position 4. A related
transformation on thiophenecarboxamide substrates was reported
by Miura and coworkers (not shown).219
Similar, but Ru catalysed cyclisations have been disclosed
by the groups of Swamy220 and Urriolabeitia (not shown).221
The former one used chromene-3-carboxamides as substrates,
the latter one various heterocyclic amides. Hence, in both cases
a pyridinone ring was annulated to another heterocyclic ring,
giving access to interesting scaﬀolds.
Tian and Van der Eycken published an intramolecular variant
of this type of transformation (Scheme 31E).222 This allowed
them the synthesis of polycyclic systems which occurred in
natural products as well. In their paper, they applied this method
for building up a variety of polycycles in good to excellent yields,
and also demonstrated the synthesis of two natural products,
rosettacin and oxypalmatine.
When using acrylates instead of alkynes as the olefination
reagent, isoindolin-1-ones are the resulting products as demon-
strated by Lu and Yu (Scheme 31F).223 The olefinated product
could be isolated only in a few cases (e.g. with N-C6F5-2-
furancarboxamide as substrate or when styrenes were used as
olefinic coupling partner instead of acrylates) and mainly
spontaneous cyclisation to the isoindolin-1-ones via base mediated
1,4-conjugate addition was observed. Typical yields were in the
range of 80–93%.
Scheme 30
Amide-directed aldehyde olefination.
Scheme 31
Amide-directed alkenylation–cyclisation sequences.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6626 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
6.1.5.
Miscellaneous C–C bond forming reactions. In this
section, all C–C bond forming reactions which do not fit in any
previous section are summarized.
ortho acylation of N-aryl acetamides with aldehydes was
reported by Novak and co-workers (Scheme 32A).224 They found
that the presence of a catalytic amount of B(C6F5)3 had a
beneficial eﬀect on catalysis and a series of aryl–aryl ketones
were synthesized. Using aliphatic aldehydes, the yields were
generally lower but overall there was a high variance of yields.
Alternatively to aldehydes, a-oxocarboxylic acids can be used as
acyl source in a decarboxylative reaction. Again Pd(OAc)2 is
used as catalyst in presence of an oxidant, in this case K2S2O8
(not shown).225
Carboxamidation of enamides by isocyanides was reported
by Liang and Luo (Scheme 32B).226 So the amide-directed the
introduction of another amide group at a terminal double
bond. Fair to good yields were obtained and also good FG
tolerance in this Pd(OAc)2 catalysed protocol was observed.
The protocol reported by In Su Kim is according to the
proposed mechanism a C–H alkylation in the first step.227
However, this product was not isolated but a double bond
migration occurred and hence this example was displayed in this
special section (Scheme 32C). Acrylamides were the substrates
and maleimides the coupling partners, which led to quite
unusual but interesting product structures. With the optimized
protocol ([Cp*RhCl2]2, AgSbF6, PivOH) almost two dozen exam-
ples were reported in low to excellent yield range. The high yields
(also 490%) were obtained with acrylamide derived substrates
but other types of substrates performed significantly worse.
Finally, a peculiar cyclopentenylation reaction has been
reported by Radhakrishnan and co-workers (Scheme 32D).228
The reaction required a specific type of bicyclic diaza olefin and
hence its utility was limited to very specific examples.
6.1.6.
Halogenation. So far only C–C bond forming reactions
were presented and these are also the majority of contributions.
Starting from this section, also other transformations are
discussed.
Halogenation reactions via directed C–H-activation are of
particular interest since they can be used to override the
directing effects of substituents present in the substrate.
Mu¨ck-Lichtenfeld and Glorius developed an ortho chlorination
protocol of benzamides using a Rh catalyst (Scheme 33A).229
Interestingly, often applied NCS did not work but trichloro-
isocyanuric acid (TCC) or 1,3-dichloro-5,5-dimethylhydantoin
(DCDMH) in combination with 2-trifluoromethylpyridine as
activator. The most interesting examples were of course in which
the chlorination was directed at the meta position compared to a
usually ortho/para DG (and of course ortho to the carboxamide
group) such as methoxy or methyl.
Kapur and Das showed that under Pd catalysis, Weinreb
amides and N-acylanilines could direct NXS promoted halo-
genation in their ortho positions (Scheme 33B).230
A similar transformation but with a Pd@MOF nanocompo-
site catalyst was reported by Martin-Matute and co-workers. The
work was mainly dedicated to pyridine-directed halogenation,
but also amides worked and recyclability of the catalyst was
demonstrated (not shown).231
6.1.7.
C–O bond formations. N-Sulfonylbenzamide-directed
trifluoroethoxylation was reported by Ji and Li.232 Since the
sulfur was not involved in the directing effect, this example
was still treated in the amide section (Scheme 34A). Pd(OAc)2 was
used as catalyst and PhI(OAc)2 as oxidant. Amongst other FGs,
bromine was tolerated and typically yields in the 60% range were
obtained. Application of the method in the synthesis of the drug
flecainide was demonstrated as well.
C8-Triflation of naphthalenes was developed by Xiao and Fu
(Scheme 34B).233 The optimised reaction conditions turned out
to be quite complex since besides 10 mol% Pd(OAc)2 also
0.5 equiv. benzophenone (BP), 1.2 equiv. TfOH, 0.8 equiv.
TMSOTf and 2 equiv. N-fluoro-1,3,5-trimethylpyridinium triflate
reagent were required giving moderate to good yields.
Scheme 32
Miscellaneous amide-directed reactions.
Scheme 33
Amide-directed halogenation reactions.
Scheme 34
Amide-directed C–O bond forming reactions.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6627
Rh catalysed acyloxylation was reported by Xu and Li
(Scheme 34C).234 The publication focused mainly on heterocyclic
DGs but included also a table of amide-directed examples. Yields
around 60% were typical.
Additionally, Chakraborti and co-workers developed a Pd
catalysed hydroxylation protocol which they mainly applied to
heterocyclic DGs (see Section 15.9).235 However, five examples
of amide direction were reported but only three of them gave
good yield (not shown).
6.1.8.
C–N bond formation. Sukbok Chang and co-workers
reported an unusual example of amide-directed C–H activation
(Scheme 35A).236 The group they introduced was actually again
an amide, which in turn could direct another amidation and so
on and so forth. Overall iterative amidation was reported with
dioxazolones as amidating reagent. Starting from N-phenyl
pivalamide, the penta-amidated product could be obtained
exclusively when 6 equiv. dioxazolone were used. The hexa-
amidated product was never observed, most likely due to
steric reasons.
The introduction of amine groups is a particular challenge
in C–H activation chemistry. One example was disclosed by Sun
and Yu using N-C6F5-benzamides and secondary dialkylamines
as coupling partners (Scheme 35B).237 Hence, only tertiary
amines were obtained. Switching to anilines as coupling part-
ners, secondary N,N-diarylamines were the products. Yields are
generally good in this [Cp*RhCl2]2 catalysed method and FGs
are tolerated to a relatively good extend.
6.2.
C(sp3)–H activation
The activation of C(sp3)–H bonds is typically more challenging than
activation of their C(sp2)–H counterparts. Not surprisingly, much
less work has been published on this topic in recent years. In fact
only three amide-directed examples (i.e. mono-dentate amides!)
have been reported all coming from the lab of Jin-Quan Yu.
The first one dealt with arylation of methylene groups in
b-position to the CONH(4-CF3-C6F4) DG (Scheme 36A). In this
case, even an enantioselective method was developed using a
chiral N-acetyl protected 2-aminoethyl quinoline (APAQ) as
ligand.238 They obtained e.r. of typically 95 : 5 using Pd(OAc)2
as catalyst and aryl iodides as aryl source. Good FG tolerance and
yields between 45–89% were reported. In a second contribution
enantioselective alkenylation and alkynylation reactions were
also reported (not shown).239
The second contribution reported a Pd catalysed borylation
with B2pin2 as coupling partner (Scheme 36B).240 Methyl or
methylene groups in b-position were borylated whereas the less
sterically demanding was favoured (CH3 over CH2) in cases
where there was competition. Noteworthy, also saturated
carbocyclic systems (C3–C7) were successfully borylated.
7. N-Alkoxy- and Weinreb amides
Besides CONH2, CONHR and CONR2 amides, also N-alkoxy
amides i.e. Weinreb amides have been used as DGs, however
less frequently. Not surprisingly, relatively similar catalytic
systems as compared to ordinary amides are applied also in
this case and also the types of reactions reported show a large
overlap with the examples in Section 6.
7.1.
Arylation
Only two examples for arylation reactions of N-alkoxybenzamides
have been reported in recent years. Bhanage and co-workers
used anilines as aryl source, which were in situ converted to
the corresponding diazonium salts (Scheme 37A).241 After the
initial C–H activation and arylation, the alkoxyamide actually
directs a second C–H activation on the previously introduced
aryl ring and delivers phenantridinones as the final products
after reductive elimination. Mild reaction conditions and good
to excellent yields (57–91%) are the main advantages of this
protocol. Additionally, halogens (F, Cl, Br) are tolerated on the
N-alkoxybenzamide substrate.
Land and You reported another arylation protocol, this time
of N-aryloxyacetamides, under Rh catalysis. In this case, oxida-
tive coupling between the position 2 of azoles and benzoazoles
was realized with typical yields 470% (Scheme 37B).242 Mainly
oxazoles and benzoxazoles were applied but one example with
benzothiazole and one with N-methylbenzimidazole was reported
as well. Under the applied reaction conditions, the N-aryloxy
amide was N–O cleaved and overall ortho arylated phenols were
obtained as the products.
Jin-Quan Yu and co-workers reported a C(sp3)–H arylation
catalysed by simple Pd(OAc)2 and 2-picoline as ligand, which
led to mono-arylation products (Scheme 37C).243 These mono-
arylated products could be subjected to a second arylation when
a different ligand, namely 2,6-lutidine was used (Scheme 37D).
The substrates applied were typically enantiopure and it was
demonstrated that the stereocenter was not compromised by
the reaction conditions. After the second arylation step, the
Scheme 35
Amide-directed C–N bond forming reactions.
Scheme 36
Amide-directed C(sp3)–H functionalisations.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6628 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
products were obtained in d.r. 420 : 1. Additionally, also the
conversion of the N-methoxyalkanamide to a methyl ester was
demonstrated and could be carried out in a single operation,
again without compromising the stereocenter. Aryl- and hetero-
aryl iodides were the applied coupling partners and the yield
range was relatively large spanning from 32–91%. Excellent FG
tolerance was reported.
7.2.
Alkylation and allylation
The group of Huang reported on the alkylation of N-methoxy-
benzamides
using
alkyl
iodides
as
coupling
partners
(Scheme 38A).244 The reaction was mono-selective for substrates
carrying a substituent already in ortho- or meta-position. In case
of para substituted compounds or the parent N-methoxy-
benzamide, mixtures of mono- and di-alkylated products were
obtained. On average, the mono-alkylated product was favoured
in a 6:1 ratio, which is remarkable considering the large excess of
iodide (6 equiv.). A weakly coordinating ligand was important for
achieving this degree of mono-selectivity. Amongst others, bromine
as FG was well tolerated in this Pd(OAc)2-catalysed protocol.
Notably, N-methylbenzamide gave the alkylated product only in
17% yield, whereas the N-methoxybenzamides gave products in
the 60–90% range.
Huang, Li, and Wang disclosed a Rh(III)-catalysed allylation
protocol using 2-vinylcyclopropane-1,1-dicarboxylate (or related
compounds) as allyl source (Scheme 38B).245 The reaction
showed excellent FG tolerance (including Br, I, NO2, CN,
COOMe) and yields around 80%. A large set of examples was
reported and the products showed good E/Z selectivity (5 : 1 in
the worst case, often B20 : 1).
The group of Huang reported the synthesis of dihydro-
isoquinolinones via a Pd(OAc)2 catalysed alkylation–cyclisation
sequence (Scheme 38C).246 Initially, di-tbutyl peroxide was
the alkyl source and the reaction proceeded smoothly in
cyclohexane, unfortunately requiring 25 equiv. of TFA. Notably,
if N-alkyl- or N-arylbenzamides were used, the reaction was
inefficient, whereas most examples for N-alkoxybenzamides
gave a yield B80%. By adding 2 equiv. of K2S2O8 to the reaction
mixture, the peroxide could be replaced with a tertiary alcohol.
The reaction with t-butanol gave essentially the same yield as
with the corresponding peroxide. In cases were one methyl
group was replaced by a longer alkyl chain, cyclisation occurred
either to the methyl, or the other alkyl group leading to
mixtures of products.
7.3.
Alkenylation
Moving to alkenylation reactions, several more examples as
compared to alkylation reactions were reported. They can be
clustered into reactions in which the alkenylated product is
isolated as the target molecule, and in examples in which the
alkenylation is followed by a cyclisation step to an N-containing
heterocycle, without isolation of the intermediate product.
Kapur reported pure alkenylation using cyclic aromatic Weinreb
amides as substrates.247 The reaction was Ru-catalysed and acrylate
or styrene derivatives were used as alkene sources (Scheme 39A).
A wide range of electron withdrawing groups on the olefin were
accepted, but yields were typically only in the 41–73% range.
Cu(OAc)2H2O was used as oxidant and AgSbF6 as additive.
In the end, the authors demonstrated typically further trans-
formations of Weinreb amides and converted them into an
aldehyde or ketone moiety.
Scheme 37
Arylation reactions directed by N-alkoxy and N-aryloxyamides.
Scheme 38
N-Alkoxyamide-directed alkylation/allylation reactions.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6629
A special case is the reaction with propargylic alcohols as
coupling partners. Ma and co-workers showed that in this case
an allene moiety was attached at the ortho position to the
N-methoxybenzamide DG (Scheme 39B).63 The most remark-
able feature of this transformation was the fact that in case of
chiral propargylic alcohols, the allene products are formed in
ees between 94–98%. It has to be mentioned that the reaction
required long reaction times, typically 72 hours but delivered
typical yields B70%. Furthermore, the intramolecular cyclisa-
tion of the products to several types of heterocycles was
demonstrated as well, showing the synthetic potential of the
disclosed method.
Alkenylation and also acetoxylation (not shown) of Weinreb
amides was reported by Yu and co-workers (Scheme 39C).248
This protocol was also applied for other DGs such as ketones
(see Section 2.3) and esters (see Section 5.1.2). In case of the
Weinreb amides the substrate scope included only FGs which
can be considered as innocent (F, Cl, CF3, OMe), since they do
not undergo any transformations under a wide range of C–H
functionalisation conditions. Yields for the alkenylation were
high (70–92%) for examples in which no di-alkenylation was
possible. In the other cases, mixtures of mono- and di-alkenylated
products were obtained. For acetoxylation, the yields were generally
B10% lower and the same issue with a two-fold functionalisation
occurred.
In one case also an N-hydroxyanilide has been used as
substrate.249 Acrylates were used as coupling partners in this
Rh catalysed protocol (Scheme 39D). The resulting products
were almost exclusively of E configuration but in two examples
isomerisation occurred giving then E/Z mixtures. These were
the t-butyl and ethyl acrylates, however why exactly these two
examples showed isomerisation was not explained. Also in this
case the final products were amides since the N-hydroxy group
was cleaved in course of the reaction (internal oxidant).
Zhang and Zhong reported an alkenylation protocol of
N-methoxy amides, in which the methoxy group is cleaved
under the applied Ru catalysed conditions (internal oxidant),
leading to alkenylated amides as final products (Scheme 39E).250
In this case not aromatic but a,b-unsaturated N-methoxyalkan-
carboxamides were used as substrate leading to the corresponding
2,4-diolefins with excellent Z/E selectivity often of 99/1. Yields
however were low to good (22–70%).
7.4.
Alkenylation with concomitant cyclisation
Several papers were published in which the alkenylation step is
immediately followed by a cyclisation to a nitrogen containing
heterocycle.
Li, Yang, and Zhou showed that indolines carrying an
N-methoxycarbamoyl in position 1 can be alkenylated with
alkynes in position 7 and then further cyclised to 6- or
7-membered rings, depending on the nature of the alkyne
(Scheme 40A).251 Dialkyl alkynes gave the 6-membered cyclisa-
tion product, whereas diaryl alkynes gave the 7-membered
derivative. Otherwise, the reaction conditions in this Rh catalysed
protocol were identical. Also alkylation with olefins and further
cyclisation was reported. For this transformation the additive and
solvent had to be changed (from NaOAc and MeOH to CsOAc and
DMF) and acrylates were the reaction partners.
A Ru catalysed alkenylation–cyclisation reaction was reported
by Bhanage and co-workers in PEG-400 as recyclable solvent
(Scheme 40B).252 N-Alkoxy or Weinreb amides were the best
substrates
and
diphenylacetylene
was
the
sole
coupling
partner and after cyclisation, in which the N–OMe bond is
broken, isoquinolinones were the obtained products. Also
carboxylic acids were applicable DGs for this reaction sequence
Scheme 39
N-Alkoxy- and N-hydroxyamide-directed alkenylation reactions.
Scheme 40
Alkenylation–cyclisation sequences directed by N-alkoxyamide/
ureas.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6630 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
giving isocoumarins. If styrenes were the olefin source,
no subsequent cyclisation occurred (not shown). For all trans-
formations yields were typically 480%.
Li and Wang investigated the reaction of 2,2-difluorovinyl
tosylate
with
N-acyloxybenzamides
under
various
Rh(III)-
catalysed conditions, which gave access to diﬀerent types of
product.253 N-(Pivaloyloxy)benzamides led to 4,4-difluoro-3-
alkoxy-3,4-dihydroisoquinolin-1(2H)-ones (Scheme 40C). If the
pivaloyloxy group was exchanged for a methoxy group, no
cyclisation took place but b-fluoride elimination delivered the
alkenylated products (not shown). In addition, detailed DFT
calculations were carried out in order to elucidate the reaction
mechanism.
Finally, Meyer and Cossy reported an N-alkoxycarboxamide-
directed macrocyclisation with an intramolecularly accessible
alkyne (Scheme 40D).254 Macrocyclisation reactions are impor-
tant transformations for natural product synthesis and new
methods therefore highly welcome. The formation of 12-, 14,
and even a 21-membered macrocyclic pyridinone were demon-
strated. For such a challenging transformation, yields were
actually quite good, getting as high as 82% in one example.
The 21-membered ring was still formed in 32% yield.
7.5.
Other transformations
The group of Chien-Hong Chen disclosed a Ru-catalysed alkynyla-
tion of aryls and heteroaryls using hypervalent iodine–alkyne
reagents (Scheme 41A).255 FG tolerance was excellent (including
bromine) and yields were typically around 70%.
Ketenimines were used for the annulation of N-methoxy-
benzamides under Rh catalysis (Scheme 41B).256 Initially, 3-amino-
1,1-diarylmethylisoindolin-3-ones were isolated as products, which
can be further converted to 3-(diarylmethylene)isoindolin-1-ones
under Lewis acidic conditions via elimination of the amine.
Using N-methoxy-1-naphthamides as substrates, this elimina-
tion occurred even spontaneously without any additional
Lewis acid.
The halogenation of Weinreb amides (besides nitriles
and amides, see Sections 10 and 6.1.6) was reported by
Kapur (Scheme 41C).230 NXS was used as halide source and
22 examples with yields between 49–81% were reported in
this Pd(OAc)2 catalysed protocol. The main focus was on
bromination, but also iodination and chlorination was demon-
strated. The presence of a nitro group shut down the reaction
completely.
A quite peculiar transformation was reported by the group of
Glorius (Scheme 41D).257 They used N-aryloxyacetamides as
starting materials which were converted to N-(2-hydroxyaryl)-
acetamides. So overall, an intramolecular amidation took place
via migration of the amide group. The reaction required a
bicyclic olefin as co-catalyst which enabled the amide migra-
tion. DFT-calculations and experimental mechanistic studies
allowed them to propose a mechanism for this transformation.
Electron withdrawing groups (CF3, COOEt) directly on the aryl
ring were not well tolerated, however, if they were separated by
an aliphatic spacer yields were again high (typically 70–90%).
8. Carbamates
Only a few examples of carbamate-directed C–H activation
reactions have been disclosed in the past three years. Hence,
it is avoided to divide this part into further subsections. All
reported examples deal with activation of C(sp2)–H bonds,
either of aromatic or olefinic systems.
Kim and co-workers developed an allylation protocol for
vinylic C(sp2)–H bonds using cyclic or acyclic allylic carbonates
as the reaction partner (Scheme 42A).258 The reaction was
catalysed by [RhCp*Cl2]2 and performed at room temperature
but consequently also took 36 h of reaction time. The yields in
this transformation were low to good (28–82%) and in cases
were Z or E products can be obtained, the selectivity is never
better than 5 : 1. The same group also reported ‘‘alkylation’’
with maleimides under almost identical conditions.259
Boc-protected 2,3-dehydropiperidines can be arylated with
arylboronic acids in position 2 using [RuCl2( p-cymene)]2
Scheme 41
Various transformations directed by N-alkoxy- and N-aryloxy-
and Weinreb amide.
Scheme 42
Carbamate-directed transformations.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6631
as catalyst (Scheme 42B).260 The method tolerated also hetero-
cyclic boronic acids and delivered good yields, typically 470%.
Formyl protection of the dehydropiperidine worked as well.
Halogenation protocols using NXS under Pd catalysis have
been reported with a number of diﬀerent DGs. Also carbamates
promote this chemistry as disclosed by Moghaddam and Jafari
(Scheme 42C).261 The halogenation is mono-selective and the
second ortho position stayed untouched. In fact, if one ortho
position carried a substituent already, no reaction occurred.
Chlorine, bromine and iodine could be introduced equally well
and yields were generally 480%.
Finally, Satoh and Miura disclosed a carbamate directed
alkenylation protocol via Rh catalysis. The transformation
required 2 equiv. of Cu(OAc)2 as oxidant, and could be carried
out in an environmentally benign alcoholic solvent, namely
tBuOH (Scheme 42D). It was shown, that after Boc-cleavage and
imine formation, a thermal cyclisation to a pyridine ring could
be carried out, leading to polyannelated ring systems.262
9. Urea derivatives as DGs
Urea derivatives have not been used as frequently as DGs as
compared to amides or esters, but some progress has been
made in the last three years. In several cases, urea derivatives
are often tested concomitantly with related DGs such as amides
or N-alkoxyamides, often in these contributions only for
showing broader applicability of a method. In this section,
examples will be presented in which urea based DGs make up
for a large part of the corresponding contribution and are not
only treated as a side note.
The group of Novak reported the alkylation of amides
and urea derivatives using alkyl sulfonium salts as alkylating
agents (Scheme 43A).198 The most interesting application is in
methylation reactions, since methods for introducing the CH3
group via C–H activation are actually quite rare. The reaction
conditions in this Pd(OAc)2 catalysed reaction were quite mild
(50 1C) but 5 equiv. of TFA were required. It has to be mentioned
that FG tolerance was not really investigated in this report and
yields were between 48–89%. The same group reported also
an ortho-trifluoroethylation reaction of N-arylureas, where they
basically applied a protocol they had previously used for the
same transformation with amide substrates (Scheme 24G) and
obtained excellent yields (Scheme 43B).263
A third alkylation protocol was reported by Nishimura and
co-workers.264 Mainly starting materials of the type N,N0-diaryl-
N-methylurea were used. Alkylation took place at the N-methyl
and not on the arene system (!), which was an unusual finding
(Scheme 43C). Actually, the reaction worked with excellent
yields, regularly 490%. More than 30 examples were reported
which showed excellent FG tolerance. This Ir-catalysed method
used terminal olefins as the starting material and required one
free NH group of the urea in order to allow coordination of the
Ir species. Then, a 5-membered metallacycle was formed with
the metal group before alkene insertion and reductive elimina-
tion delivered the final products.
The group of Lipshutz reported Pd catalysed arylation of
N-aryl-N0,N0-dimethylureas on the aryl systems.265 Depending
on the choice of catalyst, they could use either aryl iodides
(Scheme 44A, Pd(OAc)2) or arylboronic acids (Scheme 44B,
[Pd(MeCN)4](BF4)2) as aryl source. Both arylation protocols gave
good to excellent yields, whereas the boronic acid protocol gave
higher yields in those examples where the same product was
formed via both methods. Additionally, oxidative alkenylation,
i.e. Fujiwara–Moritani reaction, was also reported, again with
remarkably high yields in most cases. This transformation was
particularly interesting since it could be run in water with low
amounts of a surfactant (wt 2% PTS) at room temperature as
well (Scheme 44C).
Later, a Rh catalysed variant was reported by Yi and
co-workers (Scheme 44D).266 Also in this case N-aryl-N0,N0-
dimethylureas were the starting materials to be alkenylated
on the aryl systems. However in this case, the alkenylated
urea products were not isolated but further converted by
ammonolysis and esterification (MeOH is the solvent in this
reaction) to the corresponding O-methyl carbamates. Quite
good yields (frequently 490%) and substrate scope as well as
good E-selectivity was observed.
The group of Jana reported reaction conditions, which gave
two diﬀerent products, just depending on the electronic nature
of the applied olefine coupling partner.267 Again the same
substrate class as in the previous examples was used in combi-
nation with styrene derivatives. In case of styrenes with electron
Scheme 43
Urea-directed alkylation reactions.
Scheme 44
Urea-directed arylation and olefination.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6632 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
withdrawing or only slightly donating (e.g. CH3) substituents,
2-arylated indoles were the product stemming from ortho
alkenylation and subsequent aza-Wacker cyclisation as suggested
by the authors (Scheme 45A). In case of 4-methoxystyrene or vinyl-
naphthalenes, the corresponding 2-arylindolines were the
products (Scheme 45B). The authors proposed that a p-benzyl
Pd species was formed which was better stabilised by methoxy-
arenes or naphthalenes, hence avoiding b-hydride elimination
and allowed the immediate attack of this species with the free
NH group.
A Pd catalysed alternative indoline synthesis was reported by
the group of Han (Scheme 45C).268 In fact, the authors dis-
closed even an asymmetric variant of this transformation using
Pd(OTs)2(MeCN)2 as precatalyst and a chiral sulfoxide-oxazoline
(SOX) ligand. 1,3-Butadiene derivatives were the coupling partners
of choice. Yields were mainly in the 50% range and the butadiene
needed to carry an electron withdrawing group. However, e.r. of
up to 95 :5 were obtained.
A quite special case is the meta selective borylation of
benzamides as reported by Kuninobu and Kanai.269 Of course
the question arises why this example is presented in the urea
section, and arguments could be found for both cases (and
even for putting this example in the amine section). Actually,
the amide group does not coordinate the metal, but the two NH
groups of a urea derivative, and it is this urea derivative, which
has included a bidentate pyridine group which coordinates the
Ir catalyst (Scheme 46 bottom). So a secondary weak interaction
via hydrogen bonding delivers the metal species via the ligand
in proximity of the C–H bond to be broken. A wide variety of
substituted benzamides and also carboxylic acid esters, and
phosphoric acid esters (and derivatives thereof) have been used
as starting materials demonstrating that the oxygen acting as
hydrogen bond acceptor did not need to come from an amide.
Interestingly, yields (only determined as NMR yields from meta/
para mixtures) were either B50% or 490% whereas electron
withdrawing groups lead to the high yields. The meta selectivity
showed quite some variation ranging from 3.3 : 1 up to 430 : 1.
10. Nitriles as DGs
In recent years, the application of nitriles as DGs has been
dominated by directing functionalisation of an aromatic system
meta to the DG.270–273
The nitrile function typically sits at the end of a spacer and
points towards the C–H bond to be activated. Due to its
linearity, the nitrile function is perfectly suited for this kind
of activation mode. Only few ortho directing transformations
have been reported. These will be treated here at the beginning
of this chapter.
10.1.
ortho directing
1,3-Dicyanobenzene has been arylated in position 2 under
Pd(OAc)2 catalysis using aryl bromides as the aryl source
(Scheme 47A).274 Arylation occurred in position 2 in yields
ranging from 45–81%. Interestingly, 2-bromo pyridine did not
react whereas 3-bromo- and 4-bromopyridine did. One cyano
group could be replaced by another electron withdrawing group
such as Cl, F, or NO2. 1,2-Dicyanobenzene reacted as well.
Mechanistic studies of a similar arylation protocol were
reported by the group of Ren.275
Finally, Kapur reported on ortho halogenation using several
DGs, including benzyl nitriles (Scheme 47B).230 The reaction
conditions were identical with those reported in previous
sections (see Sections 6.1.6 and 7.5) and bromination and
iodination with NBS and NIS were reported. As compared to
the other DGs, namely Weinreb amides and anilides, yields
were pretty much the same for comparable substrates.
10.2.
meta and para directing
Further examples directed by the cyano function were mainly
meta directing. As already mentioned, the cyano group has to be
attached to a linker, in order to be able to bring the ligated
metal in proximity to the C–H bond in meta position. What all
examples have in common is the ortho substituted benzonitrile
marked in blue in Fig. 3. The nature of the linker chain in
Scheme 45
Urea-directed alkenylation–cyclisation sequences.
Scheme 46
Ligand-assisted meta borylation.
Scheme 47
Cyano-directed ortho functionalisation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6633
between can vary. Interestingly, the ortho position of the
benzonitrile group does not get functionalised and the function-
alisation of the more distant ring is favoured! It can be suspected
that the metal catalyst gets coordinated by the nitrile nitrogen,
which of course disfavours ortho functionalisation. The reported
protocols differ in the length of the linker chain. However, most
often a 3 or 4 atom linker was used whereas typically one or
two of them are heteroatoms. Regarding the transformations
reported in recent years, there was a strong focus on alkenyla-
tion reactions as can be seen in the subsequent section.
All examples in Scheme 48 used a four atom linker to
connect the benzonitrile group, however, diﬀerent solutions
for this bridge were reported. Shangda Li and co-workers used
N-nosylated amides (Scheme 48A),276 the group of Maiti relied
on a sulphonic- or carboxylic acid ester (Scheme 48B and C),277
and Gang Li and co-workers applied a carbamate linker
(Scheme 48D).278 All three protocols used Pd(OAc)2 as precatalyst
and a mono-protected amino acid (MPAA) mainly Ac-Gly-OH
as ligand and olefins carrying electron withdrawing groups as
coupling partners in HFIP as solvent. The unique features of
this solvent have been highlighted recently.279,280 Diﬀerences
can be found in the choice of oxidant. Also the yields of these
three protocols were in a similar range. Li’s work had the
largest substrate scope regarding the aryl ring,276 whereas Maiti
showed that a wide range of electron withdrawing groups
is tolerated in his protocol.277 However, the reaction was not
exclusively meta selective and also other regioisomers are
obtained in ratios between 6 : 1–20 : 1. Additionally, Shangda
Li and Gang Li showed in their reports also a few examples of
meta acetoxylation.276,278
Yu and Sun also used an amide linker, however his protocol
is Rh catalysed and did not require Ac-Gly-OH or HFIP
(Scheme 48E). In his catalytic system, [RhCp*Cl2]2 was the
catalyst and Cu(CO2CF3)2 the oxidant with additional amounts
of CF3COOH in oxygen atmosphere and DCE as solvent. Also
in this protocol, the reaction was not perfectly meta selective
and ratios of meta : other isomers between 10 : 1–20 : 1 were
observed. The yields are in the same range as for the previously
discussed examples (49–85%).
The same group also showed that the number of linker
atoms could be reduced to three as well and still the protocol
using Pd(OAc)2/MPAA in HFIP as solvent could be applied.281
Instead of Ac-Gly-OH, formyl-Gly-OH was the ligand in this
case. Again, meta selectivity was 20 : 1 at best, and no significant
diﬀerence between the scope and yield of the above mentioned
examples was observed (Scheme 49A).
The group of Maiti also used ‘‘shortened linker’’ DGs for
meta functionalisation of arenes. In a first publication they
Fig. 3
General strategy for designing meta-directing moieties.
Scheme 48
Cyano-directed meta-alkenylation.
Scheme 49
Cyano-directed meta-functionalisation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6634 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
demonstrated hydroxylation (Scheme 49D) and acetoxylation
(Scheme 49E)282 in a second one alkenylation (Scheme 49B and F)283
and finally also silylation (Scheme 49G) and germanylation reactions
(Scheme 49C).284 For the hydroxylation, acetoxylation, silylation,
and germanylation protocol the linker was sulphonic acid ester
based. For the alkenylation, both sulphonic acid ester and
carboxylic acid ester linkers were applied. The olefination
reactions showed the same features as for the previously
discussed
4-atom
linker
system.
Hydroxylation
reactions
worked in yields between 50–77% and good to excellent meta-
selectivity. Acetoxylations worked in the same yield range but
with lower selectivity. In silylation and germanylation reactions
only between 40–60% yield was obtained.
Again the group of Yu showed alkenylation reactions using a
nitrile DG with a 5 atom linker (not shown). The method
showed the same features discussed previously: Pd(OAc)2,
Ac-Gly-OH as ligand and HFIP as solvent. However, Ac-Gly-OH
seemed not to be ideal for starting materials already carrying a
substituent on the aromatic ring. Hence, Ac-Val-OH was identi-
fied as superior ligand in a second screening campaign. The
results regarding meta selectivity were comparable to those in
the examples discussed previously. The same was true for the
yields and substrate scope. As an add-on in this publication,
significant eﬀort has been put into elucidation of the reaction
mechanism via experimental and theoretical methods.
The group of Maiti investigated biphenyl-templates as para-
DGs in olefination reactions (Scheme 50A and B).285,286
Therein, the directing nitrile moiety was attached to a biphenyl
system, which was linked to the arene system to be alkenylated
via a silyl ether. It was shown that it did not matter which of the
aromatic systems was directly linked to the oxygen. Crucial for
success was that the silyl moiety in the linker chain was bulky,
since this forced the arene and biphenyl system to face into the
same direction and hence enabled the nitrile to bring the metal
catalyst in proximity of the para C–H bond. Yields for both types
of substrate were in the synthetically useful range of 450%,
in a good number of cases around 70%. Besides the para-
alkenylated products also other regioisomers were formed
favouring the para product in ratios between 5 : 1 and 20 : 1.
A few examples of acetoxylation were reported as well.285
By ‘‘inverting’’ the substrate, meaning that now the nitrile
DG is placed on the arene part, meta alkenylation of biphenyls
was achieved (Scheme 50C).287
11. Imines as DGs
Imines have been prominently used as DGs in recent years. One
large application field was their use as so called ‘‘transient’’ DGs,
in which the imine is formed in situ, enables a C–H activation
reaction, and then gets cleaved again. Reactions such as hydro-
acylation, hydroarylation, hydroalkylation, arylation, alkenylation,
amination, and halogenation have been realised with this
approach. Since this field has been reviewed just now,102,103 these
examples are excluded from this chapter and only examples are
presented in which the imine is present from the beginning (and
eventually cleaved after directing the metal catalyst), or in situ
formed but then remains in the final product.
11.1.
Arylation
Imine-directed arylations have not been the centre point of
recent research in the field as can be seen by the small amount
of examples. Szostak and co-workers reported a Ru(0)-catalysed
protocol which works under neutral conditions (Scheme 51A),288
which have been applied previously for C(sp3)–H arylation of
saturated heterocycles.289 Arylboronic acid esters were the aryl
source. The protocol gave good to excellent yields (up to 96%)
and tolerated the most common FGs. In one example it was
shown that the imine could be formed in situ as well, which
would then fall into the category of transient DGs.102,103
A second example was disclosed by Yoshikai using Co(acac)3
as catalyst and aryl chlorides as aryl source (Scheme 51B).290
Both of these features make the protocol highly attractive,
with the drawback of the requirement of 2.5 equiv. of a
Grignard species and the resulting limited FG tolerance. Still,
the protocol worked well on suitable examples with typical
yields around 80% and the DG could be converted to a nitrile
function.
11.2.
Alkylations and allylations
Alkylation reactions represent a very special case in imine
directed C–H functionalisation. Interestingly, non-precious
Scheme 50
Cyano-directed para-(and meta-)alkenylation.
Scheme 51
Imine-directed arylation reactions.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6635
metals play a dominant role in this field and examples for Fe,
Co, and Mn catalysis have been reported.55,61,70,72
Yoshikai, one of the pioneers in non-precious metal cata-
lysed C–H activation reported on the C2 alkylation of indoles
carrying an imine group in position three (Scheme 52A).291 In
the same contribution also alkenylation was disclosed, which
will be discussed in the subsequent section. As catalyst simple
Fe(acac)3 could be applied, however an NHC ligand had to
be added. One drawback in this type of chemistry was the
necessity for a Grignard species, which naturally limited the FG
tolerance. Still, in the presented examples good to excellent
yields (up to 93%) were reported. Notably, the reaction worked
well on indole but was inefficient on simple arene systems,
however, a protocol for this type of substrates was reported
previously.292
This aforementioned protocol also had the limitation of the
requirement for Grignard reagents. In subsequent work, they
tried to address this issue and it was found that addition of
50 mol% magnesium served the same purpose (Scheme 52B).293
However, still only examples with FGs not sensitive to Grignard
species were included. Noteworthy, with styrenes as the alkyl
source the branched products were obtained, whereas with vinyl-
trimethylsilane the linear products were formed, potentially due
to the steric demand of the SiMe3 group.
The two previous reports always used PMP protected imines
as DG. However, the same group also demonstrated that
unprotected imines can be used as well if ketimines are used
(Scheme 52C).294 In fact, in competition experiments between
PMP-protected imines and free imines, it was found that
the latter reacted preferentially. In the present example vinyl
silanes and terminal aliphatic olefins were the coupling partners
always giving the linear products in good to excellent yields (up
to 99%). In this contribution, the alkylated imines were also
isolated in a number of cases. In case of pivalophenone imine,
excellent selectivity for mono-alkylation products was observed
due to the steric bulk introduced by the t-butyl group. In a
later contribution, the alkylated imines and their further
photochemical transformation to nitriles was the focal point
(Scheme 52D).290 This time, alkyl bromides were used as the
alkyl source and it can be speculated that the alkyl bromides
might eliminate to the corresponding olefins in situ.295 Again,
the reactions worked typically with high yields, often in the
70–90% range. In both contributions the presence of a
Grignard reagent was required again, leading to the same
issues with FG tolerance.
Ackermann
and
co-workers
showed
N-PMP
protected
ketamine-directed introduction of a substituted allyl-group
stemming from dioxolanone (Scheme 52E).296 The reaction was
catalysed by MnBr(CO)5 and gave the final products in decent
yields with an E/Z selectivity of at least 7.3/1, often 420/1.
11.3.
Alkenylation
C2-Alkenylation of indoles was reported by Yoshikai and
co-workers under Fe catalysis (Scheme 53A).291 Reaction condi-
tions were similar to the ones for the alkylation disclosed in the
same contribution. It has to be mentioned that E/Z selectivity was
not good in 3 out of 8 examples and also yields varied between
18–84%, the lowest one being obtained by a dialkyl alkyne.
As we have seen in previous chapters, alkenylation reactions
are often followed by a cyclisation reaction with a heteroatom
nucleophile
leading
to
heterocyclic
systems.
Imine
DGs
showed the same behaviour, since the lone pair of nitrogen
could attack suitable groups which were introduced via the C–H
activation step.
Several isoquinoline syntheses have been reported. Li and Wang
developed a reaction between aromatic imines and alkynes using
Cp*Co(CO)I2 as catalyst (Scheme 53B).297 In most cases the reaction
was quite eﬃcient giving yields 470%. Most examples used diaryl
alkynes, but also dialkyl or terminal alkynes were applied success-
fully. Additionally, the transformation showed good FG tolerance.
Later, a slight variation of that protocol was reported as well.148
Another
base
metal
catalysed
isoquinoline
synthesis
was reported by Glorius and co-workers, this time using
Scheme 52
Imine-directed alkylation/allylation reactions.
Scheme 53
Imine-directed
alkenylation
and
alkenylation–cyclisation
reactions.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6636 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
MnBr(CO)5 under redox neutral conditions (Scheme 53C).298 As
coupling partners, tertiary propargylic carbonates were applied.
The authors proposed that after C–H activation and olefination
a carbonate elimination took place to deliver a reactive allene
species, which was intramoleculary attacked by the imine to
deliver the isoquinoline products. Yields were good to excellent,
however not much FG tolerance was explored.
Using diazomalonates as reaction partners, isoquinolin-3-
ones were the obtained products, again under Co catalysis
(Scheme 53D).299 The reaction performed in TFE and unfortu-
nately, transesterification of the product took place leading to
mixtures of compounds in an otherwise high yielding protocol.
Almost simultaneously, Zhu300 and Jiao301 reported two
diﬀerent protocols for the synthesis of quinazolines starting
from carboximidates (Scheme 54A and B). Both groups relied
on the same catalyst, namely [Cp*RhCl2]2 but used diﬀerent
sources for the nitrogen ending up in position 1 of the quinazo-
line. Zhu used dioxazolones whereas Jiao preferred benzylic
azides in most cases. Comparing both protocols it can be seen
that the use of dioxazolones gives a bit better yield, but also
with azides 470% are achieved in almost every example. FG
tolerance was basically identically good. Overall, Zhu’s protocol
was operationally simpler as could be seen by comparing the
reaction conditions in Scheme 54A and B.
A rare case of rhenium catalysis was reported by Wang and
colleagues (Scheme 54C).302 In this contribution, an imine
starting material was again reacted with an internal alkyne,
as seen previously in isoquinoline syntheses. However, under
ReBr(CO)8 catalysis a [3+2] cycloaddition took place and the
imine nitrogen did not end up in the ring but in position 1
of an indenamine product. The reaction worked well with a
number of alkynes (diaryl, dialkyl, and aryl–alkyl). Good to
excellent yields were obtained (up to 98%) in this operationally
simple protocol.
A second protocol in which the imine nitrogen ended up as
amine function in an exocyclic position was disclosed by Zhang
and co-workers.303 They reported that carboximidates could be
alkenylated in ortho position using acrylates and [Cp*RhCl2]2 as
catalyst (Scheme 54D). Until this point, this would be a quite
standard transformation, however the consecutive sequence to
the indenone products was quite interesting. It was proposed
that an initial intramolecular cyclisation led to an 1H-isoindole
intermediate which was oxidised by Mn(OAc)2 via a single
electron transfer forming in presence of O2 a peroxide inter-
mediate (detected by LC-HRMS). This intermediate eventually
ring opened and cyclised again, this time to the final product
(Scheme 54, right). For a detailed discussion of this pathway we
refer to the original paper.
The group of Jun reported a similar cyclisation, however
without
the
subsequent
oxidation-ring
opening-cylisation
sequence and hence delivering 1H-isoindoles as the products
(not shown).304
Also iminoquinones have been used as DG, which have
certainly diﬀerent properties than ordinary imines, still this
example is presented in this section (Scheme 54E and F).305 The
reaction allowed fast access to a tricyclic system involving a
number of olefins carrying diﬀerent electron withdrawing groups.
Depending on the catalytic system, diﬀerent products were
obtained. If only Pd(OAc)2 was the catalyst, the saturated products
of Scheme 54E were isolated, whereas if additionally 0.5 equiv.
Cu(OAc)2 oxidant was present, the products with an exocyclic
double bond were formed (Scheme 54F), both in high yields.
In all previously discussed examples the imine group was
already present in the starting material. There were also
Scheme 54
Imine-directed functionalisation–cyclisation sequences.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6637
examples reported in which the imine was only formed in situ
and then cyclisation took place to pyridium derived hetero-
cycles. Besides the starting materials in Scheme 55, the imine
intermediates are shown as well.
Both contributions in this field stem from the group of
Cheng and run under Rh catalysis.306,307 In the first report, a
three component reaction was carried out between a ketone or
an aldehyde, an amine, and an internal alkyne. Via the imine
intermediate, the desired pyridinium salts were formed quite
eﬃciently with typical yields of 480%.306 The second protocol
was only a two component reaction, because the amine carried
already an alkyne function for a subsequent intramolecular
cyclisation.307 Also for this much more complex ring systems,
good to excellent yields were reported surpassing 80% in
almost every example. Via this route, facilitated access to
protoberine alkaloids was granted.
12. Oximes and oxime derivatives
Oxime containing DGs are quite frequently applied and used in
several variants, namely ketoximes, aldoximes and ethers and
esters thereof. In 2016 the subject has been comprehensively
reviewed,308 but since then again a good number of examples
have been reported, which are now covered in this section. In
several cases, besides the oximes also N-heterocyclic DGs have
been tested in the same transformation. However, this chapter
focuses solely on the oxime examples.
12.1.
Arylation
Arylation reactions are usually amongst the most detailed
studied transformation with any DG. For oximes, only a few
examples have been reported in the last three years.
The group of Xu developed a site-selective biaryl synthesis via
dehydrogenative C–H/C–H arylation under ball milling conditions
(Scheme 56A).309 Mechanochemistry is an interesting, yet under-
represented method to introduce energy into a reaction system. In
a dehydrogenative approach, the question of regioselectivity is a
major issue in cases were substituted arenes are the coupling
partners. In this protocol, arenes bearing electron donating groups
showed excellent para selectivity, whereas arenes with electron
withdrawing groups such as acetophenone or methyl benzoate
gave good meta selectivity, presumably because the meta position is
more reactive towards SEAr reactions. Overall, the transformation
showed excellent FG tolerance and gave yields in the 50–80% range.
Pd-Catalysed ortho-C–H arylation of acetophenone oxime
ethers with aryl boronic acid esters was reported by Lee and
co-workers (Scheme 56B).310 The corresponding biaryl products
were obtained in yields between 42–80%. Interestingly, besides
the parent phenyl boronic acid ester, only derivatives carrying
electron withdrawing substituents (CF3, NO2, COOEt) were
applied. Noteworthy, the boronic acid ester can be used as
crude material stemming from an Ir catalysed direct borylation.
The b-arylation of oxime ethers using diaryliodonium salts
was developed for C(sp3)–H bond activation by Chen and co-
workers (Scheme 56C).311 The arylated oxime ethers were not
isolated but immediately hydrolysed to the corresponding
ketones. The reaction worked for a wide variety of ketoximes
and generally gave yields around 80%. Most interestingly, the
method was also applied to the arylation of complex natural
product derived molecules (steroids).
12.2.
Alkylation
Only few alkylation reactions have been reported in the last three
years. Li and co-workers reported Rh(III)-catalysed direct alkyla-
tion of arenes using commercially available alkyl trifluoro-
borates (Scheme 57A).312 The method is especially interesting,
Scheme 55
In situ formed imine DGs and subsequent cyclisation.
Scheme 56
O-Methyl oxime-directed arylation reactions.
Scheme 57
O-Methyl oxime-directed alkylation reactions.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6638 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
since it allows simple methylation reactions. Yields were good,
between 64–90% but only electron withdrawing FGs were
reported amongst the examples (CN, NO2, CF3, COOEt).
Via ring opening of cyclopropanols b-aryl ketones were made
accessible by the group of Li.313 16 examples were presented
but not much FG tolerance was explored (Scheme 57B).
An alkylation in the broader sense was the synthesis of
benzocyclobutenes via a Pd catalysed reaction with norbornenes
(Scheme 57C).314 Norbornene is a quite useful auxiliary in C–H
activation chemistry, for example in the Catellani reaction.11,315
However, in the present transformation, the norbornene was
not an auxiliary but a reaction partner and remained in the
final products.
12.3.
Alkenylation
ortho-Directed alkenylation reactions have been exploited
extensively with a number of diﬀerent DGs. As discussed
in previous chapters, the alkenylation reaction was often
immediately followed by a cyclisation towards a (hetero)cyclic
ring system. Also with oxime derived DGs this behaviour was
observed.
However, the first example to be discussed was dedicated to
an alkenylation reaction in which no further cyclisation
occurred. The group of Zhao reacted acrylates with benzylic
alcohols masked by acetone oxime ethers under Pd catalysis
(Scheme 58A).316 The resulting alkenylated products were
formed via a six- or seven-membered exo-acetone oxime ether
palladacycle, in contrast to the often dominating 5-membered
metallacycles. The reason why in this example no cyclisation
occurred could be found in the architecture of the substrates.
In this specific case, oxime benzyl ethers were the starting
materials and olefination took place on the benzyl system.
Hence, an intramolecular attack of the oxime nitrogen was
disfavoured and the alkenylated products were stable.
Several isoquinoline syntheses have been reported in recent
years. Basically simultaneously, the groups of Sundararaju317
and Ackermann318 disclosed [Cp*Co(CO)I2]-catalysed alkenyla-
tion/cyclisation sequences of oxime derivatives and diaryl
alkynes. In the Sundararaju protocol, free OH ketoximes were
used as substrates (Scheme 58B), whereas in Ackermann’s
transformation O-acetylated oximes were used (Scheme 58C).
Both moieties act as internal oxidant in the respective trans-
formations. The reaction conditions were almost identical, with
the diﬀerence that the Ackermann protocol required AgSbF6 as
additive whereas in Sundararaju’s procedure yields were better
in its absence. Both transformations showed excellent FG
tolerance and high yields.
An almost identical reaction was reported by Chen with the
addition that besides oximes also N0-hydroxybenzimidamides
were used as DG which then delivered 1-amino-isoquinolines as
products (Scheme 58D).319
Hua and co-workers developed an alkenylation–cyclisation
sequence in which the oxime DG is formed in situ via reaction
of
a
carbonyl
group
with
hydroxylamine
hydrochloride
(Scheme 58E).320 Starting from chroman-4-ones, tricyclic fused
pyridines were easily accessible, which allowed rapid access to
the skeleton of cassiarins, a family of alkaloids with antimalarial
activity. Yields were typically 480% and a hydroxyl and bromine
function were tolerated without any loss in efficiency.
12.4.
Acylation
Several examples for O-Me ketoxime-directed acylation of
p-systems, aromatic and olefinic ones, have been reported.
The group of Jiao reported acylations of aryl systems using
toluene under aerobic conditions as the acyl source, leading to
benzophenone derivatives (Scheme 59A).321 This Pd(OAc)2
catalysed process is quite attractive since toluene is a simple,
cheap, and stable starting material. The reaction required
N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI) as additive which induced in
presence of oxygen a radical process leading to the oxidation
of toluene to a benzoyl radical, which could then be transferred
to the ortho position of the oxime. Yields were in the 42–81%
range and the most interesting FG tolerated was bromine, since
that leaves a handle for further reactions.
The same group reported a similar approach, this time
starting from benzylic alcohols or benzaldehydes, again with
Scheme 58
Alkenylation reactions and alkenylation–cyclisation sequences
directed by oximes and derivatives.
Scheme 59
O-Methyl oxime-directed acylation and acylation/cyclisation
reactions.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6639
NHPI under aerobic conditions (Scheme 59B).322 This modifi-
cation showed broader FG tolerance with similar yields and
also examples of aliphatic aldehydes were reported, allowing
also the synthesis of aryl alkyl ketones.
The acylation of a,b-unsaturated O-methyl ketoximes with
benzaldehydes resulted overall in an interesting new method
for the synthesis of highly substituted furan derivatives
(Scheme 59C).323 Highly functionalised furans were synthesised
from a,b unsaturated O-methyl oximes by using Co catalysed
aldehyde addition and cyclative capture. Twelve examples were
prepared tolerating several important FGs (e.g. Br, COOR) with
moderate to good yields (25–84%).
12.5.
C–O bond formation
A good amount of oxime-directed C–O bond formations have been
disclosed in recent years. Acetoxylation, hydroxylation and alkoxyla-
tions have been reported, all using Pd catalysis and various oxidants.
12.5.1.
Acetoxylation. Dong and co-workers used 2,6-dimethoxy
benzaldoxime as an eﬃcient exo-type DG for arene C(sp2)–H
acetoxylation (Scheme 60A).324 In this case, Pd(OAc)2 was used as
catalyst and PhI(OAc)2 as the oxidant in a mixture of AcOH/Ac2O
as solvent. A low catalyst loading of 1 mol% was sufficient to
obtain the desired products in good to excellent yields in cases
where only mono-acetoxylation was possible. If there was no
sterics induced preference for a single reaction, mixtures of
mono- and diacetoxylation products were obtained.
Using substituted benzoic acids, Liao and Ji developed a mono-
selective ortho-aroyloxylation protocol of O-benzyl acetoximes, again
catalysed by Pd(OAc)2 (Scheme 60B).325 The benzoic acid as well as
the benzyl part could carry common FGs and the transformation
robustly gave 60–80% yield. As oxidant simple K2S2O8 could be
applied. In two examples also aliphatic acids were used, which
worked as well as the benzoic acid derivatives.
An alternative to commonly used oxidants in organic chem-
istry was used by the group of Mei. In their acetoxylation of
the b-position of an O-alkyl ketoximes, they relied on electro-
chemical oxidation (Scheme 60C).326 They described a large set
of examples and compared the yields with an alternative
oxidant, namely NaNO3/O2. In most examples, the electro-
chemical oxidation proved to be superior, giving yields 470%
in many cases. Eventually this report inspires more research
in this direction since replacing typical strong oxidants can
be quite useful.
12.5.2.
Hydroxylation
and
alkoxylation.
Intramolecular
alkoxylation towards saturated 5-, 6-, and 7-membered oxygen
heterocycles
has
been
reported
by
the
group
of
Dong
(Scheme 60D).327 As in their previously discussed acetoxylation
protocol, they used Pd(OAc)2 as catalyst and PhI(OAc)2 as
oxidant. The eﬃciency of this intramolecular cyclisation was
dependent on the relative stereochemistry of the substrates.
If anti diol derivatives were used, the yield was significantly
higher as compared to the syn diastereoisomers. This was a
nice extension to the repertoire of cyclisation reactions toward
saturated O-heterocycles.
Pd-Catalysed O-methyl oxime-directed ortho C–H hydroxyla-
tion of arenes was reported by the group of Jiao under neutral
conditions (Scheme 60E).328 Simple oxone was used as oxidant
and also the catalyst system was simple (Pd(OAc)2 + PPh3).
Overall, more than 40 examples were reported demonstrating
the excellent FG tolerance and the high yields (typically 70–90%)
in this protocol.
12.6.
C–N bond formation
Another interesting transformation developed by Jiao is the
amination of oxime ethers with anthranil (Scheme 61A).329
Anthranil is here a quite special reagent, since it gets ring
opened and overall delivers a 2-formyl aniline moiety into the
ortho position of the substrate. So basically two FGs are
introduced at once. The reaction proved to be quite robust
with yields between 62–86%. Regarding FGs, besides MeO and
halides no further moieties were investigated, but the oxime DG
can be replaced also by N-heterocycles.
In recent years, 3-substituted-1,4,2-dioxazol-5-one has estab-
lished itself as a good source for the amide group in C–H
activation chemistry. The group of Li also made use of this
Scheme 60
C–O bond forming reactions directed by oxime derivatives.
Scheme 61
C–N and C–Se bond forming reactions directed by O-methyl
oximes.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6640 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
reagent in the amidation of CH3 groups in carvone derived
oxime methylether (Scheme 61B).330 The most interesting exam-
ple was the late stage functionalisation of natural products,
namely the oxime ether of ()-santonin which worked with a
number of 3-substituted-1,4,2-dioxazol-5-ones in 64–94% yield.
Besides acylations, the group of Jao disclosed also ortho
nitration of aromatic oxime ethers using t-butyl nitrite as NO2
source under radical conditions (not shown).321 Acetophenone
oximes (23 examples) bearing substituents such as Me, OMe,
t-Bu, Br, and F were successfully converted into the corresponding
ortho-nitrated products.
12.7.
C–Se bond formation
Selenium-containing organic compounds are not very common
and hence methods for introducing selenium are relatively
rare. However, Wan and Li developed an aromatic oxime
ether-directed Rh(III)-catalysed selenylation protocol of arenes
(Scheme 61C). As selenylating reagents, electrophilic selenyl
chlorides and diselenides were used. The catalytic system was
highly eﬃcient under mild conditions and delivered the corres-
ponding products in typically 480% yields.331
13. Hydrazine and hydrazone
derivatives as DGs
Hydrazines and hydrazones are not frequently applied as
DGs in C–H activation chemistry. In most cases, it is not the
parent FG which acts as DG, but substituted (or protected)
variants thereof.
For hydrazines, few examples have been reported in which
simple aryl hydrazines were the substrates. In the first one, the
group of Cheng developed an alkenylation protocol in which the
final products are ortho alkenylated anilines (Scheme 62A).332
The actual DG is a hydrazone, since 1.2 equivalents of ketone,
namely 3-pentanone, transform the hydrazine in situ to a hydra-
zone. Only then ortho C–H insertion by Rh took place and the
olefination occurred with styrene derivatives or acrylates in quite
good yields (470%). The catalyst was then also involved in the
cleavage of the N–N bond and formation of the final aniline
products.
A similar olefination reaction has been disclosed by Zhu and
co-workers, however in this example there was no ketone added
and hence it is the hydrazine itself which exhibited the
directing eﬀect (Scheme 62B).333 With acrylates as coupling
partners again ortho alkenylated aniline derivatives were the
final products and also in this protocol yields were very good,
typically 480%. Additionally, the FG tolerance was also
significant. Alternatively, alkyl–aryl alkynes could be reacted
under the same reaction conditions. In these reactions indoles
were obtained as products via a cyclisation after the olefination
step. Interestingly, the aryl group always ended up in position 2
and the alkyl group in position 3 of the indole derivative.
Furthermore, Cui and co-workers developed a synthesis
of 1-aminoindoles via a Rh-catalysed intramolecular three
component annulation (Scheme 62C).334 The aryl hydrazines
were used as their HCl salts together with ethyl diazoaceto-
acetate and ketone using [Cp*RhCl2]2 as catalyst. According to
the proposed mechanism, the hydrazine formed with the
ketone the corresponding hydrazone and it was actually the
sp2 hybridized nitrogen of the hydrazone which directed the Rh
to close proximity to the ortho C–H bond. This allowed the
transfer of the ethyl acetoacetate to this position and cyclisation
with the NH group delivered the final products. The transfor-
mation showed broad FG tolerance with typical yields between
50–80%.
Reddy and co-workers reported a direct arylation protocol
of 1-arylhydrazine-1,2-dicarboxylates with aryl iodides and
Pd(OAc)2 as catalyst (Scheme 63A).335 The arylation worked
quite well giving yields between 50–86% and some FG toler-
ance, most importantly a second iodine. The obtained products
Scheme 62
HydrazineHCl- and hydrazine-directed transformations.
Scheme 63
Miscellaneous transformations directed by hydrazine/hydra-
zide/hydrazone derivatives.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6641
can be cyclised under oxidative conditions to the corresponding
benzo[c]cinnoline derivatives.
Basically simultaneously to Cui’s indole synthesis, the group
of Zhu published another variant of this type of reaction.
Starting from 1-aryl-2-Boc-hydrazines and diazodiesters or diazo-
ketoesters 1-aminoindoles were obtained (Scheme 63B).336 The
catalytic system was quite similar and a series of examples with
high yields and good FG tolerance was reported. When they used
N-Boc aromatic hydrazones as substrates, isoquinoline-3-ones
were the products (Scheme 63C). Excellent yields were obtained
using 0.5 equiv. AcOH as additive and slightly lower yields when
LiOAc was used instead. More than 30 examples were reported
with most yields in the 90% range.
Another indole synthesis starting from hydrazines, this time
N-aryl, N0-Boc hydrazines, was reported by the group of Glorius
under [Cp*Co(CO)I2] catalysis (Scheme 63D).337 Mainly sym-
metric diaryl alkynes were the coupling partners but in some
cases also unsymmetrically substituted (e.g. aryl–alkyl) ones
were used. The reaction showed good FG tolerance and also
good to excellent yields, often 485%.
Using [Cp*RhCl2]2 benzoyl hydrazines have been trans-
formed to isoquinolones via the reaction and subsequent
cyclisation with diaryl alkynes (Scheme 63E). The resulting
products have large conjugated p-systems and the authors also
investigated their photophysical properties.338
The group of Zhu applied the starting material mentioned in
Scheme 63C again, this time in a reaction with diaryl alkynes
under [Cp*Co(CO)I2] catalysis (Scheme 63F).339 Via this method,
3,4-diarylated isoquinolines were obtained as products. Again,
this is a well working reaction with good FG tolerance. The
group of Sun disclosed a similar reaction under Rh catalysis
(not shown).340
So far all examples dealt with C(sp2)–H activation. Dong and
co-workers could also realise a C(sp3)–H activation, namely a
Pd(OAc)2 catalysed acetoxylation (Scheme 64A).341 As substrates
served N2-protected hydrazones derived from 2,6-dimethoxy-
benzaldehyde and PhI(OAc)2 was the acetyloxy source. As
N-protecting
group
5
different
sulfones
were
used
and
acetoxylation occurred in b-position. Quite a range of substrates
were subjected to the reaction conditions and the typical yield
was in the 50–70% range.
Dibenzylidenehydrazines can be considered as a hydrazone
derivative as well. Two transformations on this type of substrate
have been reported since 2015, all under Rh catalysis. Zhu
reported the reaction with vinyloxirane leading to unsaturated
alcohols (Scheme 64B).342 Interestingly, only mono-functionalisation
occurred with 1.2 equiv. vinyloxirane.
The second procedure used diazodiesters as coupling
partners and with 2 equivalents, difunctionalisation on both
aromatic rings was obtained in good to excellent yields
(Scheme 64C).343
14. Bidentate DGs
In this section, recent advances in the astute use of bidentate
DGs in C–H bond functionalisation will be depicted. Indeed,
from the seminal work of Daugulis on the use of the amide
derived from 8-aminoquinoline as a bidentate chelating auxiliary,344
the scientific community put a lot of efforts in the design and use of
a large panel of bidentate groups considerably enlarging the current
tool-box of C–H bond functionalisation reactions. Consequently,
over the years, a myriad of transformations was developed playing
with the unique properties of various bidentate DGs and were
already abundantly described in the literature.57,108,345–350 Indeed,
such bidentate DGs appear today as key tools to achieve efficient
transition metal catalysed directed C–H bond activation and were
even successfully employed in strategies involving transient DGs,
which will not be depicted in this review.103,351–359 In this section,
an overview of the major contributions made in the 2015–2017
period will be provided. In particular, this part will focus on the
recent advances made in transition metal-catalysed bidentate
group-directed functionalisation of both aromatic and aliphatic
compounds. At first, transition metal catalysed C–H bond
functionalisation involving N,N-bidentate DGs will be dis-
cussed. Then, a focus on the promising, albeit still less studied,
N,S- and N,O-bidentate DGs will be reported.
14.1.
N,N-Bidentate DGs
Among all bidentate DGs, the N,N-bidentate ones represent
the most commonly used auxiliaries for directed C–H bond
activation.
14.1.1.
Amides derived from 8-aminoquinoline. Amides
derived from 8-aminoquinoline are by far the most common
bidentate DGs and have received a lot of attention. Due to the
large number of examples, a selection of the most relevant ones
will be presented herein, providing to the reader a nice overview
of the various possible transformations. It is worth mentioning
that in contrast with most of the other bidentate DGs, amides
derived from 8-aminoquinoline were successfully applied in
transformations of both C(sp2) and C(sp3) centers. C(sp3)–H
functionalisations are particularly challenging transforma-
tions as the functionalisation of less reactive aliphatic chains
(with or without the help of the Thorpe–Ingold effect) in an
Scheme 64
Hydrazone
and
dibenzylidenehydrazine-directed
trans-
formations.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6642 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
efficient manner remains an intensive quest. In this regard,
the combination of using high-valent transition metals with
bidentate DGs turned out to be an efficient approach in various
reactions.
Note that in some cases the transition metal-catalysed
functionalisation of 8-aminoquinoline itself (rather that the
substrate) at the remote C5 position was observed when using
these amides as DGs. These cases will not be discussed in this
review.360–369 To overcome such an issue, though, a second
generation of bidentate DGs was designed and the amides
derived from 5-chloro-8-amino-quinoline and 5-methoxy-8-
amino-quinoline were investigated (vide infra).
As the directing group often needs to be cleaved after the
metal catalysed C–H bond functionalisation event, several
strategies were developed leading to the corresponding carboxylic
acid, amide or ester. Indeed, classical approaches relied on using
basic or acid conditions to cleave the DG.370–378
If
diﬃculties
are
met,
additional
steps
such
as
N-methylation379–382
or
N-Boc383–387
protection
might
be
helpful in some cases for the deprotection of the DG under
basic conditions. More recently, it has been demonstrated that
oxidative cleavage388 (ozonolysis followed by hydrolysis) as well
as Ni-389,390 and Co-catalysis387 were also good alternatives for
instance although so far less commonly used compared to
classical acid and basic conditions.
14.1.1.1. C(sp2)–H functionalisation
14.1.1.1.1. Arylation. The arylation of C(sp2) centres has
been extensively studied. In 2015, Babu reported a regiocon-
trolled arylation of C2-substituted thiophene or furan using
aryl iodides as coupling partners.391 Good chemo-selectivity
was observed, with tolerance of a bromide substituent for
further post-functionalisations (Scheme 65A) and yields typically
around 60%.
Similar catalytic systems were applied for the arylation of
acrylamides towards the synthesis of
Z-cinnamamides by
Babu372 (Scheme 65B) and Xue/Jiang (Scheme 65C).374 In the
former case, a large scope of carboxamides was described with
moderate to good yields, up to 88%. In the last case, attempts to
extend the reaction towards the alkylation of acrylamides were
performed, but with only low conversions.
The
Pd-catalysed
arylation
of
arenecarboxamides
was
reported in 2016 by Babu.392 Di-arylated products were usually
obtained (Scheme 65D) with moderate to good yields (25–85%),
except when 5-iodoindole and 40-iodoacetophenone were used,
leading either to the exclusive formation of mono-arylated
product or a mixture of compounds, respectively. Depending
on the substitution patterns on the arenecarboxamides, mono-
arylation or a mixture of mono- and di-arylated compounds
were also observed (46–63%). The replacement of aryl iodides
by a benzyl bromide derivative enabled the mono-benzylation
reaction in decent yields.
The arylation reaction was extended in 2016 to N-(quinolin-
8-yl)ferrocenecarboxamide by Kumar.393 This Pd-based catalytic
system gave access to di-arylated and mono- or di-alkylated
ferrocenecarboxamides (Scheme 65E) and demonstrated a good
FG tolerance on the aryl iodide partners (alkyl, CF3, OMe,
NMe2, Cl, I, acyl, NO2). The eﬃciency of Ni(OTf)2 was also
evaluated, but lower yields were obtained.
A study performed by Yang, Wu an Wu also investigated the
arylation of ferrocene derivatives (Scheme 65F).394 The authors
evaluated the potential of 8-aminoquinoline and 2-(2-pyridyl)-2-
isopropylamine (PIPNH2) derived carboxamide as DGs to pro-
mote the transformation. Good yields, around 70–85%, were
usually obtained with the 8-aminoquinoline-derived amide.
Other metals than Pd were also investigated. For instance,
mechanistic studies were undertaken by Lan on the Ru-
catalysed arylation of benzamide.395 Using Co(acac)2 as catalyst,
8-aminoquinoline-derived amides were shown to dimerize.375
An excellent regioselectivity was observed (Scheme 66A), but
attempts to achieve the hetero-coupling of two diﬀerent arene-
carboxamides failed to get high selectivity. This reaction tolerated
several common FGs (I, Br, NO2, OMe, CF3). Another example was
reported in 2016, but required a stoichiometric amount of Co salt.396
A mixed DG strategy adopted by Niu and Song allowed
the Co-catalysed arylation of benzamides and arylpyridines,
oﬀering an access to valuable biaryl systems.397 This process
required two parallel activations (SET and CMD pathways) for
the formation of a high-valent Co intermediate coordinated to
the coupling partners (Scheme 66B).
Three alternatives to the use of aryl halides were reported in
the 2015–2017 period: cross coupling with arylboronic acids, a
decarboxylative reaction with benzoic acids, and the use of an
aryne precursor. Tan and coworkers published the arylation
of arenecarboxamides with arylboronic acids mediated by
Cu (Scheme 66C).379 A stoichiometric amount of Cu(OAc)2 is
Scheme 65
Pd-Catalysed arylation of C(sp2) centres with 8-aminoquinoline-
derived amides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6643
required, but a good selectivity as well as a good FG tolerance
(F, Cl, Br, OMe, SMe, alkyl, aryl, CF3, CN) were observed.
The
corresponding
products
were
generally
obtained
in
moderate to good yields (48–79%). A considerable kinetic
isotope effect (KIE) was observed with deuterium-labelled
compounds, suggesting that C–H bond cleavage was involved
in the rate-determining step of the mechanism. A similar
Co-based system proved to be efficient in the same transforma-
tion and was also suitable for the arylation of acrylamide
derivatives.380
Concerning the decarboxylative process, Hirano and Miura
reported a Cu-mediated arylation of benzamides using ortho-
nitrobenzoic acids.398 This reaction allowed the synthesis of
biaryl compounds bearing a nitro group (Scheme 66D) with low
to excellent yields (14–85%). By slightly changing the reaction
conditions (addition of a base), access to phenanthridinones
was possible (not shown).
The use of arynes was reported in 2017 by Zhang, with a
Cu-based catalytic system.399 o-(Trimethylsilyl)aryl triflates were
employed as aryne precursors and the reaction oﬀered access
to phenanthridinones by means of an annulation process
(Scheme 66E). The use of arynes is not common in C–H arylation
processes, and this reaction is therefore a very interesting
contribution to the field. A broad array of FGs was well tolerated
on the amide partner (OMe, alkyl, CF3, Br, I, F, CN, ester). In
order to avoid the extra DG installation step, Wan published in
2015 a multicomponent protocol, where the amide formation
and the Pd-catalysed arylation occurred as a cascade process
with moderate to excellent yields (47–95%).400 This step-
economic approach directly employed acyl chlorides, aryl iodides
and 8-aminoquinoline to obtain the 2,6-disubstituted products
(Scheme 66F). The presence of a methyl group at the ortho- or
meta-position of benzoyl chlorides led to the selective formation
of mono-arylated products.
14.1.1.1.2. Alkylation.
A
selective
Pd-catalysed
mono-
alkylation
of
8-aminoquinoline-functionalised
benzamides
was reported by Chen in 2015 (Scheme 67A).376 Notably, the
control of the reaction time and the amount of NaHCO3 added
regulated the selectivity of the reaction, favouring either
the mono- or the di-alkylated product with good yields with
primary alkyl iodides (75–87%) and moderate to good yields
with secondary alkyl iodides (31–88%).
A Ni-catalysed system was also reported in the same period
by Chatani.401 This protocol employed alkyl bromides with a
wide range of substituted arenecarboxamides and acrylamide
derivatives (Scheme 67B), resulting in good yields, typically
470%. An example with para-substituted arene carboxamide
yielded the di-alkylated product. Benzylation and allylation
reactions were also presented.
The Pd-based catalytic system described by Babu for aryla-
tion of thiophene and furan was also successfully applied with
alkyl iodides (see Scheme 65A).391 An Fe-catalysed alkylation of
acrylamides and arenecarboxamides using a broad range of
Grignard reagents was established by Ilies and Nakamura in
2015 (Scheme 67C).402 A broad variety of substrates was used
with excellent yields, mostly 490%. To avoid the homocoupling
reaction of the alkyl partners and a possible b-H elimination, the
stabilisation of an organoiron(III) species by the DG and an
additional diphosphine ligand was crucial.
Other reagents were also suitable for the directed C–H
alkylation. Indeed, the same group developed in 2015 a
Fe(acac)3 catalytic system using AlMe3.403 Efficient with both
8-aminoquinoline- and picolinamide-derived DGs, this system
was applied to a large scope of (hetero)arenecarboxamides
(Scheme 67D) with moderate to excellent yields (48–99%),
and was proven to be also active with AlEt3.
The
combination
of
organoaluminium
reagents
with
2,3-dichlorobutane as oxidant was reported by Xu and Zhang with
a Co-based catalytic system.404,405 An excellent mono-selectivity
was observed and AlMe3 gave yields between 73–93%. Moderate to
good yields (40–87%) were also obtained using AlEt3 as alkyl
source (Scheme 67E). Importantly, one example of C(sp3)–H bond
methylation was reported with a moderate yield.
Another original reagent, dicumyl peroxide, was reported as
a methyl precursor by Chatani in 2016 for the methylation of
arenecarboxamides.406 This selective methylation occurred
selectively on the less hindered ortho-position (Scheme 67F),
and was totally inhibited by the addition of radical scavengers,
demonstrating the radical character of the process. The following
mechanism was proposed: coordination of the Ni catalyst
with the bidentate DG followed by formation of the corres-
ponding complex A. Then, the intermediate Ni(III) B was
obtained from peroxide along with an alkoxy radical via a
SET process. After decomposition of the alkoxy radical into a
methyl radical and acetophenone, the Ni(IV) species (C) was
Scheme 66
Arylation of 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6644 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
formed, which underwent reductive elimination/protonation
steps to access the corresponding product and regenerated
the Ni catalyst.
The ortho-alkylation of arenecarboxamides was also possible
with butenolides and dihydrofurans using a Rh catalyst,409
generally providing mono-alkylated products (Scheme 67G) in
synthetically useful yields (49–87%). Unfortunately, di-alkylation
occurred with unsubstituted arenecarboxamides. In 2016, Cheng
performed the reaction between the 7-oxabenzonorbornadiene
and derivatives with arenecarboxamides bearing an 8-amino-
quinoline pattern, with typically excellent yields (470%, up to
93%).410 A [3+2] amide/alkene annulation took place, with
cleavage
of
the
8-aminoquinoline
group
(Scheme
67H).
A plausible mechanism was proposed: after coordination of
the Co catalyst to the amide substrate, the formation of a
metallacycle occurred, followed by the insertion of the bicyclic
Scheme 67
Alkylation of C(sp2) centres using 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6645
alkene, an intramolecular nucleophilic addition, a protode-
metallation step and the elimination of the 8-aminoquinoline.
The Rh-catalysed directed alkylation with styrenes was reported
by Chatani providing the corresponding linear products with
excellent yields, mostly 480% (Scheme 67I).411 An electron-
donating group on the arenecarboxamides accelerated the reaction,
and a large panel of styrene derivatives were suitable.
The formation of isoindolin-1-ones by C–H bond alkylation/
cyclisation with Co catalysis and electron-deficient alkenes was
described by Ackermann in 2015.412 This approach demon-
strated good FG tolerance and selectivity, except in the case of two
meta-substituted arenecarboxamides (Me or F as substituents),
for which a second isomer was obtained (Scheme 67J). A broad
range of substituents was tested, including Cl, Br, I, F, OMe or
NO2, and led to moderate to good yields (42–85%).
Another oxidative coupling, using maleimides as coupling
partners and mediated by Cu(OAc)2 was published by Hirano
and Miura.413 This method gave direct access to spirosuccin-
imide derivatives (Scheme 67K). A key role of Cy2NMe was
suggested to promote the C–H bond cleavage and to increase
the rate of the reaction. This process required a large excess of
Cu, but a similar reaction was reported by Jeganmohan using
only a catalytic amount of Co(OAc)2 in 2017.414 Maleimides
were also used by Chatani, without intramolecular cyclisation,
giving access to the corresponding alkylated products.415 This
reaction was performed under Rh catalysis (Scheme 67L) and
was also efficient under Ru-based conditions.
The alkylation of a C(sp2)–H bond of Cp rings was also
examined in 2015. Methylation and ethylation of two pallada-
cycles derived from ferrocene and a Co sandwich compound
were realised (Scheme 67M) with moderate yields (31–66%).407
The Pd-catalysed system developed by Kumar for (hetero)aryla-
tion of ferrocenecarboxamides393 was equally efficient for the
mono- and di-alkylation with alkyl iodides (Scheme 67N). The
key to control the selectivity was the nature of the base: NaHCO3
promoted mono-alkylation while Cs2CO3 yielded di-alkylated
products. A catalytic system using Co(acac)2 for alkylation of
ferrocene derivatives was also studied, but only one example
using an 8-aminoquinoline-derived amide as DG was reported,
with 28% yield.408
14.1.1.1.3. Allylation. The introduction of allyl groups was
also studied in recent years. In course of their studies regarding
the alkylation reaction of amides, Chatani demonstrated that the
same catalytic system might be used for the allylation reaction of
arenecarboxamides in presence of an allyl bromide.401 For all
examples, the presence of a substituent at the ortho- or meta-
position allowed a steric control in order to give exclusively the
mono-allylated products (Scheme 68A).
Sundararaju published in 2015 another Ni-based catalytic
system using allyl bromide.416 With ortho- and meta- substitution
relative to the DG, mono-allylation occurred with moderated to
good yields (40–87%) while di-allylation took place only with para-
substituted or unsubstituted arene carboxamides (Scheme 68B).
A Pd catalysed system was developed by Liu using 3-bromo-
3,3-difluoropropene as coupling partner (Scheme 68C).383
The reaction tolerated a wide range of substituents on the
arenecarboxamides (OMe, Br, F, CF3, alkyl, aryl).
Finally, three diﬀerent groups (Maiti,417 Jeganmohan418 and
Chatani419) concomitantly reported a Co-catalysed allylation of
arenecarboxamides using aliphatic olefins. In all cases, in order
to avoid a mixture of mono- and di-functionalised compounds
in this cross-dehydrogenative reaction, the aromatic carboxa-
mide partners were ortho-substituted and only linear allylated
products were observed (Scheme 68D).
14.1.1.1.4. Alkenylation, alkynylation and annulation. The
formation of isoindolinones was reported by Wei using readily
available reagents such as carboxylic acids or anhydrides
as coupling partners (Scheme 69A).420 In this process, the
presence of an additional pivalic anhydride was required for
the reaction with carboxylic acids.
Another original oxidative coupling using allenes was
reported by Cheng in 2017.421 The reaction took place specifi-
cally on the terminal carbon of mono-substituted allenes
(Scheme 69B) and yields between 30 and 83% obtained. Note
that when unsymmetrical or cyclic allenes were used, mixtures
of products were obtained.
The Co-based catalytic system developed by Jeganmohan,
mentioned
in
the
allylation
part,418
was
also
eﬃcient
for alkenylation reactions. The addition was totally selective
but only low to moderate yields (23–42%) were obtained.
Surprisingly the acetate group was preserved during the
process, and the reaction was applied to substituted allylic
alcohols (Scheme 69C). It is worth to mention that a mechanistic
study regarding the Pd-catalysed regioselective C–H olefination
reaction with aliphatic alkenes was reported by Peng, Paton
and Maiti.422
Scheme 68
Allylation of C(sp2) centres using 8-aminoquinoline-derived
amides as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6646 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
A Pd-based catalytic system was used by Wu and Ye
to achieve the functionalisation of arenecarboxamides with
1-iodoglycals.423 An additional ligand derived from L-proline
was required to obtain good to high yields (51–91%) and mono-
selectivity (Scheme 69D), even if traces of diglycosylated com-
pounds were generally detected. Various substituents on the
amide partner were tolerated, such as a bromine atom particu-
larly useful for further post-modifications.
In 2017, alkynes were also used by Chatani to perform
alkenylation of ortho-substituted arenecarboxamides with alkynes
relying on a Rh catalyst (Scheme 69E).424 This alkenylation
reaction tolerated a broad array of substituents on the aromatic
ring (Me, OMe, Cl, F, Br, Ac, NO2, aryl).
Zhang performed a Pd-catalysed alkenylation of aryldifluoro-
acetic acid derivatives bearing the 8-aminoquinoline scaﬀold,
via a six membered palladacycle.425 The reaction showed
excellent selectivity with only mono-substituted compounds
detected with a large scope of styrenes and allylated reagents
(Scheme 69F) with moderate to excellent yields (27–99%).
However, small amounts of di-alkenylated compounds were
observed with para-substituted arenecarboxamides, especially
with F, COMe and SO2Me as substituents.
The alkynylation of C(sp2)–H bond was reported multiple
times using a Ni-based catalytic system. In 2015, the groups of
Li and Balaraman used (triisopropylsilyl)ethynyl bromide as
coupling partner for the functionalisation of benzamides.426,427
In the former case, the reaction was also applied to acrylamide
derivatives, but the use of a flexible bis(2-dimethylaminoethyl)-
ether (BDMAE) as ligand was required (Scheme 69G). The
system developed by Balaraman required additional benzoic
acid (Scheme 69H). In this case, important amounts of
di-alkynylated products were observed with para-substituted
arenecarboxamides.
In 2016, Balaraman published a Co-catalysed di-alkynylation
of arenecarboxamides with an 8-aminoquinoline pattern as DG
(Scheme 69I).428 Di-Alkynylated compounds were generally
obtained except in few cases, and several common FGs were
tolerated (Br, Cl, F, Me, OMe, CF3, NMe2).
Chatani and co-workers published an annulation reaction
after a twofold C–H bond activation (Scheme 69J).429 The
annulation reaction could be inhibited by addition of a proton
source, such as pivalic acid, resulting in alkenylation of the
aromatic ring in ortho position, and various FGs on the amide
coupling partner were tolerated (alkyl, OR, SMe, CF3). A similar
annulation reaction with alkynes was developed by Huang
using Ni(cod)2 as catalyst without any additive (Scheme 69K).
Otherwise, the use of an electron-rich phosphine ligand favoured
a [4+2] annulation yielding isoquinolones.430
Scheme 69
Alkenylation, alkynylation and annulation of C(sp2) centres using 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6647
Other metals were also studied in the last three years.
In 2017, Nicholls disclosed a Co-catalysed alkenylation of
arenecarboxamides with various 1,3-diynes to form alkynylated
isoquinolone
derivatives
(Scheme
69L).431
Note
that
the
remaining alkyne was able to undergo another C–H activation
process to synthesize bis-heterocycles.
Similarly, Ilies and Nakamura reported an oxidative annula-
tion of acrylamide derivatives with alkynes catalysed by Fe,
leading to the formation of pyridones (Scheme 69M) in typically
excellent yields (up to 99%).432 When arenecarboxamides
were used, the corresponding isoquinolones were obtained
albeit with a narrow scope. Due to the key role of the in situ
formed silylmethylzinc reagent, slight modifications in the
reaction conditions led to the formation of mono-alkenylated
products.
14.1.1.1.5. Isocyanide insertion and reaction with nitroalkanes.
The synthesis of 3-iminoisoindolinones was realized with various
catalytic systems using amides derived from 8-aminoquinoline
as DG. A Cu-catalysed formal [4+1] cycloaddition of benzamides
with isonitriles was reported by Hirano and Miura in 2015
(Scheme 70A) giving moderate to good yields (21–85%).433 In
2016, Lei and Hao published a Ni(acac)2 catalysed reaction
giving access to the same products (Scheme 70B) with typically
good yields (470%).434
In 2016 and 2017, three protocols using a Co catalyst were
studied by the groups of Hao,435 Ji437 and Sundararaju.436
In the former case (Scheme 70C), synthetically useful yields
were obtained (30–85%) and a mixture of regioisomers was
only observed for the arenecarboxamide bearing a fluorine as
substituent at the meta position.
The protocol reported by Sundararaju provided the same
selectivity (Scheme 70D), good yields (35–96% yield), and a
mixture of regioisomers was only observed with meta-trifluoro-
methylated arenecarboxamides.436 An extension to acrylamide
derivatives was possible, albeit the corresponding products
were obtained only with poor to moderate yields (27–63%).
The system developed by Ji showed good tolerance to steric
hindrance, for instance tolerating a mesitylene group attached
to the isocyanide partner (Scheme 70E).437 Generally, aromatic
isocyanides are known to be diﬃcult coupling partners. The
transformation was eﬃcient with arenecarboxamides (typically
470% yield) and compatible with acrylamide derivatives giving
moderate yields in the latter case (45–74%).
The use of nitromethane as a coupling partner was studied
by the group of Tan.438 This reaction gave direct access to
3-hydroxyimino-1-isoindolinones
(Scheme
70F).
Note
that
3-methylene-1-isoindolinones
were
obtained
when
other
nitroalkanes were used.
14.1.1.1.6. Carbonylation. In the period 2015–2017, four
protocols for carbonylation of C(sp2) centres avoiding the use of
toxic CO gas were disclosed. The first, reported by Ge, employed
DMF as a carbonyl surrogate and was applied to a wide range
of amides, including arenecarboxamides (Scheme 71A) and
aliphatic amides for the direct carbonylation of C(sp3) centres.439
A synergistic Ni/Cu system under oxygen was adopted, the Ni being
coordinated to the DG and the Cu generating the electrophilic
species from DMF.
A second Cu-catalysed carbonylation using 2,20-azobisisobutyro-
nitrile (AIBN) was reported in 2016 by Koley.440 With arene-
carboxamides, only carbonylated compounds were observed with
good yields (49–96%), but attempts to generalise this method
to heteroarenecarboxamides gave only cyanated compounds
(Scheme 71B), typically with excellent yields (mostly 490%).
Another carbonylation was reported in 2016 by Zhang, using
diisopropyl
azodicarboxylate
(DIAD)
as
carbon
monoxide
surrogate.441 Various arenecarboxamides were used, including
compounds substituted with F, Cl, Br, CN, NO2, CF3 or OMe
Scheme 70
Reactions with isocyanide and nitromethane using 8-amino-
quinoline-derived amides as DG.
Scheme 71
Carbonylation of C(sp2) centres using 8-aminoquinoline-
derived amides as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6648 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
and yields were typically around 70%. Several azodicarboxylates
were also eﬃcient for this reaction and three acrylamide
derivatives were functionalised (Scheme 71C).
The last example was published by Daugulis in 2017, also
using DIAD and a Co-based catalytic system, for the carbonyla-
tion of sulfonamide derivatives (Scheme 71D).442 This reaction
gave easy access to 2-sulfobenzoic acid imides in moderate to
good yields (47–73%).
14.1.1.1.7. Trifluoromethylation. Tan published in 2016 a
Cu-mediated protocol for the trifluoromethylation of arene-
carboxamides using the Togni reagent II under mild conditions
(Scheme 72A). This selective method was robust (water as
additive, air tolerant), eﬃcient (36–80% yield) and tolerant to a
large scope of substituents (alkyl, F, Cl, CF3, OR, CO2R, aryl).381
14.1.1.1.8. Halogenation. In 2016, Koley reported a Ni cata-
lysed iodination of amides derived from 8-aminoquinoline.443
This process used molecular iodine and gave selectively mono-
iodinated compounds (Scheme 72B) in good yield (typically
470%), with a good FG tolerance (alkyl, OR, CF3, Cl, Br, NO2,
CN, aryl). Note that one non-aromatic amide was also reactive
and was obtained in good yield.
14.1.1.1.9. C–N
bond
formation.
Direct
amination
of
arenecarboxamides was reported by Liu and Zhang using a Ni
catalyst.444 Being efficient (48–81% yield) with several second-
ary amines (Scheme 73A), this reaction provided mono-
functionalised products and mechanistic studies suggested
the involvement of a NiI/NiIII catalytic cycle.
A Cu-catalysed protocol was reported by Daugulis in 2016.445
The transformation was eﬃcient with secondary amines, but
the use of 1 equivalent of Cu was required in case of primary
amines and aniline derivatives leading to the corresponding
products in moderate to good yields (Scheme 73B). Note that
slightly modified conditions were used for the amination of
electron-poorer derivatives such as sulfonamides, which was
also described in this study.
Another Cu-based system was developed by Jana for the
amination of arenecarboxamides, using anilines and an excess
of hydrated Cu(OAc)2 (Scheme 73C). A broad range of sub-
strates with diﬀerent substitution patterns was functionalised
and the synthetic utility of this transformation was further
demonstrated by the gram scale synthesis of a bioactive com-
pound, namely mefenamic acid.446 Worth to mention that an
extension to heteroaryls as coupling partners was reported by
Punniyamurthy also relying on a Cu-mediated transformation.447
The synthesis of valuable triarylamines was performed in
2017 by Niu and Song by means of a Co-catalysed C–H bond
activation strategy in the presence of an excess of aniline
(Scheme 73D).448
Studying the properties of sulfoximines, Bolm used dibenzo-
thiophene sulfoximine as an interesting ammonia surrogate
in order to access valuable primary amines.449 The surrogate
was recycled and mono-amination was observed in all cases
(Scheme 73E), but unfortunately only few examples were high
yielding (20–86% yield, mostly o60%)
In addition to amination, the nitration reaction was also
investigated, and ortho-nitration of (hetero)arenecarboxamides
was performed by a Cu mediated C–H bond activation, and
tolerated common FGs (aryl, alkyl, F, Cl, Br, CF3, CO2R,
OMe).450 By changing the solvent and the base and under
higher reaction temperature, the selectivity of the reaction
was switched from mono- to di-nitration (Scheme 73F).
14.1.1.1.10. Hydroxylation. A Cu-mediated ortho-hydroxyl-
ation of arenecarboxamides was reported by Jana and the
chemoselectivity was controlled using pyridine as suggested
by the author, probably by stabilizing a monomeric species and
facilitating the reductive elimination (Scheme 74A). Indeed, in
its absence, a dimerization process took place with some
substrates.377 Note that, in comparison with the PIP DG, the
Scheme 72
Trifluoromethylation and halogenation of C(sp2) centres
using 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Scheme 73
Amination and nitration of C(sp2) centres using 8-amino-
quinoline-derived amides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6649
amide derived from 8-aminoquinoline was less eﬃcient to
promote the related alkoxylation reaction.451
14.1.1.1.11. Thiolation
and
trifluoromethylthiolation.
In
2015, a direct Ni catalysed ortho-thiolation was reported by
Zhang with diaryl disulfides.452 Both, arenecarboxamides and
acrylamide derivatives were suitable substrates, giving desired
products in good yields (mostly around 80%) and the presence
of TBAI and o-nitrobenzoic acid as additives was required
(Scheme 75A).
Kambe also studied Ni-catalysed thiolation and sulfonylation
reactions with disulfides.453 Although the transformation was
eﬃcient (36–96% yield), a mixture of mono- and di-thiolated
compounds was obtained with unsubstituted or meta- and para-
substituted arenecarboxamides (Scheme 75B). Regarding the
sulfonylation reaction, mono-sulfonylation of arenecarbox-
amides occurred (33–55% yield) along with traces of sulfonyla-
tion of the 8-aminoquinoline auxiliary with sulfonyl chloride
under Ni-catalysis (Scheme 75C).
Another sulfonylation reaction was reported by Tan in 2015
using a Cu-mediated system and sodium sulfinates, prepared
from sulfonyl chlorides.454 The reaction showed good tolerance
to steric hindrance, moderate to good eﬃciency (46–80% yield)
and a large variety of sulfinates proved to be good coupling
partners (Scheme 75D).
An original reagent for C–S bond formation was used by
Messaoudi in 2016, performing the thioglycosylation of arene-
carboxamides.384 Such thioglycosides (Scheme 75E) obtained
with moderate to good yields (25–88%) could mimic their
O-glycosides equivalents, with enhanced stability. However, in
case of arenecarboxamides unsubstituted at the ortho-position,
mixtures of mono- and di-functionalised compounds were
obtained.
In 2017, a diastereoselective trifluoromethylthiolation of
acrylamide derivatives was reported by Bouillon and Besset,
using PdCl2 as catalyst.455 Z-SCF3-containing olefins were selec-
tively synthesised in good yields (typically 470%), using the
Munavalli reagent as both the SCF3 source and the oxidant
(Scheme 75F). Mechanistic studies suggested that the C–H
bond activation event was the rate-determining step.
Finally to avoid the installation of the DG, a one-pot proce-
dure was reported in 2017 by Liu and Wei for the C–S bond
formation via C–H bond activation.456 The initial conditions
gave access to di-thiolated compounds, and mono-thiolated
products were selectively prepared in moderate to good yields
(53–81%) by changing the base and using a lower amount of
thiol derivatives (Scheme 75G).
14.1.1.1.12. Selenylation. Two protocols for C–Se bond
formation by C–H activation were reported in the 2015–2017
period. The first one, published by Baidya in 2016, reported the
arylselenylation of arenecarboxamides catalysed by Cu.457
Selective di-functionalisation was observed and a wide range
of FGs was tolerated on both the arenecarboxamides or the
selenated coupling partners (Scheme 76A). Substitution of the
8-aminoquinoline auxiliary was also well tolerated.
The second example was the Ni-catalysed synthesis of benzo-
isoselenazolone derivatives under air atmosphere, reported
by Nishihara in 2017.458 Mechanistic studies suggested that
Scheme 74
Hydroxylation of C(sp2) centres using 8-aminoquinoline-
derived amides as DG.
Scheme 75
Thiolation and trifluoromethylthiolation of C(sp2) centres
using 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Scheme 76
Selenylation and silylation of C(sp2) centres using 8-amino-
quinoline-derived amides as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6650 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
the C–H bond cleavage is the rate-determining step of the
reaction (Scheme 76B).
14.1.1.1.13. Silylation. A regio- and stereo-selective silyla-
tion of acrylamide derivatives was reported by Zhang in 2017.459
The reaction had a good FGs tolerance (Scheme 76C) and
was eﬃcient with a-substituted acrylamides. In contrast, only
moderate yields were obtained with b-substituted derivatives.
A stable palladacycle was characterized and explained the
observed Z-selectivity.
14.1.1.2. C(sp3)–H functionalisation. The 8-aminoquinoline
derived amides have been widely investigated in transition
metal catalysed directed functionalisation of C(sp3)–H bonds
and represent without any doubt a privileged bidentate DG for
series of transformations.
14.1.1.2.1. Arylation. Pd-Catalysed arylation of unactivated
aliphatic amides at the b-position constituted the most exem-
plified transformations with this DG. Since 2015, diﬀerent
coupling partners were used such as (diacetoxyiodo)arenes,
the commonly used aryl halides (mainly iodide) and more
scarcely polyfluoroarenes.460
Qin reported on Pd(II)-catalysed arylation of unactivated
aliphatic amides using (diacetoxyiodo)arenes as arylation reagents
via a Ag salt-free process, a real asset compared to other approaches
(Scheme 77A).461 Note that in this transformation the presence
of Cs2CO3 was crucial. The selective mono-functionalisation of
secondary C(sp3)–H bonds was achieved, albeit in case of a
primary C(sp3)–H, a mixture of mono- and di-functionalised
products was obtained.
Using aryl iodides as coupling partners, the Pd(II)-catalysed
arylation of O-methyl lactic acids provided an eﬃcient access
to
chiral
b-aryl-a-methoxy
acids
under
mild
conditions
(Scheme 77B).462 In this approach disclosed by Shi, no
diarylation was observed. Note that the reaction was restricted
to the functionalisation of primary C(sp3)–H bonds. One of the
main limitations was the necessity to install the DG on the
substrate. Consequently, as an improved protocol, the in situ
generation of the bidentate DG and its use in a Pd-catalysed
arylation reaction of unactivated aliphatic amides were inde-
pendently studied by the groups of Babu463 and Liu.464 They
developed a multicomponent reaction of acid chloride, aryl
iodide and 8-aminoquinoline with a similar Pd-based catalytic
system. In the former study, the monoarylation of linear
aliphatic amides (22 examples, 50–97% yield) was reported.
Note that in case of cycloalkanes, products resulting from a
diarylation reaction (14 examples, 25–83% yield) was obtained
(Scheme 77C). It is worth to mention that the Ag salt-free
protocol reported by Liu was tolerant to various alkyl chains
(Scheme 77D).
Moreover, the Pd-catalysed arylation of a-cyano aliphatic
amides was also investigated, oﬀering an access to useful and
privileged more complex molecules.465 Extension of these
reactions to the use of heteroaryl iodides as coupling partners
was possible. Indeed, transition metal-catalysed heteroaryla-
tion of aliphatic amides were reported using iodopyridines as
studied by Bach (Scheme 77E).466 Thiophene derivatives were
also used by Xu and Qiu (Scheme 77F)467 as well as by Xia and
Yin (Scheme 77G).468 In the last cases, the heteroarylation did
tolerate several FGs on the heteroaromatic ring (Cl, Br, I, OR,
C(O)R, CO2R, aryl) and was carried out under Ni catalysis.469,470
This bidentate DG was not restricted to b-functionalisation as
the arylation at the g position was also successfully achieved via
Pd-catalysis by Maiti (Scheme 77H)471 and Babu (Scheme 77I),472
although so far restricted to specific substrates with blocked
b-position.
Furthermore, cyclic saturated compounds were also function-
alised. Pd-Catalysed arylation of symmetric cycloalkanecarboxamides
Scheme 77
Arylation of C(sp3) centres with 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6651
at
the
b-methylene
position
was
investigated
by
Chen
(Scheme 78A).473 Derivatives of various ring sizes were studied
giving eﬃcient access to the corresponding mono-arylated
products with high cis diastereoselectivity. Note that the eﬃ-
ciency of the reaction was dependent on the ring size of
the substrate; 5-membered rings (24–68% of mono-arylated
products and 2–5% of di-arylated products), 4 membered ring
(25–32% mono- and 46–64% di-), 6 membered ring (33–54%
mono- and 15–17% di-) and 7 membered ring (43% mono- and
5% di-). Surprisingly, the commonly used amide derived from
pivalic acid was unreactive.
Hoshiya and Shuto disclosed a new protocol for the synthesis
of 1,1,2,3-type chiral tetra-substituted arylcyclopropanes by
means of a diastereoselective Pd(II)-catalysed C–H bond function-
alisation (Scheme 78B).474 The nature of the alcohol protecting
group turned out to be crucial for the efficiency of this difficult
reaction by influencing steric and electronic features of the
cyclopropane. Noteworthy, the tri-substituted chiral cyclo-
propane used as starting material was prepared in 5 steps from
(R)-epichlorohydrin.
In addition, functionalisation of cyclobutanes was also
described in a process involving a Pd(II)-catalysed cascade reaction:
(1) synthesis of cyclobutanes from 6-bromohexanamides via a
Pd(II)-catalysed intramolecular methylene C–H alkylation followed
by a subsequent (2) intermolecular C–H bond functionalisation
(i.e. arylation, alkenylation, alkylation, alkynylation, allylation,
benzylation and alkoxylation) with various RX coupling partners
offering an access to quaternary carbon centered cyclobutanes
(not shown).475
Only rare protocols investigated diastereoselective or enantio-
selective arylation of aliphatic amides. In 2015, Babu reported
a Pd-catalysed diastereoselective arylation of aliphatic chains of
a prochiral methylene group in b-position, with diﬀerent sub-
stitutions patterns such as derivatives bearing a substituent at
the a- or the g-position and a- and b-disubstituted ones as well
as (S)-2-phenylbutanamide for instance (Scheme 78C).371
The enantioselective arylation of secondary C(sp3) centers at the
b-position of aliphatic amides was studied by Duan (Scheme 78D).476
The presence of chiral phosphoric acids and amides enabled
controlling the enantioselectivity and was beneficial to the
reaction rate.
Several groups investigated the arylation of unactivated
secondary C(sp3)–H bonds of saturated heterocycles such
as tetrahydrofuran- and 1,4-benzodioxanecarboxylic acid (Babu,
Scheme 79A),370 proline (Liu and Zhang, Scheme 79B),477 furan-,
N-protected piperidine- and THP carboxylic acid derivatives
(Bull, Scheme 79C)378 as well as L-pipecolinic acid derivatives
(Cao and Wu, Scheme 79D).478 In the last case, the method
appeared to be robust with all excellent yields, typically around
80%, and tolerated a variety of FG such as free alcohol, nitrile
and halogens. Moreover, using a similar catalytic system
(Pd(OAc)2 (5 mol%), AgOAc (2 equiv.), toluene, 110 1C), the
b-arylation of dipeptides was achieved offering the possibility
to functionalise protected amino acids as well as at the
C-terminus of peptides (not shown).479
14.1.1.2.2. Alkylation. The Shi group reported a protocol
based on a Co-catalysed intramolecular process leading to
bicyclo[n.1.0]-alkanes
in
decent
to
good
yields
(32–77%)
(Scheme 80A).480 The main drawbacks were a rather high
catalyst loading and a relatively narrow FG tolerance (alkyl,
Br, F). The same group developed an intermolecular process
based on the Pd-catalysed functionalisation of O-alkylated
lactic acid derivatives with alkyl iodides (linear or branched
ones) to access chiral a-alkoxy acids in average (50–60%) yields
(Scheme 80B).481 Only the mono-alkylated products were
synthesised and the synthetic potential of this approach was
demonstrated by a good tolerance to several FGs (halogene,
amides, ester, protected alcohol and amine among others).
Alkylation of more rigid skeletons was possible as reported
by Uenishi, who successfully developed a Pd-catalysed C–H bond
functionalisation of a tertiary carbon of chiral cyclopropane
derivatives with alkyl iodides and bromides (Scheme 80C)
obtaining low to excellent yields (22–93%).482
Scheme 78
Diastereoselective or enantioselective arylation of C(sp3)
centres with 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Scheme 79
Arylation of C(sp3) centres of saturated heterocycles with
8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6652 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
In
an
interesting
example,
acetonitrile
was
used
for
Pd-catalysed cyanomethylation of unactivated aliphatic amides,
by primary and secondary C(sp3)–H bond activation. The trans-
formation displayed good b-selectivity, tolerated a broad scope
of bulky aliphatic groups, and the methyl C–H bonds were
preferentially functionalised in the presence of methylene C–H
bonds (Scheme 80D).385
Phosphonoalkyl iodides were also suitable coupling part-
ners as demonstrated by the Pd-catalysed alkylation of aliphatic
chains from Yang, which oﬀered access to valuable chiral
g-phosphono-a-amino acids using (iodomethyl)phosphonate
(Scheme 80E) with yield typically around 70% and up to 97%.483
14.1.1.2.3. Alkoxycarbonylation. Shi investigated the alkoxy-
carbonylation reaction of both primary and secondary C(sp3)–H
bonds via a Pd(II)/Pd(IV) catalytic cycle (Scheme 80F).484 The use
of alkyl chloroformates as carbonyl sources constituted a real
asset for this transformation. The quantity of Ag salt was impor-
tant to prevent the intramolecular C–N bond reductive elimina-
tion as alternative reaction pathway, even though its exact role was
not elucidated. Functionalisation at the b- and even g-position was
possible, albeit in lower yields in the last case.
14.1.1.2.4. Alkenylation. Transition metal catalysed alkenyl-
ation of aliphatic amides were investigated using diﬀerent
coupling partners. Rao reported a procedure based on a
Pd-catalysed alkenlyation with vinyl iodides. Access to linear
E-olefins from E-iodo alkenes and Z-isomers from Z-olefins was
obtained, albeit with moderate E/Z ratios in the latter case
(Scheme 81A).485
Internal alkynes turned out to be suitable coupling partners
in the alkenylation of aliphatic chains under Ni-catalysis
as demonstrated by the methodologies developed by You
(Scheme 81B)486 and Maiti (Scheme 81C).487 Zhang used
terminal alkynes (Scheme 81D).308 The system developed by
Maiti was eﬃcient with a broad scope of diaryl alkynes, and
tolerant to common FGs (OR, CO2R, NO2, CF3). Alternatively,
organoborate reagents were employed in an Fe-catalysed trans-
formation, albeit restricted to few examples of alkenylated
products (3 cases).488
A Co-catalysed reaction of aliphatic amides with terminal
alkynes leading to the corresponding pyrrolidinones was
reported by Zhang (Scheme 81E).489 Alkenylation of unactivated
aliphatic C(sp3)–H bonds was also investigated by the same
group, who developed a Cu(II)-catalysed and Ag(I)-mediated
sequential alkynylation with alkynyl carboxylic acids and annula-
tion via a decarboxylative process, offering access to pyrrolidinone
derivatives (Scheme 81F).490
Shi also demonstrated that a Ni/Cu co-catalyst system might
be used for the oxidative coupling of unactivated aliphatic
amides with ethynyltriisopropylsilane as the terminal alkyne
(not shown).491
14.1.1.2.5. Carbonylation. Carbonylation of aliphatic chains
has attracted a lot of attention as demonstrated by recent
contributions. In course of their investigations towards the
carbonylation of aromatic amides by means of Ni/Cu catalysis,
Ge extended this approach to the functionalisation of aliphatic
amides using DMF as carbon source in an oxygen atmosphere
(Scheme 81G) giving good yields in the 60–80% range.439 Trans-
formations
involving
Co
catalysts
with
carbon
monoxide
reagent were also efficient as depicted by the group of Gaunt
(Scheme 81H) with moderate to good yields (49–89%) and a good
FG tolerance with for instance presence of a phthalimide
group.492 Similar systems were also reported by Sundararaju
(Scheme 81I) with decent to good yields (15–87%)493 and by Lei
(Scheme 81J) typically with yields around 70%.494
14.1.1.2.6. Halogenation. Only one report using the amide
derived from 8-aminoquinoline was depicted for a chlorination
reaction between 2015–2017. Besset studied the Pd-catalysed
chlorination of unactivated aliphatic chains at room temperature
in presence of NCS (Scheme 82A).495 The transformation was
regioselective and even though both mono- and di-chlorinated
products were obtained, they were easily separable by column
chromatography. The reaction also tolerated the presence
of common FGs such as halides, and gave typically a total
yield between 60 and 70%. Worth to mention is that no
chlorinated product at the C5 position of the 8-aminoquinoline
was detected.
In addition, to the reports from Yu496 and Shi497 who inves-
tigated the Pd-catalysed fluorination of amino acid derivatives
Scheme 80
Alkylation, cyanomethylation and alkoxycarbonylation of
C(sp3) centres with 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6653
at the b-position with other DGs, the Pd-catalysed directed
fluorination of unactivated aliphatic chains with this bidentate
DG was studied by the groups of Xu (Scheme 82B)498 as well
as Wu, Zhang and Huang (Scheme 82C).499 In both cases, an
electrophilic fluorinated reagent was used and a Pd(II)/Pd(IV)
process was proposed to promote the reductive elimination
step in this challenging transformation.
14.1.1.2.7. C–O bond formation. The Pd-catalysed C–O
bond formation by C(sp3)–H activation was investigated by
several groups. A protocol was proposed by Chen and Rao for
the b-hydroxylation of aliphatic amides (Scheme 82D) with
moderate to good yields (24–72%).500 In this catalytic system,
water was used as the hydroxyl group source and the 1-hydroxy-
1,2-benziodoxol-3-(1H)-one as oxidant. The reaction is moisture
tolerant and in most cases, mono-hydroxylation occurred
except for substrates bearing two methyl groups.
Acetoxylation reactions of methylene groups on aliphatic chains
and benzylic positions were studied by Shi (Scheme 82E)501
under oxidative conditions (use of oxone/Ac2O) and gave the
corresponding anti-b-hydroxy-a-amino acid amides in typically
a yield around 60%, and up to 86%. Interestingly, these
compounds were prepared in moderate to high diastereoselec-
tivity via a sequential C–H functionalisation (mono-arylation or
alkylation followed by an acetoxylation reaction). Note that
to get a better understanding on the diastereoselectivity in
Pd-catalysed alkoxylation of cyclic alkanecarboxamides, a study
was reported by Rao (not shown).502
Stable nitroxyl radicals were used by the group of You to
perform aminoxylation of C(sp3)–H bonds (Scheme 82F).503
This Ni-catalysed system gave fair to good yields (35–91%)
and was tolerant to various FGs (halides, allyl, OMe, alkyl, aryl).
Organosilanes were also suitable coupling partners allowing
the aryloxylation/vinyloxylation of unactivated aliphatic chains
as described by Zhang (Scheme 82G).149
14.1.1.2.8. C–N
bond
formation.
The
transition
metal
catalysed-C–N bond formation was investigated by several
research groups over the 2015–2017 period. The access to
b-lactams was achieved by intramolecular processes by Yang
and You (Scheme 83A)504 and by Cao and Wu (Scheme 83B).505
In the first case, the use of Cu as catalyst was effective. In the
second one, Pd was required. A large array of FGs was tolerated
(alkyl, OR, F, Cl, Br, NO2, aryl) and excellent yields were typically
obtained, mostly around 80–90%. Isoindolinones were also
accessible thought a benzylic C(sp3)–H bond activation, as
described by Hirano and Miura (Scheme 83C).506 Intermolecular
processes were also disclosed, using simples alkylamines
(Scheme 83D and E).507,508 Both systems are Cu-mediated, but in
the first case the scope was limited to secondary cyclic alkylamines.
However, a broad variety of substituent was tolerated on the amide
partner (aryl or bulky aliphatic groups). In the latter case, both
cyclic and acyclic dialkylamines were efficient.
14.1.1.2.9. Sulfenylation, sulfonylation and trifluoromethyl-
sulfenylation. Since 2015 several groups (Shi,509 Zhang,510 Shi511
as well as Qiu, Xu and Yin512) investigated the Ni-catalysed
Scheme 81
Alkenylation and carbonylation of C(sp3) centres with 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6654 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
sulfenylation of aliphatic chains using generally disulfides
or thiol derivatives (Scheme 84A–D). These protocols were
complementary using either aromatic disulfides and even
thiols (Scheme 84A and B) or both aromatic and aliphatic
ones (Scheme 84C and D). Note that depending on the reaction
conditions and the substrate skeleton, mono- and/or di-
functionalised products were obtained. This approach was
not restricted to the C–S bond formation, since an extension
to a C–Se bond construction was also reported (Scheme 84B).
A first example of a Pd-catalysed sulfonylation using sodium
sulfinates was studied by Shi (Scheme 84E).513 Eﬃcient with a
large scope of sodium sulfinates, this reaction also tolerated the
presence of common FGs on the amide partner (alkyl, aryl, F,
Cl, CF3, Br). In addition, the Pd-catalysed direct introduction of
a SCF3 group by C–H bond activation was developed by Besset,
the sole report of the trifluoromethylthiolation of a primary
C(sp3)–H bond reported so far (Scheme 84F).373 Decent yields
were obtained (up to 53%) and this reaction was compatible
with the presence of various common FGs. Besides, a large
variety of aliphatic carboxamides were functionalised such as
Scheme 82
Halogenation and C–O bond formation on C(sp3) centres
with 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Scheme 83
Amination of C(sp3) centres with 8-aminoquinoline-derived
amides as DG.
Scheme 84
Sulfenylation,
sulfonylation,
trifluoromethylthiolation
and
silylation of C(sp3) centres with 8-aminoquinoline-derived amides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6655
those derived from pivalic acid, a,a-dimethyl hydrocinnamic
acid, phenylacetic acid and even more challenging substrates
bearing a C–H bond at the a position of the carbonyl group. The
synthetic utility of this transformation was further illustrated
by the synthesis of analogues of bioactive molecules (ibuprofen
and naproxen).
14.1.1.2.10. Silylation. Silylation of unactivated aliphatic
chains, a-amino acid derivatives by means of Pd-catalysis at the
b-position and even at the g-one were studied by Zhang
(Scheme 84G),514 Shi (Scheme 84H)515 and Maiti (Scheme 84I),516
respectively. Albeit an excess of the coupling partners was generally
necessary, with these three protocols functionalisation at the
b- and even at the g-position when the b-position was di-
substituted was possible and extension to germanylation was
even possible as depicted by Maiti.
14.1.2.
Amides derived from 5-chloro-8-aminoquinoline
and from 5-methoxy-8-amino-quinoline. As the C5 position of
the 8-aminoquinoline part of the bidentate DG might also be
reactive, competitive pathways might be observed and in some
reports, the selective functionalisation at the C5 position
was achieved.360–369 To tackle this issue, the design of new
bidentate DG was realized and the amides derived from either
5-chloro-8-aminoquinoline
(Q0NH2)
or
5-methoxy-8-amino-
quinoline (MQNH2) were investigated instead.
14.1.2.1. C(sp2)–H functionalisation. The amide derived from
5-chloro-8-aminoquinoline was employed as bidentate DG in
the Ni(II)-catalysed sulfonylation of carboxamides as reported
by Chatani (Scheme 85A).517 A mechanism involving a Ni(II)/Ni(IV)
catalytic cycle was proposed, albeit the authors cannot rule out a
radical pathway. Note that the 5-methoxy-8-quinolinyl derived
amides led to the decomposition of the starting materials.
In the course of their studies regarding the synthesis of
isoindolinones via Pd catalysis, Wei showcased that the amides
derived from 5-chloro-8-aminoquinoline and from 5-methoxy-8-
aminoquinoline were eﬃcient DGs in Pd-catalysed C–H bond
functionalisation of benzamides with anhydrides and carboxylic
acids (Scheme 85B).420 Note that only four examples were
reported.
14.1.2.2. C(sp3)–H functionalisation. It was reported that for
arylation of C(sp3) centres, aryldiazonium salts were suitable
coupling partners. Indeed, by combining Pd catalysis and
photoredox, Polyzos achieved the arylation of aliphatic amides
derived from Q0NH2 with a-quaternary centers in moderate to
good yields (21–78%, Scheme 86A).518 The transformation was
selective towards primary C(sp3) centres and even a benzylic
methylene group remained unaffected.
The Pd(II)-catalysed benzylation of aliphatic amides via a
cross dehydrogenative coupling was disclosed by the group of
Chatani (Scheme 86B).519 The transformation was selective
for the b-position leading to the corresponding products in
40–75% yields and a real asset of this reaction was the use of
toluene derivatives as reagent (10 equiv.) and not as a solvent.
The use of this bidentate DG was not restricted to the C–C bond
formation as the b-halogenation of unactivated aliphatic chains
was also reported by Rao520 and Chatani.521 Rao developed a
protocol enabling the halogenation of C(sp3) centres at room
temperature via Pd catalysis (Scheme 86C). This bidentate DG
was crucial for the success of the transformation since when
the amide derived from 8-aminoquinoline was used, introduc-
tion of the chlorine atom at the C5 position was observed. Key
features need to be highlighted such as (1) good FG tolerance
(NO2, Br, F, acetyl, CF3), (2) the functionalisation of substrates
bearing secondary, tertiary and quaternary centers at the
a-position of the carbonyl groups (28–85% yields) and (3) the
possibility to convert the C–X bond into various C–FG bonds.520
Note that depending on the skeleton of the amides, mono- or
poly-halogenation occurred. Importantly, the amide derived
from Q0NH2 was easily cleavable under acidic conditions
(BF3Et2O or concentrated H2SO4, 100 1C).520
Chatani showed that a Ni catalyst was suitable for the
iodination reaction of aromatic and aliphatic amides derived
Scheme 85
Functionalisation of C(sp2) centres using amides derived
from 5-chloro-8-aminoquinoline (Q0NH2) and from 5-methoxy-8-amino-
quinoline (MQNH2) as DGs.
Scheme 86
Functionalisation of C(sp3) centres using amides derived
from 5-chloro-8-aminoquinoline (Q0NH2) and from 5-methoxy-8-amino-
quinoline (MQNH2) as DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6656 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
from Q0NH2 with simple molecular iodine (I2), leading to the
corresponding iodoarenes (44–83%) (not shown) or b-lactams
(27–91%), respectively (Scheme 86D).521 When aromatic amides
were used as substrates, mono- and di-iodinated products were
obtained depending on the substitution patterns of the starting
material (not shown), albeit in case of aliphatic chains, the
corresponding iodinated products were not isolated affording a
direct access to b-lactams.
Amides derived from 5-methoxy-8-aminoquinoline (MQNH2)
were used in few reports involving Pd505 or Cu504,506 catalysed
C–N bond formation and Pd-catalysed C–Cl bond formation.495
Indeed, although the methodologies were mainly developed for
the amide derived from 8-aminoquinoline (QNH2) as DG, the
good reactivity and the easy cleavage of the MQ-based DG in the
presence of CAN495,504,505,521–523 or a demethylation/oxidation
sequence506 towards the corresponding amides make this DG
particularly attractive. Worth is to mention that only a small
number of examples with MQ-based DG was depicted in these
reports (1 to 3 max), hence only showcasing the potential of this
DG. In addition, it was successfully applied in the C–C bond
formation. Indeed, recently, Shi reported the Pd-catalysed
b-arylation of alanine derivative (15 examples, 68–93% yields,
Scheme 86E) and the subsequent amidation via an intra-
molecular process leading to the corresponding highly valuable
a-amino-b-lactams.522 It is important to highlight that the
cleavage of the DG was achieved for several products (6) in
moderate to high yields (23–83%).
14.1.3.
Sulfonamides
featuring
8-aminoquinoline
and
amides featuring phenylenediamine as DGs. In 2015, White-
oak, Ribas and co-workers investigated sulfonamides featuring
8-aminoquinoline as an analogue of the corresponding amide
with first row transition metals (Scheme 87A).524 Indeed, a
Co-catalysed reaction between arenesulfonamides with term-
inal and internal (symmetrical or not) alkynes yielding sultams
was developed in the presence of Mn(OAc)3. This approach
turned out to be highly regioselective and with good functional
group tolerance. Lots of eﬀorts were made to cleave the DG
although without success.
Then, Sundararaju reported a similar study involving
Co-catalysis (45–90% yield) (Scheme 87B).525 Finally, a slightly
different catalytic process was developed by the group of Yang
(Scheme 87C).526 In that case, no Mn salt was required as
NaClO3 was used as an alternative oxidant and PivOH played
a key role. Aromatic and aliphatic terminal alkynes were
suitable coupling partners as well as internal alkynes. When
unsymmetrical aryl alkyl alkynes were used a mixture of regioi-
somers was obtained, the aryl group being at close proximity of
the nitrogen atom as major isomer.
Very recently, a new N,N-bidentate DG based on a 2-amino-
phenyl moiety was designed by Watkins (Scheme 87D).527 It was
successfully employed in a Pd-catalysed arylation of benzamide
derivatives (430 examples, up to 84% yield). Mono-arylated
compounds were obtained and (hetero)aromatic iodides such
as benzophenone, pyrimidines, and pyridine were suitable
coupling partners. With this bidentate DG, the typical use of
a Ag salt was no longer necessary as it could be replaced with
Mn(OAc)2. The DG was eﬃciently removed under basic condi-
tions (NaOH/EtOH under reflux).
14.1.4.
Amide derived from 2-(2-pyridyl)-2-isopropylamine.
The PIP based DG derived from 2-(2-pyridyl)-2-isopropylamine
(PIPNH2) has been extensively studied since its design in
2013.528,529 This removable DG has shown great potential in
direct C–H bond functionalisation with various transition metals,
the most commonly used being Ni, Co, Cu and Pd catalysts.
Its removal might be achieved via a nitrosylation/hydrolysis
sequence,451,530–535 a two step process via the in situ esterifica-
tion of an electrophilic pyridinium triflate intermediate497 or
under acidic conditions.536–538
14.1.4.1. C(sp2)–H functionalisation
14.1.4.1.1. Arylation. Since 2015, several groups were inter-
ested in arylation and heteroarylation of carboxamides. Two
reports from Shi focused on Ni catalysed arylation of (hetero)arene
carboxamides using aryl boron reagents539 or arylsilanes530 as
alternatives to the more classically used Ar2I+X and ArX coupling
partners. In the former case, a Ni(II)/Ni(III) catalytic pathway was
proposed and the reaction proved to be eﬃcient (40–85%),
tolerant against several FGs (Cl, CF3, OMe, F) and steric hindrance
(Scheme 88A).539 In the latter case, the use of non-toxic and safe to
handle arylsilanes are key advantages and the transformation
proceeded via a fluoride-promoted transmetallation in moderate
to good yields (26–92% yields, Scheme 88B). The PIP based DG
was removed after a nitrosylation/hydrolysis sequence affording
the corresponding acid.530
A complementary approach relied on a Cu/Ag-mediated
arylation of (hetero)arenecarboxamides using 2-thiophenecarboxylic
acids as coupling partners (Scheme 88C).531 In this reaction,
a protodecarboxylation/dehydrogenative coupling process was
involved. The same authors reported that thiophenes were
also suitable coupling partners. Indeed, they developed a
Cu-catalysed oxidative dehydrogenative arylation of a panel of
thiophene compounds and the reaction turned out to be tolerant
to halogen and carbonyl groups for instance (Scheme 88D).540
To further demonstrate the synthetic utility of this bidentate
Scheme 87
Functionalisation of C(sp2) centres using sulfonamides featuring
8-aminoquinoline and amides derived from phenylenediamine as DGs.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6657
DG, a Pd-catalysed PIP-directed arylation of C(sp3)–H bonds
was successfully developed by Baudoin, offering an access to the
aeruginosin family of marine natural products (not shown).541
Arylation reactions with this DG were not restricted to
het(arenes) as ferrocenecarboxamides were functionalised with
aryl iodides via Pd catalysis (30–81% yield) as developed by
Yang, Wu and Wu (Scheme 88E).394 Note that the amide derived
from 8-aminoquinoline was also a suitable DG in this transfor-
mation (see Section 14.1.1).
14.1.4.1.2. Alkylation. The alkylation of aromatic carboxa-
mides bearing PIP as DG were reported by Lu and Li
(Scheme 88F and G). Indeed, they developed two Co catalysed
protocols. In one case, the dicumyl peroxide (DCP) was
employed playing the role of both source of the methyl group
and hydrogen acceptor via a radical process.542 In the second
case, an oxidative cross dehydrogenative coupling with various
alkylated derivatives (alkanes, (thio)ethers and toluene deriv-
atives) was reported (47 examples, up to 85% yield).543
14.1.4.1.3. Alkynylation. The group of Shi investigated the
alkynylation of aromatic and heteroaromatic amides. At first, a
protocol using a Cu catalyst and terminal alkynes was devel-
oped, a clear advantage compared to the existing approaches
(Scheme 89A).532 Then, they studied a modified process invol-
ving a low Ni catalyst loading with bromoalkynes as coupling
partners (Scheme 89B).533 The eﬃcient reaction turned out to
be chemoselective towards the synthesis of mono- or di-
alkynylated products depending on the amount of alkynes
used, in 62–98% yield and 52–99% yield, respectively.
Additionally, a Ni(II)-catalysed dehydrogenative alkynylation
using O2 as the sole oxidant was developed,544 a clear advantage
compared to their previous report,532 in which a superstoichio-
metric amount of a Ag salt was necessary (55–95%, 28 examples,
Scheme 89C). It is worth to note the key role of PIP as DG since all
other bidentate DGs failed except the one derived from 8-amino-
quinoline providing the expected product only in poor yield (37%).
14.1.4.1.4. Halogenation. Shi developed in 2016 the first
Ni-catalysed halogenation of aromatic and heteroaromatic
amides using inexpensive and readily available LiX salts as
halide source (Scheme 90A).536 Note that a slight change of the
catalytic system (NiCl2(PPh3)2 10%, LiCl 3 equiv., KMnO4
2.2 equiv., tBuCN, O2, 140 1C, 24 h), compared to the one used
for the bromination and iodination reaction, allowed the for-
mation of a C–Cl bond (not shown). Aromatic derivatives bearing
various FGs (halogen, Ac, CF3) were functionalised in about
41–92% yield (20 examples) as well as heteroaromatic amides,
albeit in somehow lower yields (30–76%, 9 examples). For
unsubstituted and some para-substituted arenecarboxamides,
mixtures of mono- and di-halogenated products were observed.
14.1.4.1.5. Alkoxylation. C–O bond formation was also
studied in recent years and two protocols for methoxylation
(Scheme 90B)451 and acyloxylation (Scheme 90C)545 via Cu
catalysis were developed by Shi. In the first case, aromatic
and heteroaromatic derivatives bearing various FGs (e.g. CF3,
NO2, halogen) were methoxylated in moderate to good yields
(25–96%). In the latter case, sterically hindered benzoic acids
were crucial, as no expected product was obtained in presence
of benzoic acid. The scope is pretty narrow (11 examples,
29–70%) and in several cases, mixture of products (mono-
and di- as well regioisomers (one case) were obtained). The
authors proposed a Cu(II)/Cu(III) catalytic cycle.
14.1.4.1.6. Sulfenylation and sulfonylation. The PIP biden-
tate based DG was particularly eﬃcient for sulfenylation and
sulfonylation reactions via Ni catalysis.
Scheme 88
Transition metal catalysed functionalisation of C(sp2) centres
using the amide derived from 2-(2-pyridyl)-2-isopropylamine as DG.
Scheme 89
Alkynylation of C(sp2) centres using the amide derived from
2-(2-pyridyl)-2-isopropylamine as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6658 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
In 2014, seminal works on transition metal catalysed C–S
bond formation were developed using Pd546 or Rh547 catalysts.
One year later, key contributions in that field were reported by
Lu and Shi using low cost metals, especially Ni catalysts.
Indeed, using aryl disulfides as electrophilic sulphur sources,
Lu developed a Ni-catalysed sulfenylation reaction; the use of
a catalytic amount of benzoic acid was essential to promote
the reaction in typically about 80–90% yields, except for three
derivatives (Scheme 90D).537 Afterwards, Shi disclosed another
Ni-catalysed protocol which did not require an additional
oxidant, although in that case an extra ligand was required
(up to 93% yield, Scheme 90E).548 For this transformation a
Ni(II)/Ni(IV) catalytic cycle was proposed. Note that a comple-
mentary study was reported by Shi dealing with the Cu-
mediated sulfenylation of heteroaromatic amides (37 examples,
83–99% yield, Scheme 90F).549
The sulfonylation reaction using sodium sulfinates was
also studied by Shi534 (26 examples, up to 80% yield) as well
as Gong and Song (33 examples, up to 90% yield),550 using a
Cu- or Ni-catalyst, respectively (Scheme 90G and H).
14.1.4.2. C(sp3)–H functionalisation. The PIP-based bidentate
DG was also successfully employed in transition metal catalysed
C–O, C–N and C–F bond formation by activation of C(sp3)–H
bonds. Regarding C–O bond formation, this DG was mainly
employed in intramolecular processes for the functionalisation
of secondary C(sp3) centers leading to the corresponding
lactones and cyclic ethers as concomitantly studied by the
groups of Shi551 and Ye,535 using a similar catalytic system
(Scheme 91A and B).
14.1.4.2.1. Amination. Zhang studied Pd-catalysed direct
amination of unactivated methylene C(sp3)–H bonds using
azodiformates as the amino source, especially the diethyl
azodicarboxylate, offering access to b-amino acid analogues
(Scheme 91C).538 The transformation was achieved on primary
and secondary C(sp3) centers and turned out to be sensitive to
steric hindrance. Note that the amide derived from 8-amino-
quinoline was also a suitable substrate even though providing
the expected derivatives in lower yields.
14.1.4.2.2. Fluorination. The Pd-catalysed fluorination of
amino acids at the b-position was independently reported by
the groups of Shi497 and Ge552 using SelectFluor as the fluorine
source. Shi reported the first example of the fluorination of
aliphatic and benzylic methylene C(sp3)–H bonds via an inner
sphere mechanism and the PIP amide group was cleaved
leading to the corresponding esters (Scheme 91D).497 In the latter
case, the functionalisation was extended to the fluorination of
aliphatic amides and good yields were obtained on unactivated
aliphatic amides with various skeletons (Scheme 91E).552
14.1.5.
Amides derived from 2-(2-pyridyl)ethylamine and
2-(aminomethyl)pyridine. In contrast, only a handful of reactions
used amides derived from 2-(2-pyridyl)ethylamine (PE) and
Scheme 90
C(sp2)–heteroatom bond formation using the amide derived
from 2-(2-pyridyl)-2-isopropylamine as DG.
Scheme 91
Pd-Catalysed functionalisation of C(sp3) centres using the
amide derived from 2-(2-pyridyl)-2-isopropylamine as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6659
2-(aminomethyl)pyridine (PM), probably due to a less favour-
able geometry of the intermediate, have been reported.
In 2016, He and Chen reported a Pd-catalysed arylation of
phthaloyl alanines at the b-position using amides derived from
PE as bidentate DG (Scheme 92A).553 With two sets of reaction
conditions (conditions A, 16–90%; conditions B, 15–72%), they
successfully employed sterically hindered ortho-substituted
aryl iodides (e.g. OMe, NO2, Me, OAc, COMe, F), a significant
synthetic challenge. The transformation was really selective as
no product resulting from di-arylation or b-lactam byproducts
were observed. However, when the arylation at the b-methylene
position was concerned, mono-arylated products were obtained
in rather lower yields (o48%). Note that PE-directed arylation
of isoleucine derivatives at the g-position was previously
reported by the authors.554 In comparison, when PM was used
as DG (Scheme 92B), the reaction was really sensitive to steric
hindrance leading to poor yields (15–26%) with 2-substituted
aryl iodides but the transformation was still efficient with para-
substituted aryl iodides (62–86% yields).553
The PM DG was also employed in the Pd-catalysed arylation
of diamondoids with aryl iodides (36–87%), a synthetic challenge
due to the large number of possible C–H bonds to be function-
alised (Scheme 92C).555
14.1.6.
Picolinamides.
Since
the
pioneering
work
of
Daugulis,344 the use of this N,N-bidentate DG has been extensively
investigated in various transformations.556–558 The cleavage of
this DG was conducted under acidic,559,560 basic561–566 and
reductive acidic562 conditions as well as after a treatment with
PCl5/2,4-lutidine then MeOH and an aqueous work-up.567
14.1.6.1. C(sp2)–H functionalisation
14.1.6.1.1. Arylation and alkylation. Pd-Catalysed arylations
of thiophene derivatives and allylamines were reported. In
2016, Babu and co-workers disclosed picolinamide-directed
arylation of the C3-position of 2-(aminoethyl)thiophenes with
aryl iodides and heteroaryl iodides in low to good yields and in
a regioselective manner (Scheme 93A).568 The same group used
a similar catalytic system for arylation of allylamines at the
g-position
leading
to
the
corresponding
cinnamylamines
with good to high E/Z ratios (up to 2 : 98) in the favour of the
challenging Z isomers (Scheme 93B).569 Note that substrates
bearing a primary g-C(sp3) center and a g-C(sp2) center led to
di-arylated products. Furthermore, Shao and He reported the
Pd-catalysed cyclisation of alkenyl anilines via oxidative aryla-
tion (not shown).570
For the methylation of arenes, two reports were published
using either AlMe3 or MeI as the methyl source. In 2015, Ilies
and Nakamura developed a protocol allowing methylation
of arenes via Fe catalysis, involving a plausible Fe(III)–Me
intermediate (Scheme 93C).403 Although efficient, only a couple
of examples were reported and the selectivity for mono-
methylation vs. di-methylation depended on the substrate
substitution pattern.
Another protocol from Zhang and Ma described the
Pd-catalysed methylation of the amide derived from (S)-tyrosine
analogues (Scheme 93D).559 It is worth to mention that only this
DG was eﬃcient for this di-methylation reaction and a scale up
on ca. 20 g was successfully achieved with the complete retention
of the chiral information.
14.1.6.1.2. Alkenylation. Two examples of alkenylation/
annulation reactions have appeared since 2015. Rodriguez,
Arraya´s and Carretero reported a Rh(I)/Rh(III) catalysed function-
alisation of aromatic picolinamide derivatives with internal
alkynes (Scheme 94A and B).561 Depending on the choice of
Rh catalyst (Rh(I) vs. Rh(III)), a nice divergent site-selectivity
control was achieved via selective functionalisation of either
the aromatic or the heteroaromatic part (the DG itself) of
N-substituted picolinamide compounds. Depending on the
reaction conditions, the synthesis of isoquinoline derivatives
or the olefination of benzylamine and phenethylamine deriva-
tives was achieved. Note that in the latter case, the di-olefinated
products were obtained except on specific substrates. Symmetrical
and unsymmetrical alkynes were used as coupling partners; the
observed regioselectivity depended on the alkyne substitution.
This study was strongly supported with several mechanistic
studies and DFT calculations.
Two years later, the same group reported a protocol for the
synthesis of 1,4-dihydroisoquinoline compounds (56–96% yield)
Scheme 92
Functionalisation of C(sp3) centres using the amides derived
from
2-(2-pyridyl)ethylamine (PE)
and
2-(aminomethyl)pyridine (PM)
as DGs.
Scheme 93
Picolinamide-directed arylation and alkylation of C(sp2)
centres.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6660 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
from benzylamines taking advantage of Co catalysis and using
molecular O2 as oxidant (Scheme 94C).562 An interesting feature
is that, in contrast to Rh catalysis, dialkyl alkynes were more
efficient in that case as compared to diaryl ones. Additionally,
terminal alkynes were suitable coupling partners as well. When
unsymmetrical alkynes were used, the regioselectivity seemed
to be controlled by electronic factors: 1-aryl-1-alkynes provided
only one single diastereoisomer albeit no regiocontrol was
observed with dialkylated alkynes.
The Co-catalysed alkynylation of benzylamine derivatives
was studied by Balaraman and co-workers (Scheme 94D).571
The transformation was FG tolerant (NO2, Br, OMe) and
importantly, primary, secondary, tertiary and even enantiopure
benzylamines were suitable substrates. Depending on the
substrate, mono-, di-alkynylated products or even a mixture
was obtained.
14.1.6.1.3. Cyanation. Recently, the use of picolinamide as
DG allowed the cyanation of naphthalene derivatives via Cu
catalysis. Using this cost-attractive transition metal, the func-
tionalisation of a panel of naphthalenes was possible using
benzoyl cyanide as the cyano source (Scheme 95A).560 Although
eﬃcient, the transformation turned out to be sensitive to the
substitution pattern of the substrate.
14.1.6.1.4. Trifluoromethylation. Using an inexpensive Ni
catalyst and the Langlois’ reagent, Zhang reported the trifluor-
omethylation of arylamines under mild conditions (50 1C, air
atmosphere) with cheap oxidant leading to the corresponding
trifluoromethylated products in moderate to good yields
(Scheme 95B). It is worth mentioning that this transformation
was carried out in water and the catalytic system was recycled
and reused about eight times.572
14.1.6.1.5. Acetoxylation.
In
2017,
Zeng
reported
a
Co-catalysed cross dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) between
picolinamide derivatives with aliphatic and aromatic carboxylic
acids (Scheme 95C).573 It is worth mentioning that this trans-
formation was mainly restricted to naphthalene compounds
and only two N-benzyl substituted 2-pyridinecarboxamides
were functionalised as well, although in low yields (25 and
37%). Acetoxylation at the remote e-C(sp2)–H bond was studied
by Babu using this bidentate DG (not shown).574
14.1.6.1.6. Amination. The regioselective amination of
1-naphthylamine derivatives at the C8-position was independently
reported by Yang, Wu and Wu563 as well as Punniyamurthy564
using a Pd or Cu catalyst, respectively (Scheme 95E and F). The
Pd-catalysed mono-amination of naphthalene derivatives was
achieved (up to 89% yield). Although the diversity in term of
naphthalene derivatives was rather limited (4 diﬀerent skeletons),
several cyclic secondary aliphatic amines were suitable.471 Under
Cu catalysis the introduction of indoles was possible in moderate
to good yields (39–74%) and a large variety of FGs was tolerated
on the indole skeleton (e.g. halogen, ester, vinyl, allyl) and even
7-azaindole.564 The approach was also applied to the introduction
of azoles, albeit only 3 examples were reported (51–69%). Note
that the arylation of the NH of the picolinamide part was also
reported with boronic acids (not shown).575
Hirano,
Miura
and
co-workers
also
investigated
the
Cu-promoted intramolecular amination reaction on phenethylamine
Scheme 94
Picolinamide-directed alkenylation and alkynylation of C(sp2)
centres.
Scheme 95
Picolinamide-directed functionalisation of C(sp2) centres.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6661
derivatives. Indeed, in 2015, two sets of reaction conditions
were established for the synthesis of indolines under micro-
wave irradiation via a Cu-mediated or catalysed process using
MnO2 as a terminal oxidant in the last case (Scheme 95F).576 In
2017, the same authors reported a DG controlled divergent
process which allowed, in case of NHPA as DG, the selective
access to indole derivatives starting from enamides via a
Cu-catalysed intramolecular C–H bond amination reaction
(Scheme 95G).577
14.1.6.2. C(sp3)–H functionalisation. The picolinamide DG
has played an interesting role in the Pd-catalysed alkenylation
of aliphatic amines at the d-position with alkynes in a highly
selective manner.567 Indeed, to date d-C(sp3)–H bond functio-
nalisation remains scarce and often occurred on substrates on
which the g-position was less accessible or sterically hindrance
favoured
a
six-membered
intermediate
rather
than
the
kinetically favoured five-membered metallacycle. Impressively,
the functionalisation was completely site-selective even in
presence of accessible g-C(sp3)–H bonds. The reaction provided
the corresponding products in moderate to good yields, and the
role of 2,6-dimethylbenzoquinone (2,6-DMBQ) was crucial as
both ligand and co-oxidant (Scheme 96A). Note that when
unsymmetrical alkynes were used, mixtures of isomers were
obtained, with moderate to good selectivity depending on the
specific examples. Remote functionalisation was also successfully
achieved by the Maes group, who developed a protocol for
the remote C5-(hetero)arylation of 3-aminopiperidine via a
Pd-catalysis (Scheme 96B).565 Indeed, starting from commercially
available 1-Boc-3-aminopiperidine, they offered an access to cis-3,5-
disubstituted piperidines in typically 60–70% yields (up to 82%).
The mono-arylation only occurred in a regio- and stereo-selective
manner. The nature of the nitrogen protecting group had a
strong impact on the outcome of the reaction: a shutdown of the
reactivity was observed with benzyl and carbamoyl protecting
groups, while lower to good yields were obtained with pivaloyl,
tosyl and alkoxycarbonyl groups. Albeit a large excess of (het)ArI
was used, the unreacted reagent was easily recovery. Finally, very
high yields were obtained with heteroaromatic compounds as
coupling partners (two examples, 84 and 95% yields). In addition,
the
Pd-catalysed
carbonylation
of
N-alkyl
picolinamides
was
possible
using
this
bidentate
DG
(Scheme
96C).566
With the methodology developed by Wang, not only g-lactams
and g-amino acids were synthesized in high yields (60–90%
yield) but this approach allowed the total synthesis of bioactive
rac-pregabalin. Note that TEMPO was used as oxidant in the
transformation.
Finally, the regioselective Pd-catalysed esterification between
two diﬀerent alkylbenzenes was developed by Liu and Zhang
(Scheme 96D) and products were obtained in a typical 50–70%.578
In this transformation, the role of picolinamide as DG was
crucial to ensure the esterification reaction since the tested
benzamide and acetanilide were completely inefficient; the
oxygen from the benzyl esters comes from the O2 in the air.
14.1.7.
Triazolyldimethyl (TAM) based amides. Since the
first design of a triazole-based bidentate auxiliary by the group
of Ackermann in 2014,579 the triazolyldimethyl (TAM) based
amides proved to be an eﬃcient bidentate DG in C–H bond
activation involving Pd, Fe, Mn and Co catalysis. In addition,
the DG was easily cleavable under acidic conditions580–584 or
using nitrosonium tetrafluoroborate under mild conditions.585
14.1.7.1. C(sp2)–H functionalisation
14.1.7.1.1. Alkylation. In 2015, the combination of Fe
catalysis and TAM as bidentate DG allowed the methylation
and ethylation of anilides (Scheme 97A).580 Using cheap FeCl3
as catalyst in presence of ZnCl2TMEDA as additive, most likely
involved in the transmetallation step, the methylation of arenes
(71–96%) and heteroaromatic derivatives such as pyrrole, furan
and thiophene was achieved (49–60% yield). The approach was
Scheme 96
Picolinamide-directed alkenylation, arylation, carbonylation
and esterification of C(sp3) centres.
Scheme 97
Alkylation, allylation, alkenylation and alkynylation of C(sp2)
centres using triazolyldimethyl amide as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6662 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
also successfully extended to the functionalisation of the chal-
lenging olefinic C–H bonds leading to the selective formation
of the Z isomers (57 and 90% yields).
The same group further investigated the potential of the
bidentate DG in Fe-catalysed C–H allylation and alkylation
of amides (Scheme 97B).585 Using allyl chloride, the function-
alisation of a broad range of substrates was possible including
arenes, ferrocenes,408 heteroarenes and alkenes (47–92% yield).
When substituted allyl chlorides were reacted, allylated benza-
mides were obtained with moderate to good regioselectivity
(from 2 : 1 to 5.7 : 1) in favour of the branched products.
Moreover, primary and secondary alkyl bromides were also
suitable coupling partners. Note that such transformations were
not restricted to Fe catalysis, since very recently Ackermann and
co-workers reported a MnCl2-catalysed alkylation of amides with
alkyl halides (up to 90% yield) (Scheme 97C).582 They developed
a process involving a low-valent Mn catalyst, for which the
presence of zinc additives and phosphine ligands were no
longer required.
14.1.7.1.2. Alkynylation and alkenylation. In 2017, Acker-
mann and co-workers reported the Fe-catalysed alkynylation of
aromatic
amides
using
several
silylated
alkynyl
halides
(Scheme 97D).586 This is an eﬃcient process, which allowed the
synthesis of mono-alkynylated products in 44–71% yields under
mild reaction conditions. This reaction was also successfully
applied to heteroaromatic and olefinic compounds (54–59%,
4 examples). Note that the methodology was further applied to
the synthesis of the corresponding isoquinolones via a two-step
sequence (alkynylation/desilylation–cyclisation).
A TAM-DG promoted olefination of aromatic systems using
activated olefins such as acrylates, vinyl phosphonate, or vinyl
sulfones was reported by Shi and co-workers (Scheme 97E).587
Interestingly, O2 was suitable as oxidant. Although eﬃcient
(typically 80–90% yield), mixture of mono- and di-olefinated
compounds were observed in case of meta- and para-substituted
derivatives. In 2016, Chen and Shi, published a Pd-catalysed alky-
nylation reaction under mild reaction conditions (Scheme 97F).583
This reaction was tolerant to various FGs (e.g. NO2, CF3, F), provided
the corresponding products in high yields (76–93%) and no Ag
was required, a real asset.
14.1.7.2. C(sp3)–H functionalisation: alkylation and Alkynylation.
In the course of their investigation of Fe-catalysed methylation of
anilides,580 the group of Ackermann showcased the generality of
their approach by an extension to the methylation of unactivated
aliphatic amides (3 examples) in moderate to good yields
(Scheme 98A). This bidentate DG also demonstrated its
efficiency in the alkynylation of primary and secondary
C(sp3)–H bonds (Scheme 98B). Various aliphatic derivatives
(16
examples)
including
N-protected
amino
acids
were
functionalised in moderate to high yields (45–86%), moderate
to good diastereoselectivity and di-functionalisation reactions
were observed in some cases.583
14.1.8.
Other bidentate DGs based on heterocycles. Other
N,N-bidentate DGs based on heterocycles were reported including
those combining an amide part and a heterocyclic unit such as
an oxazoline, pyrazole, benzothiadiazole and alkylbenzimida-
zole. Those DGs were mainly used in the formation of C–O and
C–S bonds either on aromatic or aliphatic derivatives.
14.1.8.1. Amide-oxazoline
14.1.8.1.1. Alkylation.
Using
the
2-(2-oxazolinyl)phenyl
moiety on the amide nitrogen, the group of Yu developed a
Cu-catalysed oxidative coupling of aromatic amides with malonate
derivatives, oﬀering a straightforward access to isoindolinone
compounds in 40–75% yields (Scheme 99A).588
14.1.8.1.2. Acetoxylation. In 2015, Ge and Li reported
the Pd-catalysed acetoxylation of amide-tethered oxazoline.
Indeed, via a six-membered bidentate complex with Pd(II), the
di-acetoxylation of various aromatic and heteroaromatic amides
was achieved in the presence of PhI(OAc)2 playing the role of
both oxidant and OAc source in 32–73% yields (Scheme 99B).589
It turned out that depending on the substitution pattern of the
substrate, mono-acetoxylation was achieved. Note that using very
simple conditions, Yu also developed Cu-mediated hydroxylation
of aromatic amides (Scheme 99C).590 The transformation was
tolerant to various FGs (alkyl, CF3, F, I, Cl, vinyl moiety) and
provided the products in 37–86% yields.
14.1.8.1.3. Sulfenylation. The formation of a C–S bond
by making us of N-[2-(2-oxazolinyl)phenyl] amides was also
studied by Manolikakes (Scheme 99D)591 as well as Liu and
Chen (Scheme 99E)592 via Cu mediated transformations using
Scheme 98
Alkylation and alkynylation of C(sp3) centres using triazolyl-
dimethyl amide as DG.
Scheme 99
Functionalisation of C(sp2) centres using 2-(2-oxazolinyl)-
phenyl amide as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6663
either sodium sulfinates (22–82% yield) or 2-mercaptobenz-
imidazoles as coupling partners (up to 84%). In both transforma-
tions, a good FG tolerance was noted (e.g. Cl, CF3, acetyl).
14.1.9.
Other N,N-bidentate DGs. The amide derived from
(2-aminophenyl)pyrazole
(PPNH2)
was
employed
for
the
Cu-mediated etherification of (hetero)arenes and alkene deri-
vatives using PhSi(OR)3, Si(OR)4 or ROH/Si2Me6 as coupling
partners leading to the corresponding products with yields up
to 87% (Scheme 100A). The DG was easily removed under Lewis
acid mediated methanolysis (BF3Et2O/MeOH, 100 1C) leading
to the corresponding ester.593
Amide derived from 4-amino-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (BTDNH2)
was studied by Babu in Pd-catalysed arylation and acetoxylation
(2 examples) of linear aliphatic carboxamides in yields 52–97%
yields (Scheme 100B).594 In case of cyclic carboxamides,
di-functionalisation generally occurred although in some cases,
mixtures of mono- and di-functionalised products were obtained.
Its cleavage was achieved under basic conditions (NaOH, ethanol,
85 1C) to access the corresponding carboxylic acid.
Furthermore, the amide derived from [2-(1-alkylbenzimidazolyl)]-
2-isopropylamine oﬀered a good alternative, in Cu-catalysed
sulfenylation of aromatic and olefinic amides (47 examples,
Scheme 100C).595 Note that the Pd-catalysed arylation of thio-
phene derivatives using pyrazine-2-carboxamide as DG was also
reported (not shown). A two steps sequence (N-Boc) protection/
hydrazinolysis (NH4I, NH2NH2H2O) under microwave irradia-
tion aﬀorded the Boc-protected MBIPNH2 and the corresponding
N-acylhydrazide in good yield.568
14.2.
N,S-Bidentate DGs
An interesting alternative to N,N-bidentate DGs relies on
the use of N,S-bidentate DGs, easily cleavable under acidic
(HCl, MeOH, 100 1C)596 or basic597,598 (KOH, 80–85 1C) condi-
tions. Although restricted to a handful of examples, these
N,S-bidentate DGs were successfully applied in the arylation
of alkanecarboxamides, especially on challenging cyclopropane
derivatives.
In 2015, Babu studied the arylation of thiophene- and furan-
2-carboxamides by directed C–H bond activation using either
the amide derived from 8-aminoquinoline or the 2-(methylthio)-
aniline.391 Using the bidentate N,S-DG, a selective Pd-catalysed
C–C bond formation of thiophen- and furan-2-carboxamides at
the C3 position was achieved using (hetero)aryl iodides as
coupling partners in 25–81% yields (Scheme 101A). Then,
the same group investigated the use of this N,S-DG in the
functionalisation of C(sp3)–H bonds. Hence, they described
the
Pd-catalysed
arylation
of
cyclopropanecarboxamides
followed by ring opening of the cyclopropanes using the amide
derived from 2-(methylthio)aniline as DG (not shown).472
Interestingly, di- or tri-arylation and the formation of a C–O
bond was reported within a one pot process, leading to anti
b-acyloxy amides in 10–86% yields, although an excess of Ag
salt was necessary (Scheme 101B).599
Then,
Wencel-Delord
and
Colobert
employed
amides
derived from enantiopure sulfinyl anilines in the diastereo-
selective arylation of cycloalkanes (cyclopropanes and cyclo-
butanes) leading to the corresponding compounds in moderate
diastereoselectivities (60/40 to 80/20), in 26–92% total yield
of both diastereoisomers. It is worth to mention that both
diastereomers were easily separated by column chromatography
offering access to enantiopure compounds after cleavage of the
DG (Scheme 101C).600
In 2017, Chen and He published a Pd-catalysed b-methyl
and even more challenging b-methylene C–H arylation with
sterically hindered aryl iodides by playing with the nature
of the ortho-sulfinyl aniline auxiliaries (R3 = Me, C6H4Me)
(Scheme 101D).601 The reaction showed a good FG tolerance
(NO2, F, OMe, CO2Me) for ortho substituted aryl iodides and
Scheme 100
Functionalisation using amides derived from other hetero-
cyclic amines as bidentate DGs.
Scheme 101
Arylation using N,S-bidentate DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6664 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
about 60–70% as typical yields. The same year, a diastereo-
selective transformation was developed by Wencel-Delord and
Colobert (Scheme 101E), offering an access to arylated aliphatic
amides at the b-methylene position (up to 9/1 dr), which was
extended to one example of acetoxylation (91% yield, 7/3 dr).598
Miura and Shishido reported Ru-catalysed alkenylation of
N-tosyl aromatic amides with internal alkynes followed by a
cyclisation process aﬀording the corresponding isoindolinones
in 27–71% yields (not shown).602
14.3.
N,O-Bidentate DGs
In this section the recent progresses involving N,O-bidentate DGs
will be discussed. Indeed, a couple of them were investigated
such as the bidentate amide derived from 2-pyridinamine-N-
oxide, 1-aminoanthraquinone and the oxalyl amides.
14.3.1.
Amide derived from 2-aminopyridine-N-oxide. The
bidentate amide derived from 2-aminopyridine-N-oxide (PyO)
demonstrated remarkable features in several C–H bond activa-
tion transformations. Both, the NO and NH part of the amide
are generally crucial to ensure the reaction.
14.3.1.1. C(sp2)–H functionalisation. The pyridine-N-oxide
moiety was used with first row eco-friendly transition metals
such as Co and Ni catalysts. Besides its efficiency, a key
advantage of this bidentate DG is its removal, which could be
easily realized under basic conditions.603–608
14.3.1.1.1. Alkenylation.
Such
DGs
were
successfully
applied in Co- and Ni-catalysed C(sp2)–H alkynylation/annula-
tion reactions.
An interesting approach towards heterocycles was developed
by the groups of Macgregor and Ackermann (Scheme 102A).609
Under mild conditions and using oxygen as the sole oxidant,
the synthesis of 6-membered isoquinolone derivatives from
aromatic derivatives was achieved using Co(II)-catalysis. The
transformation turned out to be particularly eﬃcient and
highly regioselective and terminal as well as internal alkynes
were
suitable
coupling
partners.
The
regioselectivity
of
the reaction steered from electronic reasons as suggested by
computational DFT investigations.
Niu and Song also investigated the synthesis of isoquinolone
and isoindolinone derivatives by slightly changing the catalytic
system via a Co-catalysed decarboxylative C–H activation using
alkynylcarboxylic acids (Scheme 102B).610 The use of a catalytic
amount of a Ag salt in the catalytic system to access isoquino-
lone compounds was a real asset of this approach, O2 playing
the role of terminal oxidant.
Furthermore, Niu and Song reported the Ni-catalysed func-
tionalisation of a panel of amides with terminal alkynes via
a twofold C–H activation process leading to substituted
3-methyleneisoindolin-1-ones (Scheme 102C).611 The reaction
demonstrated a good FG tolerance including halides and
thiophene derivatives, and the stereoselectivity of the reaction
was moderate to excellent (Z/E ratio from 52/48 to 100/0).
The same authors also developed a Co-catalysed alkynyla-
tion/annulation reaction of amides with terminal alkynes as
coupling partners in presence of AgOAc as the terminal oxidant
(Scheme 102D).612 The nature of the bidentate DG turned out to
be crucial as other DGs were ineﬃcient in that transformation.
Both Co(II) and Co(III) might be used, CoC2O44H2O being the
most eﬃcient. The reaction was applied to a wide range
of compounds (36 examples), although internal alkynes and
aliphatic ones were not suitable coupling partners.
14.3.1.1.2. Alkoxylation,
amination.
Another
example
showcasing the unique properties of this bidentate DG was
reported again by Niu and Song, who published Co-catalysed
alkoxylation of aromatic and olefinic carboxamides under mild
reaction conditions (Scheme 103A).604 Later on, the same group
extended this approach to the amination of arenecarboxamides
with alkylamines (Scheme 103B).605
14.3.1.2. C(sp3)–H
functionalisation.
This
DG
was
also
successfully applied in C(sp3)–H bond functionalisation. In
2015, Zeng and Lu reported a Pd catalysed pyridine-N-oxide-
directed arylation of alkane carboxamides with aryl iodides
(Scheme 104A).606 The functionalisation of both primary and
secondary C(sp3) centres was achieved at the b- and even the
g-position on suitable substrates. Substitution on the pyridine
Scheme 102
Alkenylation of C-(sp2) centres using 2-pyridine-N-oxide
amide as DG.
Scheme 103
Alkoxylation and amination of C(sp2) centres using 2-pyridine-
N-oxide amide as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6665
part of the DG with halides, CF3 and NO2 groups was tolerated.
Note that mono- and di-arylated products were obtained
and the overall efficiency of the transformation was substrate-
dependent.
A similar transformation was then further studied by the same
authors, and aliphatic amides were functionalised with a large
number of aryl iodides leading to mono- or di-functionalised
products depending on the substrate (Scheme 104B).607
This DG was not restricted to the formation of C–C bonds,
since very recently, the group of You demonstrated that this
bidentate DG was successfully used in the oxidative amination
of unactivated C(sp3)–H bonds with azoles via a Cu mediated
process (Scheme 104C).608 Note that an extension of this
transformation via Ni catalysis was also reported using in that
case the amide derived from 8-aminoquinoline as DG.
14.3.2.
Oxalyl amide group. In 2014, Yao and Zhao
designed a new auxiliary, the N,O-bidentate oxalyl amide group
(NHOA or NHCODIPA).613 Since this initial study, the system
was applied for several transformations. This DG was mainly
cleaved under basic conditions (KOH/EtOH, 80 1C;590 NaOH,
THF/MeOH, 50–100 1C614–617 or NaOMe, MeOH, rt618) or via a
N-Boc protection and then cleavage under basic conditions
(KOH, EtOH/Et2O, rt).591
14.3.2.1. C(sp2)–H functionalisation
14.3.2.1.1. Arylation
and
alkenylation.
Shi
and
Zhao
reported the Pd-catalysed meta arylation of b-arylethylamine
via a Catellani reaction using NHOA as a bidentate DG
(Scheme 105A).619 Using norbornene as the transient mediator,
the transformation was tolerant to various FGs, leading to the
expected compounds in good yields and various aryl iodides
bearing para, meta or ortho substituents were suitable. It is
worth to mention that the mono meta arylation was possible on
substrates bearing substituents at the ortho and meta positions.
In contrast, when unsubstituted arenes were reacted, only meta
di-arylated products were obtained. To further showcase the
synthetic utility of their approach towards the synthesis of
polyfunctionalised b-arylethylamines, the authors investigated
the Pd-catalysed oxalyl-amide-directed functionalisation of
meta arylated b-arylethylamines. This protocol turned out
to be general and alkynylation, iodination, acetoxylation and
amination reactions were achieved in moderate to good
yields (42–82%), although some di-alkynylated products were
produced in 17–30% yields (not shown).620
The same group also investigated Rh(III)-catalysed oxidative
C–H/C–H cross-couplings of benzylamines and heteroarenes
(Scheme 105B).614 When the ortho position was unsubstituted,
mixtures of mono- and di-heteroarylated products were obtained,
the ratio mono-/di-being dependent on the substitution pattern of
the aromatic system.
In the course of their investigation for the Pd-catalysed
arylation of 3-(aminoethyl)thiophene derivatives, the group of
Babu showed that among the possible DGs for this transforma-
tion, the NHOA DG turned out to be eﬃcient aﬀording the
products in 57 to 75% yields and the reaction was also
performed on a gram scale (Scheme 105C).568
The NHOA DG was also used in Pd-catalysed olefination of
b-arylethylamines (Scheme 105D).621 The reaction works with a
broad array of functionalised olefins and a good selectivity for
mono-olefination was observed in case of electron rich olefins
such as allyl acetate, 3,3-dimethyl-1-butene and styrene deriva-
tives. In contrast for more reactive olefins such as acrylamide,
acrylonitrile, acrylaldehyde and vinyl sulfone, a mixture of
mono- and di-olefinated products was obtained.
14.3.2.1.2. Carbonylation.
Carbonylation
of
b-arylethyl-
and benzylamines were achieved using diﬀerent reagents.
Indeed, in 2016, a first report from Huang and Zhao on the
Pd-catalysed carbonylation using carbon monoxide as the CO
source was reported (E).615 Then, Zhao and Shi developed
an improved protocol based on a Ru-catalysed carbonylation
reaction, which demonstrated interesting features such as the
use of isocyanate as CO source and the absence of oxidants
(F).618 21 derivatives were functionalised with up to 96% yields.
Scheme 104
Arylation and amination of unactivated C(sp3)–H bonds
using 2-pyridine-N-oxide amide as DG.
Scheme 105
Functionalisation of C(sp2) centres using oxalyl amide
as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6666 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
14.3.2.1.3. Silylation and germanylation. This bidentate DG
was also employed for the regioselective and monoselective
silylation of benzylamine and phenylethylamine compounds via
Pd catalysis at the g- and d-positions, respectively (Schemes 106,
26 examples, 43–90%).616 This reaction was not restricted
to aromatic derivatives since, using slightly modified reaction
conditions, the silylation of 2-methylaniline derivatives was
possible, albeit restricted to four examples in low to moderate
yields (21–49%). It is worth to mention that the germanylation of
benzylamines was also achieved by replacement of the hexa-
methyldisilane with Ge2Me6 (4 examples, 37–82%).
14.3.2.2. C(sp3)–H functionalisation. In 2015, the g-arylation
of aliphatic amines with aryl and heteroaryl iodides was
investigated by Zheng, Huang and Zhao (Scheme 107A).622
Upon
Pd-catalysis,
mono-
or
di-arylated
products
were
obtained (47–83%) depending on the substitution pattern of
the substrates. When heteroaryl iodides were used as coupling
partners, low to high yields (23 to 78%) were obtained.
Later, the same group used a similar catalytic system for the
functionalisation of amino acids (Scheme 107B).623 ArI and
heteroaryliodides were suitable coupling partners leading to
the corresponding products in 45–86% and 36–83% yields,
respectively. The carbonylation of aliphatic amines via a Pd-
catalysed C–H bond functionalisation under carbon monoxide
atmosphere was reported by Yao and Zhao (Scheme 107C).617
Primary and secondary C(sp3) centers were functionalised in
low to high yields (12–87%) and extended to the functionalisa-
tion of benzylamines (8 examples, 71–98%) (not shown).
The reaction was even conducted on a gram scale. The authors
suggested that 3-(trifluoromethyl)benzoic acid was important
to stabilize the Pd intermediate.
14.3.3.
Amide
derived
from 1-aminoanthraquinone.
A
unique example of Pd-catalysed directed acetoxylation using
the amide derived from 1-aminoanthraquinone as bidentate
DG was reported. In 2015, Cheng, Zhu and Zhang disclosed the
Pd-catalysed acetoxylation of aliphatic amides at the a-position
via a four-six-membered bicyclic metallacycle (Scheme 108A).
Amides
containing
primary
a-C(sp3)–H
and
a-methylene
C(sp3)–H bond were smoothly functionalised in a selective
manner (32–92% yields) and only the mono-acetoxylated pro-
ducts were observed. The bidentate DG was cleaved under basic
conditions (NaOH, MeOH, reflux) and recycled.624
15. Heterocyclic DGs in
C–H functionalisation
As for carbonyl-based and bidentate moieties, heterocycles are
also a very common class of DGs for the functionalisation of
C(sp2) and C(sp3) centres. The heterocycles that can be used as
DGs are those featuring a C(sp2)-hybridised nitrogen atom,
which act as the coordinating moiety for the formation of the
metallacyclic intermediate essential to the C–H functionalisa-
tion. These DGs have attracted a lot of interest in the field for a
number of reasons: (1) heterocycles are commonly found in
bio-active and drug-like molecules, which allows late-stage
modifications
without
requiring
DG
installation/removal;
(2) if needed can be installed on the substrate in a number of
ways; (3) despite being generally considered strong-coordinating
DGs, their coordinating properties can be somewhat altered by
substitution or by changing the heterocycle used for a specific
transformation.
Although DG cleavage can be sometimes tricky with mono-
heterocycles (i.e. pyridine), several methods have been developed
during the years, thus increasing their synthetic utility. In the
case of diheterocycles, cleavage (e.g. for pyrimidine) or modifica-
tion of the DG (for example by ring opening) is intrinsically
easier, although not often reported in publications involving
less common heterocycles. The available cleavage/modification
methods for heterocyclic DGs are discussed in each specific sub-
section. In this section, yields have been specifically reported in
case of particularly high yields (most examples 480–90%) or
lower than average (most o70% or lower) results, and in case
of strong substrate-dependence. If not reported, average yields of
70–80% for most examples is to be assumed (see discussion in
the Introduction section).
Scheme 106
Silylation and germanylation of C(sp2) centres using oxalyl
amide as DG.
Scheme 107
Functionalisation of C(sp3) centres using oxalyl amide
as DG.
Scheme 108
Acetoxylation of C(sp3) centres using amide derived from
1-aminoanthraquinone as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6667
15.1.
Pyridine as DG
The use of pyridine (as well as other heterocycles such as
pyrazole and pyrimidine) as a DG in C–H functionalisation
chemistry dates back to the late 1990s–early 2000s, when it was
pioneered by Murai/Chatani first, who reported Ru-catalysed
alkylations and carbonylations on C(sp2) and C(sp3) centres,625–627
and then by Sanford628,629 and Daugulis,630 who extended its use
to Pd-catalysed acetoxylations and arylations. Since then, pyridine
is one of the most frequently applied DGs in C–H functionalisa-
tion chemistry. This is possibly due to its simplicity and the easy
installation into aromatic rings or aliphatic chains via cross
coupling631–633 or other methods.634 A great number of reactions
have been reported with this DG, with a variety of protocols,
reagents and reaction conditions. Recently this DG has also been
commonly used for meta-selective C(sp2)–H functionalisation
using Ru catalysts,635,636 which will not be treated in this review.
Moreover, pyridine is the DG of choice for specific substrates,
such as 2-pyridones, for which other DGs have proved ineffective.
Although this DG is typically not removable when attached
to the substrate via a C–C bond, the ubiquity of pyridine rings
in
many
complex
molecules
(e.g.
bioactive
compounds),
partially compensates this disadvantage, as its removal might
not be required in all cases. The removal of this DG can
nonetheless be achieved when attached to the substrate via
a C-heteroatom bond (as is the case for N-(2-pyridyl)indoles,
N-(2-pyridyl)anilines, or O-(2-pyridyl)phenols). These cleavage
methods are discussed in Section 15.3.
15.1.1.
C(sp2)–H bond functionalisation
15.1.1.1. Arylation. Many arylation procedures with pyridine
as DG have been reported before 2014, and therefore are not
included in this review. Nonetheless, several methods have
been developed in the last few years. Szostak reported an
unusual C–C cleavage/C–H functionalisation using activated
benzamides as arylating agents (Scheme 109A),637 while boronic
acids
under
Ru
catalysis
were
utilised
by
Maheswaran
(Scheme 109C).638 The hyper-valent iodine additive in this
reaction was suggested to form a charge-transfer complex with
the substrate, generating an aromatic radical cation639 which
facilitates the formation of the ruthenacycle intermediate.
Punji and Wang reported the use of aryl iodides with
Ni and Pd catalysis respectively (Scheme 109B and D).640,641
Scheme 109
C(sp2)–H arylation using pyridine as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6668 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
While the first required preformed Ni(II) catalysts and the use of
strong base, the latter employed O2 as oxidant and green
solvents, although a 10% Pd loading was required. Notably,
both methods provide selective monoarylation, which is not
always achieved. A coupling with aryl silanes was reported by
Szostak (Scheme 109E).642 Although this procedure avoids the
use of stoichiometric Ag oxidants, still a superstoichiometric
amount of CuF2 was required, and a substrate-dependent
selectivity (mono or diarylation) was observed. A recent paper
by Kantchev demonstrated the use of the ionic liquid Bu4NOAc
as both base and solvent in the RuCl3-catalysed coupling with
aryl bromides (Scheme 109F).643 The reaction gave mostly
mixtures of mono and diarylated products, but at the same
time tolerates heteroaryls, free NH2- and free OH-substituted
aryl bromides. In 2015 Wang reported the Rh (monoarylation)
or Ir (diarylation) catalysed reaction with diazoquinones
leading to phenol-functionalised arenes (Scheme 109G).644
The next year a related transformation, using 3-diazoindolin-
2-imines as reactants was disclosed by Wang and Lu, giving
3-aryl-2-aminoindoles (Scheme 109H).645
Inspired by Szostak’s arylation method using aromatic
amides as arylation reagents (Scheme 109A), Zeng performed
the arylation of indoles (and benzo[h]quinoline) using N-acyl
saccarines as reagent under similar conditions (Scheme 109I).646
The use of boronic acids for indole arylation was instead
reported by Kapur. This method provides good substrate scope
and yields, although requiring stoichiometric amounts of both
Cu and Ag (Scheme 109J).647 Ackermann recently reported the
arylation of peptide-substituted indoles using aryl bromides.
This procedure aﬀorded good yields of arylated products, with
no racemisation and good robustness. Importantly, peptides are
tolerated on both coupling partners (Scheme 109K).648
The arylation of 2-pyridones with heteroaromatic com-
pounds via cross dehydrogenative coupling was first reported
by Miura and Hirano in 2014.649 Since then, further arylation
procedures have been reported making use of diazoquinones
and arylboron compounds (Scheme 109L–N).650–652
An example of stereoselective C–H arylation of olefins
was reported by Ackermann in 2016 using a preformed phos-
phinous acid Ru(II) complex as catalyst (Scheme 109O).653 This
method could also be applied to aromatic substrates using
tetrazoles and oxazolines as DGs.
15.1.1.2. Alkylation.
Alkylation
can
occur
via
diﬀerent
mechanisms: (i) addition to unsaturated moieties, (ii) cross
couplings, and (iii) carbene insertions. Due to the many proto-
cols reported for such functionalisation with pyridine as DG,
these strategies are treated separately. Cascade alkylation/cycli-
sation involving the pyridine DG will also be reported sepa-
rately due to the diﬀerent nature of the products obtained.
15.1.1.3. Addition to double bonds. In 2015 Nishimura reported
the Ir-catalysed regioselective (branched products) hydroarylation
of vinyl, allyl and other alkenyl ethers, leading to alpha-arylated
ethers.654,655 This reaction could be performed in a stereoselective
manner using chiral biphosphine ligands (Scheme 110A).
The group-directed addition to aldehydes has been reported
a number of times, and results in alpha-arylated alcohols. A
Lewis or Brønsted acid additive in these reactions is necessary
to activate the carbonyl group, and reduce the reversibility of
the aldehyde insertion into the C–M bond. Zhou656 and Ding657
reported the Ru-catalysed addition to formaldehyde and
electron-poor benzaldehydes (Scheme 110B and C). The scope
in aldehydes was notably increased by Wang et al., using a Mn
catalyst and a combination of ZnBr2 and Me2Zn. This allowed
the use of (hetero)aromatic, aliphatic, and even unsaturated
aldehydes as reactants; moreover, heteroaromatic and olefinic
substrates could also be easily functionalised (Scheme 110D).658
The synthesis of 2-oxoalkyarenes was achieved by Kakiuchi
using cyclic alkenylcarbonates, synthetic equivalents of enolates
(Scheme 110E).659 Despite the originality of the protocol, its use
with pyridine as DG was only demonstrated on relatively few
examples, and required a long reaction time (48 h).
An
interesting
protocol
for
a
directed
cascade
C–H
functionalisation/cyclisation was reported by Ellmann, giving
diastereoselective formation of 3 contiguous stereocentres
(Scheme 110F and G).660,661 The benzylamine in the second
protocol acts as an organocatalyst (enamine catalysis) to facilitate
the intramolecular Michael addition, which is more difficult than
in the first case.661 These are two of the relatively rare examples
where the cascade cyclisation does not involve the DG itself, which
is often the case (e.g. Scheme 112).
Park and Chang reported the eﬀect of diﬀerent DGs on the
chemoselectivity of the reaction of aromatic substrates with
activated alkenes.662 While with pyridine DGs, addition to the
double bond was obtained selectively (Scheme 110H), the use of
an amide DG in the same conditions resulted in selective
olefination instead. This switch in selectivity was limited to
the Ir catalyst used. The same reaction, catalysed by Re, was
instead reported by Zhu and co-workers (Scheme 110H).177 This
protocol, occurring under CO atmosphere (CO acts as ligand for
Re), is one of the few Re-catalysed C–H activation processes,
and proved very efficient for a variety of substrates, including
olefinic and heteroaromatic ones. In 2015 Bolm reported the
hydroarylation of unactivated bicyclic alkenes with Ru catalysis
using O2 as oxidant (Scheme 110I).663
The functionalisation of indoles with activated ketones or
aldehydes
(alpha
EWG-substituted)
under
Mn
catalysis
was reported by Ackermann (Scheme 110J).664 Although high
loadings of Mn catalyst were used (up to 20% of the metal), the
reaction gave good yields with a broad scope, and no additives
were used (cf. Scheme 110B–D). It is worth noting that the C2
regioselectivity, despite the DG, was only observed with two very
specific Mn catalysts ([Mn2(CO)10] and [MnBr(CO)5]), while
all the other catalysts tested resulted in C3 functionalisation
(no DG effect).664
A
similar
procedure
for
the
addition
to
maleimides
was reported recently by Song and Gong (Scheme 110K).665
The reaction was air tolerant and worked eﬀectively in
EtOAc. Importantly, both these protocols were applied to the
functionalisation of other heterocycles (e.g. pyrroles, selectively
mono-functionalised).
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6669
Recently, the Glorius group developed two important
methods for the C–H propargylation and 2-(indolyl)methylation
of indoles using substituted bromoallenes and 4-ethynyl benz-
oxazinanones (Scheme 110L and M).666,667 Propargylation is a
challenging transformation, as the corresponding allenylation
might instead occur more easily. For this Mn-catalysed process,
the use of BPh3 as Lewis acid and a catalytic amount of
H2O proved crucial for obtaining good yields and selectivity
(with respect to the allene product). The reaction works well
with a variety of functionalised allenes, including 1,3,3-trialkyl,
3,3-dialkyl (giving terminal alkyne products), 1,3-dialkyl and
1-monoalkyl allenes, and with other heterocyclic substrates
such as pyrroles and (benzo)thiophenes (Scheme 110L).666
A robustness screening was also performed for this reaction,
showing compatibility with functionalities such as aniline,
furan, ketones, amides and acetals. The use of 4-ethynyl
benzoxazinanones, still under Mn catalysis, results in the
C–H (2-indolyl)methylation of indoles and other heterocycles
via alkyne insertion into the intermediate manganacycle,
release of CO2, formation of an allene–Mn intermediate
complex,
and
cyclisation
with
the
nitrogen
nucleophile
(Scheme 110M).667 Even in this case a robustness screening
showed compatibility with a variety of FGs.
Pyridine-directed, Ni-catalysed alkylation of 2-pyridones using a
variety of aliphatic alkenes and dienes (including cyclooctadiene)
was reported by Miura and Hirano in 2017.668 Despite being one of
the few examples of alkylation on such substrates in recent times,
the reaction proved fairly sensitive to the substitution pattern on
the pyridone and the identity of the aliphatic alkenes/dienes used.
15.1.1.4. Cross coupling and carbene insertion. A number
of alkylation reactions based on cross coupling type of reac-
tions have been reported. A very recent example by Aissa’s
group demonstrated the use of sulfoxonium ylides as a replace-
ment reactant for diazo compounds, leading to a-arylated
aromatic or aliphatic ketones in good yields (Scheme 111A).669
Scheme 110
Pyridine-directed C(sp2)–H alkylations via addition to double bonds.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6670 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
This was the first example of the use of such reactants, safer
alternatives to diazonium compounds,670 in group-directed
C–H functionalisation. Li and Liu reported very similar condi-
tions for the alkylation of arenes and 2-pyridones respectively
with alkyltrifluoroborates (Scheme 111B and C).651,671 The
C6 alkylation of 2-pyridones was also performed via carbene
insertion using diazo compounds (Scheme 111D).672
The Ni catalysed functionalisation of indoles using alkyl
halides was achieved by Punji and co-workers (Scheme 111E).673
Although being a rare example of Ni-catalysed alkylation, this
method required the use of a preformed Ni-catalyst, catalytic
amounts of strong Li-amide bases, 2 equiv. of base and high
temperatures to result in medium to good yields of functionalised
indoles. The use of secondary alkyl halides was also possible, but
2 equiv. of KI as additive were required in this case.673
The functionalisation of non-aromatic C(sp2)–H bonds is
considerably rarer, and much underdeveloped. Yoshikai reported
the alkylation of cyclic alkenes with alkyl chlorides using Co
catalysis (Scheme 111F).674 Despite having benefits such as being
base metal-catalysed and allowing functionalisation at room
temperature, the reaction requires the use of both a catalytic
carbene and a superstoichiometric amine ligand (TMEDA), has
a limited scope, and presents some regioselectivity issues for
secondary alkyl chlorides, and therefore lacks generality.
15.1.1.5. Alkylation/cyclisation. The functionalisation of C–H
bonds with unsaturated moieties can result in the subsequent
involvement of the DG in a cyclisation process between the
newly installed functionality and the nucleophilic nitrogen
atom of the pyridine. In 2015 Glorius investigated the use of
diazomalonates in combination with Co catalysis. Instead of
obtaining the expected alkylation product, the corresponding
fused heterocycles, derived from nucleophilic attack of the
pyridine to the ester moiety of the alkyl group, were obtained
(Scheme 112A).675 Later the same group reported the use of
pyridotriazoles as carbene precursors for a similar reaction. In
this case, Rh catalysis had to be used, as Co pre-catalysts did not
produce any cyclised or alkylated product (Scheme 112B).676
15.1.1.6. Allylation. A large variety of allylation procedures
for the functionalisation of indoles have been reported in
recent years, with a number of diﬀerent reactants and leading
to variedly functionalised side chains. Two main diﬀerent classes
of reactants have been utilised: alkenes with (1) a leaving group,
or (2) a strained ring in alpha to the double bond. In both cases
most mechanistic proposals involve a migratory insertion of the
double bond into the metallacycle initially formed, followed by
a general b-elimination of a suitable leaving group (b-oxygen,
b-fluoro, b-bromo), or the release of ring strain via a b-carbon
cleavage. For the latter, the b-carbon elimination is favoured over
b-hydride elimination due to the release of the ring strain via
ring opening. Alternative mechanisms occurring via oxidative
additions have been suggested in some instances.677
In 2016 Kapur reported the allylation of indoles with allyl alcohols
(unsubstituted, 1-monosubstituted, 1,1-disubstituted), which selec-
tively resulted in non oxygenated products (Scheme 113A).678
The chemoselectivity arises from a selective b-hydroxide elimina-
tion rather than b-hydride elimination step in the mechanism.
Advantages are regio-, chemo-, and diastereoselectivity, and the
cleavage of the DG in a number of compounds.678 Many papers
have appeared using Mn and Co catalysis, in combination
for example with vinyldioxazolones679,680 (Scheme 113B), vinyl-
cyclopropenes679,681,682 (Scheme 113C, Mn cat. shown), or
diazabicyclic compounds679 (Scheme 113D). Among these,
notable are the fluorinated side chains introduced with
Ackermann’s (Mn,683 Scheme 113E, and Co684) and Zhang’s
(Mn, Scheme 113F)685 procedures.
15.1.1.7. Alkenylation. Olefination reactions can occur via diﬀer-
ent mechanisms, mostly oxidative dehydrogenative coupling with
olefins (Fujiwara–Moritani coupling, mostly with activated olefins),
Scheme 111
Pyridine-directed C(sp2)–H alkylations via cross-coupling
and carbene insertion.
Scheme 112
Pyridine-directed alkylation/cyclisation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6671
and hydrofunctionalisation of alkynes. Zhang reported the
use of unactivated olefins for the functionalisation of arenes
(Scheme 114A).686 The use of such alkenes as reactants is
rare, as most C–H olefinations employ activated styrenes and
acrylates. Li and Xu reported the use of acrylic acids as
reactants, in combination with pivalic anhydride as additive
(Scheme 114B).687 The formation of vinylic anhydride or mixed
pivalic/vinylic anhydrides as intermediate results in a decarbo-
nylative olefination process. The method shows good scope and
generally excellent yields. Co catalysis was used for the hydro-
arylation of aromatic alkynes (Scheme 114C).688 The hydro-
functionalisation of alkynes bearing a leaving group in the
propargylic position can proceed in two different ways. In case
a Brønsted acid is added to the reaction, the olefination
product is obtained, as recently reported for the olefination of
indoles (Scheme 114D).689 In such a case the leaving group is
maintained in the molecule and can be utilised successively. In
the absence of acids the corresponding allene is obtained
instead, as in Scheme 114E.689,690 Finally, noteworthy is the
C7 functionalisation of indolines using styrenes, reported
by Loh (Scheme 114F).691
15.1.1.8. Alkenylation/cyclisation. The hydrofunctionalisation
of dialkyl- or diarylalkynes in the presence of Rh(III), Ir(III),
or Co(III) catalysts, a (super)stoichiometric oxidant and a
non-coordinating anion source can result, instead of the
olefinated
product,
in
cyclisation
products
(extended
p
systems), interesting for their fluorescent properties and potential
applications in material chemistry.692 This process results in the
formation of a C–C and a C–N bond in a cascade manner
(Scheme 115A). Several examples have been reported recently,
making use of diaryl- or dialkylalkynes,693–695 including the
isolation of a 7-membered cobaltacycle intermediate (see general
mechanism in Scheme 115, bottom).696 Interesting one-pot
protocols have been reported by Cheng and Jun: in one case
the formation of the olefinic substrate from an alkyl chain
occurred in situ via oxidation, and in the other case the reaction
of allylamine with two equivalents of the alkyne resulted in the
formation of the 2-pyridinylarene substrate first, followed
by olefination/cyclisation (Scheme 115B and C).697,698 Another
cyclisation product can be obtained by using acrylates or similar
as the olefination agent. As reported by Cheng, the Rh-catalysed
reaction with 2 equivalents of acrylates in water and using O2 as
oxidant, results in the formation of pyridoisoindolium salts
(Scheme 115D).699 The process was proposed to occur via ortho
olefination, followed by intramolecular Michael addition of the
pyridine to the activated olefin, deprotonation, and finally a
second, intermolecular, nucleophilic attack to a second molecule
of the acrylate.
Alternatively, the use of Rh might also result in the formation
of two C–C bonds via a so-called ‘‘rollover cyclometallation’’
mechanism, where the nitrogen atom of the pyridine ring is not
involved in the cyclisation, and can be used to promote
a further C–H functionalisation (Scheme 115E). While the
rollover mechanism is more common for doubly coordinating
Scheme 113
Pyridine-directed allylations on C(sp2) centres.
Scheme 114
Pyridine-directed C(sp2)–H olefination.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6672 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
ligands, such as bipyridines,700 or in the case of a pyridine–carbene
moiety like the one in Scheme 115E,701 its occurrence is far
less common in other substrates (e.g. indole substrate in
Scheme 115E),702 and is obviously facilitated by the absence
of a non-coordinating anion in the reaction mixture.
15.1.1.9. Alkynylation. Generally speaking, alkynylation reactions
in C–H functionalisation typically employ two main reactants: the
hypervalent iodine compound TIPS-EBX (1-[(triisopropylsilyl)-
ethynyl]-1,2-benziodoxol-3(1H)-one), and TIPS-bromoacetylene.
Variations include other silyl protecting groups instead of TIPS
or, more rarely, aryl(bromo)acetylenes or alkyl(bromo)acetylenes.
Recent additions to the reagent pool for this transformation
include propargylic alcohols (see below). Although the silyl
protecting group can be easily cleaved, and the resulting
acetylene subsequently functionalised, this is still an intrinsic
limitation of this type of functionalisation. The use of terminal
alkynes was shown to result in the formation of considerable
amounts of Glaser–Hay coupling products.703,704
Relatively few examples of alkynylation with a pyridine
DG have been reported recently. In 2015 Li reported the
C6-alkynylation of pyridones with TIPS-EBX with a Rh catalyst,705
while Ni-catalysed reaction of indoles with TIPS-bromoacetylene
was reported by Punji706 (Scheme 116A and B). Wen reported
the use of 1,1-dimethylpropargyl alcohols as alternative reac-
tants for alkynylation reactions. This reactant avoids the use of
halogenated compounds and only results in the formation of
acetone as side product. The intermediate metal–alkyne
complex is
obtained
via b-carbon
elimination from
the
alcohol-ligated catalyst, as previously reported.707 Application
of such propargylic alcohols to the functionalisation of indoles
and carbazoles,703 although resulting in relatively low and
substrate-dependent yields, allows a larger variety of alkynes
to be used (alkyl and aryl substituted, Scheme 116C and D) than
the classical reactants. Noteworthy in this case are the mono-
functionalisation of carbazoles (carbazoles get usually doubly
functionalised) and the necessity of a 6-Me pyridine DG for the
indoles (without the 6-Me another transformation occurs704).
Finally, alkynylation of indolines (C7) and ferrocenes have
been reported by Loh and You using R-EBX (R = [Si], tBu)
hypervalent iodine species (Scheme 116E and F).691,708
Cascade alkynylation–cyclisation reactions are also possible.
For instance, two methods for the synthesis of dipyridoimid-
azolium compounds were reported by Li (Scheme 116G).709,710
Despite giving the same product, the two methods are mechan-
istically very different. While Method A is technically a cascade
directed alkynylation/cyclisation (Rh–alkyne complex is obtained
via b-carbon elimination from the alcohol-ligated intermediate707),
Method B was proposed to involve pyridine alkylation first,
followed by enolisation and nucleophilic attack of the enol to
the Co-activated pyridone ring, and Cu-mediated oxidation.
15.1.1.10. Cyanation. Classical reactions for the cyanation
of organic compounds are the Sandmeyer or the Rosenmund
von Braun reaction, or cross coupling reactions between aryl
halides and cyanide salts. All methods, in their classic version,
require prefunctionalised substrates, and more importantly,
the use of inorganic cyanides (very toxic) in the reaction.
Scheme 115
Pyridine-directed olefination/cyclisations via C–N bond
formation or rollover pathways.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6673
Although a number of (safer) reactants have been recently
utilised for the cyanation of C–H bonds, still a common feature
is the atom uneconomic nature of these reactants, where more
than 50% of the reactant mass is actually wasted.
Co-catalysed reactions were reported by Ackermann711a
and Chang711b in 2015, employing respectively N-cyano-N-phenyl-
tosylamide (NCTS) and N-cyanosuccinimide (Scheme 117A and B).
While the first protocol required a lower amount of additives
and catalyst, the use of a more stable reactant, and the good
FG tolerance in the second protocol are noteworthy. A third
protocol, reported by Jiang and co-workers, employed ethyl-
(ethoxymethylene)cyanoacetate as a new reagent under aerobic
oxidation conditions, but unfortunately stoichiometric Cu
salts were required (Scheme 117C).712 Similar conditions
(superstoichiometric Cu, air, 5% Pd cat.) were reported for
the use of iminonitriles as cyanating agent (Scheme 117D).713
The generation of cyanide ions from these two reactants has
not been yet fully understood, but it appears to occur through
oxidative processes. The cyanation of indoles with NCTS was
reported by Ackermann714 and Anbarasan715 using Mn/Zn and
Rh catalysis respectively (Scheme 117E and F). Notable features
are the functionalisation of tryptophans in the first case and
the substrate scope of substituted pyrroles (often only explored
as secondary substrates) in the second. Anbarasan also reported
the cyanation of non-aromatic C(sp2)–H bonds in both cyclic
and acyclic olefins using a similar procedure (Scheme 117G).716
This reaction was also applied to the formal synthesis of
chlorpheniramine-based hystamine antagonists.
15.1.1.11. Acylation.
This
transformation
is
commonly
achieved by using aldehydes or aldehyde precursors. An H-atom
abstraction by an oxidant delivers the acyl radical, which then
reacts with the cyclometallated Pd complex, giving a Pd(IV)
intermediate (Scheme 118, bottom). A subsequent reductive
elimination furnishes the acylated arene.
Aldehydes were generated in situ by aerobic oxidation of
toluene to benzaldehyde in Jiao’s protocol.717 A heterogeneous
Scheme 116
Alkynylation and alkynylation/cyclisation using pyridine-
based DGs.
Scheme 117
Pyridine-directed ortho cyanation of C(sp2)–H bonds.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6674 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
version of this reaction was reported by Zhaorigetu, using tert-
butylperoxybenzoate (TBPB) as oxidant (Scheme 118A).718
A decarboxylative procedure was instead developed by Liu, using
mandelic acid derivatives as reactants (Scheme 118B).719 The use of
aldehydes themselves was reported by Deng in water, using sodium
dodecylsulphate (SDS) as a phase-transfer catalyst/surfactant and
tert-butylhydroperoxide (TBHP) as oxidant (Scheme 118C).720
Exceptions to the general mechanism were reported by
Li and Wang, where the acylation product was obtained by
formal addition to ketenes (also applied to C(sp3)–H bonds)721
and nitriles (followed by hydrolysis)658 using Rh and Mn
catalysis respectively (Scheme 118D and E).
Following the classical protocol with aldehydes, Dash demon-
strated the functionalisation of carbazoles, resulting in double
acylation (Scheme 118F).722
15.1.1.12. Alkoxy- and aminocarbonylation. Although other
examples appeared with other DGs, only a few reports
on pyridine-directed alkoxy- and aminocarbonylation were
published recently. One example of the former was published
by Wu in 2016, making use of Mo(CO)6 as CO surrogate, and
requiring the superstoichiometric addition of benzoquinone
(BQ), NaOAc and Ag2CO3 (Scheme 119A).723 This protocol
worked for a variety of aliphatic alcohols, but not for other
nucleophiles. The aminocarbonylation of similar substrates
was recently achieved by Driver using Mn(CO)6 and nitroarenes
(Scheme 119B).724 Nitrosoarenes, formed in situ by reduction by
Mn, were identified in this case as the reactive species. In 2015
Ackermann
reported
a
Mn-catalysed
aminocarbonylation
of indoles with isocyanates,725 one of the most commonly used
reactants for this type of reactions.726 This reaction only
required the catalyst and solvent, without the addition of any
other additives or ligands (Scheme 119C).725
15.1.1.13. C–S bond formation. Very recently, Matsunaga727
and Wang728 reported the first protocols for Co-catalysed
trifluoromethylthiolation of (hetero)aromatic substrates using
(PhSO2)2NSCF3 and AgSCF3 as reactants (Scheme 120A and B).
In both cases, halogenated solvents had to be used and relatively
low yields (o70%) were obtained.
The use of DMSO as reactant for the methylthiolation of
similar substrates was reported by Jain via a Cu-mediated
reaction (Scheme 120C).729 Arylthiolation was reported by
Zhang using N-(arylthio)benzamides,730 while sulphonylation
can be performed via an Umpolung reaction with hypervalent
iodine compounds, followed by reaction with sodium sulphinates731
(Scheme 120D and E). Notably, the latter method is also
suitable for the reaction with other nucleophiles.
The introduction of arylsulfonyl functionalities on indoles
was recently reported with another method, using DABCO(SO2)2
and aryldiazonium tetrafluoroborates in a multicomponent
reaction catalysed by Pd(II) (Scheme 120F).732 The reaction is
initiated by the formation of an arylsulfonyl radical, which is
then introduced at the indole C2 position.
Trifluoromethylthiolation of indoles and pyrroles was reported
by Li using N-(trifluoromethylthio)saccharin under Rh/Lewis acid
catalysis (Scheme 120G).733 Interestingly, the functionalisation
of 3-substituted indoles also occurred in the absence of Rh and
Ag additive, suggesting that Lewis acids alone could promote the
reaction on such compounds.
Finally, Liu demonstrated the aryl- and alkylthiolation of
2-pyridones with disulfides under Cu/Brønsted acid catalysis
(Scheme 120H).734 It is worth mentioning that, although some
Scheme 118
C(sp2)–H acylation using pyridine as DG.
Scheme 119
Pyridine-directed alkoxy- and aminocarbonylation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6675
of these reactions required an air atmosphere, an O2 atmo-
sphere proved deleterious for the reaction,728,729,734 presumably
due to sulphur oxidation in the reactants/products.
15.1.1.14. C–B and C–Si bond formation. Organosilanes and
organoboranes
have
important
applications
in
organic
chemistry, for example in cross coupling reactions, and C–H
borylation and silylation have therefore been considerably
investigated even before 2015.31,735 Pyridine-directed C(sp2)–H
borylation and silylation have been reported by a number
of research groups. The compounds obtained in this way,
which often contain an internal Lewis acid–base interaction
as shown in Scheme 121, also have applications in material
science, due to their fluorescent properties.736–739 Due to
these non-covalent interactions, the C–H functionalisation
process
itself
has
been
suggested
to
occur
with
two
main different mechanisms. In the first one, the reaction is
initiated by the C–H cleavage/formation of a DG-coordinated
metallacycle (metal = catalyst, as for most of group-directed
functionalisations), followed by insertion of the boryl/silyl
group.740–743
The
other
mechanism
assumes
the
Lewis
acid–base interaction as the initial step, followed by catalyst
coordination/C–H cleavage, on the basis of non-successful
metallacycle formation or to early stage Lewis acid–base inter-
actions observed spectroscopically.739,744
Borylation employs diboranes or boranes as reactants; in the
latter case, the addition of a hydrogen acceptor (generally an
olefinic compound) to promote the reaction (as commonly used
for silylation with hydrosilanes, vide infra) might instead result
in complete inhibition due to hydroboration of the unsaturated
moiety.739 Several examples of borylation of 2-phenylpyridines
and analogues have appeared in the recent literature. Murata and
Ackermann reported the use of HBpin or B2pin2 in combination
with Ru catalysts (Scheme 122A and B),740,742 however only a
few examples of C(sp2)–H borylation were shown (Ackermann’s
protocol was nonetheless also applied for C(sp3)–H borylation,
see Scheme 136).
Kuninobu reported an interesting Fe-catalysed protocol
using 9-BBN (9-borabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane) as borylating agent
(Scheme 122C),739 and Miura/Hirano disclosed a Rh-catalysed
borylation of 2-pyridones (Scheme 122D).741 The use of the reaction
products as substrates in a Suzuki coupling nicely demonstrates
the potential for applications in synthesis.
Typical reactants for silylation are disilanes or hydrosilanes,
the latter generally requiring the addition of a hydrogen acceptor
to be eﬃcient (norbornene is often used for this role, in super-
stoichiometric amounts).735 Hydrosilanes/norbornene combinations
have been used for the Ir-catalysed silylation of 2-arylpyridines by
Oro/Iglesias and Kuninobu/Kanai (Scheme 123A and B).743,744
In the first case a preformed NHC–Ir(III) hydride complexes was
used as catalyst for the silylation of 2-phenyl- and 2-thienyl-
pyridines with a variety of silanes, ranging from triethyl to
triphenyl and trialkoxy silanes. Interestingly, the catalyst also
proved efficient for a variety of undirected C(sp2)–H silylations
on (hetero)arenes.743 Kuninobu/Kanai’s protocol was developed
instead for diarylfluorosilanes, and was not effective for non-
fluorinated reactants.744
Scheme 120
C(sp2)–S bond formation with pyridine DGs.
Scheme 121
Si–N and B–N non-covalent interactions during pyridine-
directed functionalisations.
Scheme 122
Pyridine-directed borylation of C(sp2) centres.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6676 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
15.1.1.15. C–N bond formation
15.1.1.15.1. Amidation. While until 2014 a number of
procedures were reported for C–H amidation using acyl azides as
nitrene precursors, recently a number of different reactants have
been employed for this transformation. Reactions with aminated
hypervalent iodine reactants have been reported by Loh and DeBoef
using catalytic Rh and stoichiometric Cu respectively, for the
synthesis of N-aryl sulfonamides and phthalimides (Scheme 124A
and B).745,746 A reaction with the electrophilic nitrogen source
N-Boc-O-2,4-dinitrophenylhydroxylamine in water under Rh
catalysis was developed by Lu (Scheme 124C).747 Notable
features of this procedure are: the use of water as solvent, the
good FG tolerance, and the possibility of functionalisation of
purine-based nucleosides. Chang used a similar hydroxylamine
reactant, N-Boc-O-acetylhydroxylamine, in the Co-catalysed
amidation of arenes: in this case a variety of carbamates (other
than N-Boc) could be employed in the reaction, and purines
could be used as DG (Scheme 124D).748
The Cu-catalysed dehydrogenative C–H amidation with
secondary amides has been reported by Chen using air as the
sole oxidant (Scheme 124E).749 Here the formation of tertiary
amides is remarkable, as most protocols result in the formation
of secondary amides instead.
In 2015 Chang introduced dioxazolones as reactants for C–H
amidation. Dioxazolones are safer and more reactive than the
corresponding acyl azides, due to their relative stability and stronger
coordination to the metal centre, which promotes faster reactions.
Moreover, these reactants are simple to prepare and to handle.
Chang750–752 and Jiao753 reported their use in the directed amidation
of arenes using Rh and Co catalysts, showing the reaction to be
suitable for a number of different DGs (including purines, amides,
and oximes, Scheme 124F). Notably, Chang reported the use of
EtOAc as alternative solvent for a 200 mmol scale reaction.751
Ackermann subsequently applied a similar procedure to the
Co-catalysed amidation of indoles,754 while You employed Rh
for the functionalisation of ferrocenes755 (Scheme 124G and H).
Very recently, the amidation of pyridones (C6) and iso-
quinolinones (C3) was reported with sulphonyl azides under
Ir catalysis (Scheme 124I).756 Interestingly, C8-functionalisation
of isoquinolinones could be performed in similar conditions in
the absence of the heterocyclic DG.
15.1.1.15.2. Amination. C–H amination reactions also typically
involved nitrenes obtained in situ from azides. For example,
Lu demonstrated the reaction of 2-phenylpyridines with aryl azides
in water, also allowing for a double ortho-functionalisation with
two different azides (Scheme 125A).757 The use of anthranils
(2,1-benzisoxazoles) as alternative, more stable nitrene precursors
was independently reported by Wang and Li.758,759 The reaction of
indoles with anthranils using polar protic solvents (H2O or MeOH)
and Rh catalysis resulted in a tandem amination–cyclisation process,
leading to the formation of indoloquinolines (Scheme 125C).758,759
The same reaction was also shown to occur on 2-pyridones
(Scheme 125D).759 Interestingly, the cyclisation did not occur
when phenyl or thienyl substrates were investigated, and the
reaction only resulted in the corresponding o-formylaniline-
substituted product (Scheme 125B).758
15.1.1.15.3. Azidation. Narula reported in 2015 a protocol for
the Cu-catalysed azidation of 2-phenylpyridines using benzotriazole
sulfonyl azide (BtSO2N3) and K2S2O8 as oxidant (Scheme 126).760
Scheme 123
Pyridine-directed silylation of C(sp2) centres.
Scheme 124
Amidation reactions with pyridine DGs.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6677
NaN3 and 1-imidazole sulfonyl azide (ImSO2N3) also proved
eﬀective in these conditions.
15.1.1.16. C–O bond formation. Examples of C–O bond for-
mation are somewhat limited in comparison to C–C and other
C–heteroatom bond forming procedures, with yields often
o70% or even o50%, possibly due to the strong coordinating
ability of O, which might inhibit the catalysis by preventing
reductive elimination or forming relatively stable complexes.761,762
Nonetheless, interesting advances are being made in terms of
greener oxidants, cheaper base metal catalysts, and milder
reaction conditions.
A number of papers on pyridine-directed C–O bond for-
mation reactions on (hetero)arenes have been reported using
Ru/PIDA,761 solid-supported Pd/PIDA763,764 or simple Pd salts/
peroxides765,766 combinations, leading to ortho acetoxylated,
hydroxylated or alkoxylated compounds (in case of PIDA as
oxidant, when H2O or an alcohol are used as solvent, one-pot
hydrolysis
or
alcoholysis
of
the
acetoxylated
product
is
obtained).
In the past few years, some reports appeared where O2 was
used as oxidant. Shen reported a direct alkoxylation with alcohols
(only 3-methylpyridine could be used as DG, Scheme 127A),767
while Guis used aldehydes/O2 as reagents in combination with
Pd catalysis.768 In this case the reaction occurred via formation
of an intermediate acyl peroxo-radical, followed by its reaction
with the arene, ultimately resulting in hydroxylated compounds
(Scheme 127B). Patel disclosed the benzoxylation of arenes
using benzylethers and TBHP as oxidant under Cu catalysis
(Scheme 127C).769 Although limited in yields and scope, this
protocol is interesting as it shows diﬀerent product selectivity from
its Pd-catalysed counterpart (which gives acylated products).770
The formation of the ester product from the benzylic ether
derives from Cu/TBHP mediated oxygenation to benzaldehyde
and further to t-butyl arylperoxyester. The arylcarboxy radical
generated by homolitic cleavage of this intermediate is finally
introduced at the ortho position in the substrate.769 A very recent
remarkable paper by Li and Xu demonstrated the acyloxylation
of 2-phenylpyridines and analogues with carboxylic acids and Rh
catalysis (Scheme 127D).234 Though using a superstoichiometric
amount of Ag as oxidant, this protocol was applicable to a broad
range of carboxylic acids: aliphatic (incl. saturated heterocyclic
rings), (hetero)aromatic and vinylic reacted in good yields,
often 480%. Moreover, a range of DGs proved eﬀective in this
protocol, and amides were used for the acylation of olefinic
substrates, although in modest yields (o70%).234
Finally, the acetoxylation of indoles (2-substituted, C7 func-
tionalisation) and carbazoles was reported by Miura using
acetic acid, Ru catalysis, and Ag oxidant (Scheme 127E).771 It is
worth noting that the functionalisation of unsubstituted indoles
was not observed, either in C7 or in C2.
15.1.1.17. C–Halogen bond formation. C–H halogenation,
as for arylation reactions, also suffered from the formation of
mixtures of mono and di-halogenated compounds. In recent
years, a few synthetic methods showing good selectivity were
Scheme 125
Amination and related reactions with pyridine DGs.
Scheme 126
Azidation of aranes using pyridine as DG.
Scheme 127
Pyridine-directed C(sp2)–O bond formation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6678 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
reported by a number of research groups and in different
conditions. The use of simple and cheap NaX salts as reactants
for the introduction of Cl, Br and I reported by Wang in 2015 is
certainly a landmark (Scheme 128A).772 This method is the most
atom economic reaction available in the series, although a limited
substrate scope was investigated. The use of N-halosuccinimides as
halogenating reactants using Pd supported on Cr- or Fe-based MOFS
as heterogeneous catalysts was investigated by Martin-Matute
(Scheme 128B).773 Although having a number of clear advantages,
such as mild conditions and recyclability of the catalyst, the catalytic
results are unfortunately considerably dependent on the substrate
and DG employed, presumably due to the steric hindrance of the
starting materials and the rigid structure of the MOFs. It is worth
mentioning that, although the catalysts could be reused for several
runs, some degradation of the solid structures was observed, as well
as its halogenation as a side process. Similar reactions, using
Pd@CNT (carbon nanotubes)763 or other Pd@MOFs (Zr-based)774
were reported by Ellis and Cohen.
Wu reported the use of benzyl chloride as halogenating
agent under oxidising conditions (Scheme 128C).775 While
using PdCl2 as catalyst, and under O2 atmosphere, selective
C–Cl bond formation was obtained, switching the catalyst to a
preformed palladacycle with a ferrocenylimine ligand and
adding a base under air, resulted in the selective acylation
of the C–H bond (not shown).775 In the chlorination case, the
intermediate tBuOCl is suggested as actual reactant, while in
the second case the formation of an acyl radical is responsible
for the reaction. In 2015 Li reported the synthesis of diaryl-
iodonium salts starting from PIDA, PTSA ( p-toluensulfonic acid)
and a DG-equipped arene under Rh catalysis (Scheme 128D).776
These compounds can be used as intermediates for the for-
mation of C–C, C–O, C–N, C–S and C–P bonds using a variety of
nucleophiles (see also Scheme 120E). It is worth noting, however,
that many procedures have been reported for the direct
formation of such bonds with the same DGs, and the synthetic
utility of this two-step procedure is therefore rather limited.
15.1.2.
C(sp3)–H bond functionalisation. The function-
alisation of activated C(sp3)–H bonds, such as benzylic, allylic,
or in a to a heteroatom, has been much investigated, even
without the facilitating effect of a DG. The activation and
functionalisation of unactivated C(sp3)–H bonds is instead
considerably more difficult, due to the intrinsically stronger
bonds, and selectivity is also challenging due to the presence of
several similar bonds in a typical organic molecule. Group-
directed C(sp3)–H bond functionalisation has been explored
during the last two decades, and brought important improve-
ment in the field. A plethora of effective transformations has
been reported throughout the years. Although mostly bidentate
DGs have been used for the functionalisation of C(sp3)–H bonds in
the last few years,777,778 several examples employing monodentate
DGs, including heterocycles, have appeared, after the pioneering
work of Sanford,629,779 Chatani,780 and Daugulis,630 among others.
For the azine-based DGs, the substrates investigated fall mainly in
two classes: 8-methylquinoline and 2-ethylpyridine derivatives,
which will be treated in this section.
8-Methylquinolines are the most common substrate investi-
gated, and its functionalisation is generally easier than that
of 2-ethylpyridines, due to its benzylic nature. Typically, sub-
stitution on the aromatic rings is tolerated, although in some
instances strong EWG substituents and steric hincrance in C7
or C2 can inhibit the reaction to various degrees. In general,
apart from a few cases, substitution at the benzylic position
(e.g. 8-ethylquinoline) strongly suppresses C–H activation.
2-Ethylpyridines (and in general any other flexible substrate),
on the other hand, present the intrinsic issue of the flexibility of
the alkyl chain, which makes the coordinating ability of the
azine less eﬃcient (metallacycle formation). In such substrates,
monofunctionalisation may also pose some challenges, due to
the lack of steric hindrance in close proximity. These issues are
generally tackled by using branched alkyl chains instead of
linear ones, to reduce flexibility/rotation (Thorpe–Ingold effect)
and increase the steric hindrance around the desired C–H bond.
As C–C bonds connect the azine to the functionalisable C–H
bonds, the DG is not cleavable in such substrates. Quinoline
substrates can, however, be easily reduced to tetrahydroquino-
line
with
NiCl2/NaBH4,781–783
H2/Pd@C,721
H2/PtO2,784
or
NaBH(CN)3/BF3–Et2O,785 hereby enlarging the application scope.
The same reduction is in theory possible for 2-ethylpyridine
derivatives, to produce piperidines, but it has not been used in
the context of C–H functionalisation.
15.1.2.1. Arylation. A few arylation procedures have been
reported by Glorius, Shi/Xia and You under Rh/Ir catalysis, for
the functionalisation of both 8-methylquinolines and 2-ethyl-
pyridines. In 2015 Glorius reported the Rh-catalysed arylation of
both substrates with aryl boroxines (Scheme 129A).786 Despite
the use of up to 2 equiv. of boroxine (6 equiv. Ar) and super-
stoichiometric Ag as oxidant (due to boroxine homocoupling as a
side reaction) the reaction gave good yields for both substrates.
While only 8-benzylquinoline was functionalised for this class
Scheme 128
Pyridine-directed C(sp2)–H halogenation reactions.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6679
of substrates, both branched and linear 2-ethylpyridine analo-
gues were tested in the reaction: branched substrates reacted to
give selectively monoarylated products, while linear-chain sub-
strates resulted in varying amounts of diarylated product.786
The
arylation
of
2-ethylpyridines
with
diaryliodonium
salts was reported by Shi under Ir catalysis (Scheme 129B).787
This reaction, although requiring 3 equiv. of the substrate to
avoid difunctionalisation, works well with a variety of azines
(pyridines, pyrazines, quinolines, 73–95% yield) and azoles
(pyrazole, isoxazole, 45–52%). The possibility to introduce
aromatic rings other than p-tolyl was demonstrated using aliphatic
oximes as substrates.787 In 2016 Glorius reported another
protocol for the arylation of 8-benzylquinolines, this time with
aryl bromides (Scheme 129C).788 The use of a chiral carbene
ligand allowed the formation of enantio-enriched products (e.r.
between 80/20 and 90/10). This reaction proved to be fairly
substrate sensitive, with yields ranging between 42 and 86%,
depending on the substituent on the benzylic ring of the
substrate and the aryl bromide used.788
Finally, an interesting protocol from the You group specifi-
cally aimed at the heteroarylation of 2-ethylpyridines and
8-methylquinolines appeared in 2017 (Scheme 129D).789 Apart
from the specific functionalisation with substituted thiophenes,
benzothiophenes and furans, this is a challenging dehydrogena-
tive coupling between a C(sp3)–H and a C(sp2)–H bond. Whereas
the high temperature (140 1C), the 3 equiv. of oxidant (6 equiv.
Ag overall) required, and the sensitivity to the Thorpe–Ingold
effect can be seen as drawbacks, very notable features are:
the use of alcohols as cosolvents for 2-ethylpyridines, the use of
substituted quinolines as DGs, and the FG tolerance on the
heteroarene partner, which includes esters, amides, aldehydes,
halides and alkenes, furnishing yields in most cases 460%.789
15.1.2.2. Alkylation. For alkylation, 8-methylquinoline is the
substrate of choice and, to our knowledge, no alkylation on
2-ethylpyridine derivatives have appeared in the last 3 years.
Investigations using typical reactants such as a,b-unsaturated
carbonyls and diazocompounds have been undertaken. A notable
exception is the use of cyclopropanols as alkylating agents, reported
by Li.790 In this case only two examples of C(sp3)–H alkylation were
reported, thus this method is not covered in Scheme 130. Another
interesting exception is the use of allylic alcohols as alkylating
agents, reported in 2017 by Kim (Scheme 130A).783 Apart from
the new reactant used, this reaction occurs in water under air
and a range of substituted quinolines could be functionalised in
Scheme 129
Arylation of 2-ethylpyridines and 8-methylquinoline derivatives.
Scheme 130
Alkylation of 8-methylquinoline derivatives.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6680 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
good yields. The use of alcohols other than 3-buten-2-ol required a
mixture H2O/PEG (polyethylene glycol) as solvent, and resulted in
generally lower yields (o70%).783
Two very similar protocols for the alkylation with a,b-unsaturated
ketones were reported by Li/Chang and Li (Scheme 130B).781,791 Both
protocols, using Rh catalysis in halogenated solvents at low/mild
temperatures gave generally high yields of the desired alkylated
quinolines. Somewhat lower yields were obtained with function-
alised substrates, in particular sensitivity to steric hindrance in C7
was noted in both cases. The reactions proceeded well with aliphatic
and (hetero)aromatic vinyl ketones.781,791 The formation of the same
product starting from both vinyl alcohols and a,b-unsaturated
ketones is due to diﬀerent mechanisms. For the latter, the
formal 1,4-addition product is obtained by migratory insertion
of the double bond into the initial rhodacycle, followed by
hydrolysis (protodemetallation). In the case of allylic alcohols,
a migratory insertion/b-hydride elimination is the suggested
pathway to the alkylated final products (Scheme 130, bottom).
The use of maleimides as coupling partners has been reported by
Kim in 2016, leading to succinimide-functionalised methylquino-
lines (Scheme 130C).782 Although the reported conditions
did not prove eﬀective with other a,b-unsaturated carbonyl
partners, the reaction proceeded in good yields with a range
of N-functionalised maleimides and substituted quinolines
(strong EWG substituents gave considerably low yields).
Two papers appeared recently on the alkylation of 8-methyl-
quinolines making use of diazocompounds, one under Rh and
the other under Co catalysis (Scheme 130D).784,785 Both protocols
are characterised by a good FG tolerance on the quinoline
substrate; for instance, strong EWG substituents can still lead
to high yields in the Rh-catalysed process,784 while a variety of
useful functionalisations are tolerated in the Co-catalysed
process, such as alkenes, alkynes, free NH2 and Bpin.785
15.1.2.3. Alkenylation and alkynylation. Due to inherently
poor reactivity and selectivity, olefination of C(sp3)–H bond is
in general rare, and only a few papers have appeared in the
literature specifically on the introduction of these functionalities on
8-methylquinolines. Sundararaju reported a Co-catalysed addition
to internal alkynes, generating olefins in a stereoselective (syn)
manner (Scheme 131A).792 The reaction with asymmetric alkynes
resulted in varying degrees of regioselectivity, depending on the
substituents. Interestingly, one example of addition to a terminal
alkyne was also reported, albeit in 30% yield.
The reaction with geminal difluoroalkenes (F as leaving
group) under Rh catalysis was developed by Li and Wang, and
also occurred with good stereoselectivity for a variety of sub-
stituted 8-methylquinolines (Scheme 131B).793 Interestingly, a
few examples of heteroaromatic (32–35% yield) and fluoroalkyl-
substituted (94%) alkenes were demonstrated. Surprisingly, it
was also shown that fluorine can act as a leaving group even in
the presence of a tosylate group, which remained unaltered in
the product.793
Only one example of alkynylation of 8-methylquinolines has
been reported recently (Scheme 131C).794 A preformed Pd(II)
catalyst was utilised for the coupling with TIPS-substituted
acetylene bromide. A range of diﬀerently substituted quinolines
(including alkene and ester substituents) could be coupled eﬃciently
under these conditions. The Cu(OAc)2 in superstoichiometric
amounts, despite being mentioned as oxidant, probably has another
role, as no oxidant should be required for this transformation.
15.1.2.4. Acylation. Li reported two protocols for the C(sp3)–
H acylation of 8-methylquinolines and 2-ethylpyridines, using
relatively reactive ketenes or cyclopropenones with Rh catalysts
(Scheme 132A and B).721,795 In both protocols substituted
8-methylquinolines were well tolerated, even at the C7 position.
The acylation with cyclopropenones, although not particularly
high-yielding, allows the introduction of enones with a single
reactant, and can also be applied to 2-ethylpyridine derivatives.
15.1.2.5. C–N bond formation. A relatively large number
of examples of C(sp3)–N bond formation in 2-ethylpyridine or
8-methylquinoline derivatives have recently appeared in the
literature. With a few exceptions, these mostly occur under
Rh catalysis, using dioxazolones, amides, azides, hypervalent
iodine compounds (amidation), anthranils (amination), and
organic nitrites (nitration) as reactants.
Scheme 131
Olefination and alkynylation of 8-methylquinolines.
Scheme 132
Acylation of 8-methylquinolines and 2-ethylpyridines.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6681
15.1.2.5.1. Amidation. Amidation reactions have been studied
with a range of nitrene precursors, such as azides, dioxazolones,
and amidated hypervalent iodine compounds.
The reaction with sulfonazides works eﬃciently with a variety
of substituted coupling partners (Scheme 133A).796 Notably,
EWG substituents on the quinoline provided better results
than EDGs, which rarely occurs. Li and Sundararaju employed
dioxazolones for the amidation, using respectively Rh and Co
dimers as precatalysts (Scheme 133B).797,798 Importantly, the
reaction with Rh was demonstrated to occur even on 8-ethyl or
8-benzylquinolines, although substitution on the quinoline itself
was not investigated. Notably, many examples of C(sp3)–H
amidation, including more complex molecules, were reported
with this protocol making use of oximes ad DGs.797 The protocol
under Co catalysis, although being fairly sensitive to the sub-
stitution pattern in both coupling partners,798 is one of the rare
examples of base metal-catalysed C(sp3)–H activation, and is
therefore an important advancement.
The use of amidated iodanes, either preformed or formed
in situ, for the functionalisation of both C(sp2)–H and C(sp3)–H
bonds was reported by Loh and You respectively under Rh
catalysis (Scheme 133C and D).745,799 In particular, the amida-
tion of 2-ethylpyridine derivatives can be performed at room
temperature, although requiring a long reaction time (48–72 h).
Interestingly, this functionalisation seems to require a quaternary
carbon a to the functionalised C–H bond to be effective
(Scheme 133C bottom and Scheme 133D). A couple of other
procedures have been reported for the amidation of 8-methyl-
quinoline, which proceed via a different mechanism (no nitrenes
involved). Azodicarboxylates have been used by Kim and Park,
while N-fluoroarenesulfonimides were utilised by Zheng under
Cu catalysis (Scheme 133E and F).800,801 In both cases certain
sensitivity to the substitution patterns on the quinoline was
observed, resulting in some cases in poor yields.
15.1.2.5.2. Amination and nitration. Jiao and Li/Lan reported
the amination of 8-methylquinolines and 2-ethylpyridines using
anthranils under very similar conditions (Scheme 134A).802,803
A notable point, apart from various functionalities tolerated on
both coupling partners, is the possibility to employ 8-ethyl-
quinolines as substrates, which are generally not reactive.
The use of t-butylnitrite in combination with oxygen and a
Pd catalyst for C(sp3)–H nitration was reported in 2015 by Liu
(Scheme 134B).804 This protocol is interesting as it avoids the use of
stoichiometric AgNO2 as reactant, often used in C–H nitration.
Although proceeding relatively slowly (48 h reactions), variedly
substituted 8-methylquinolines, including strong EWG-substituted,
could be functionalised in good yields.
15.1.2.6. C–O bond formation. C(sp3)–O bond formation
for this class of DG has not been much investigated. Apart
from two isolated examples of methoxylation and acetoxylation
of 8-methylquinoline (99 and 90% respectively) under hetero-
geneous Pd catalysis reported by Ellis in 2015,763 Chan demonstrated
the coupling of 8-methylquinolines with methylketones catalysed by
Cu.805 The proposed mechanism for this reaction does not actually
involve coordination of the quinoline nitrogen to Cu and is therefore
not entirely within the scope of this review. Nonetheless, it has
been described in Scheme 135 for completeness. The reaction
seems to be initiated by an acid-promoted aerobic oxidation,
similar to a reaction developed in the Maes group,806,807 leading
to
the
corresponding
quinoline
aldehyde.
A
subsequent
(cascade) condensation with the methylketone results then in
the formation of the enone.805
Scheme 133
Directed amidation on 8-methylquinoline and 2-ethyl-
pyridine derivatives.
Scheme 134
Directed amination and nitration on 8-methylquinoline and
2-ethylpyridine derivatives.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6682 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
15.1.2.7. C–B and C–Si bond formation. Few examples have
been reported of C(sp3)–B bond formation, investigating cyclic
and acyclic amines, rather than the typical 2-ethylpyridines and
8-methylquinolines.740,808
The
functionalisation
of
cyclic
amines is an interesting topic, and has been relatively little
explored.809 The borylation of such compounds are therefore of
interest. Ackermann’s protocol utilises a preformed, bench-
stable Ru–carboxylate catalyst, while Ir catalysis and a complex
pre-ligand were used by Li (Scheme 136A and B).740,808 Although
higher yields were obtained in this case, only three examples of
C(sp3)–H functionalisation were shown, with the main focus
of the paper being C(sp2)–H functionalisation with a number of
different DGs.
C(sp3)–Si bond formation has been investigated instead
on 2-ethylpyridine derivatives (Scheme 136C).810 Despite clear
disadvantages such as the use of 5 equivalents of silane and 3
of norbornene as additive (hydrogen acceptor), and the high
temperature required, the process gave good yields for a variety
of substrates, including substituted pyridines and unsubsti-
tuted alkyl chains, using a 2% Ru loading (total [Ru]).
15.2.
Pyrimidine as DG
Pyrimidine is often tested as secondary DG in many protocols
developed for pyridine-based strategies, and in many cases
works as well in the same or very similar reaction conditions.
Nonetheless, there are several cases in the literature where the
pyrimidine DG works diﬀerently, and many transformations
are specific for this DG. In particular, pyrimidine is often the
DG of choice for the functionalisation of indoles (and pyrroles)
in C2, and in most cases is used only for such substrates.
Because of this, a separate section has been devoted to this DG.
Protocols that are very similar to those reported for pyridine
will not be reported again in this section (the interested reader
can find many information in Section 15.1.1), and more
selected literature will be discussed here.
The cleavage of the pyrimidine ring is, as for pyridine,
typically not possible when attached via a C–C bond, but it is
easy when the DG is attached via a C–N bond (e.g. in indoles,
Scheme 137). In this case no quaternisation is necessary (as it is
with pyridine), and often simply heating with NaOEt in DMSO is
enough to produce the pyrimidine-free substrate (side reactions
may occur depending on R, for example in the case of silanes,
Scheme 137). Unlike pyridine, however, pyrimidine commonly
gives rise to rearrangements, instead of the desired cleavage. In
particular, Smiles-type rearrangements (intramolecular nucleo-
philic aromatic substitution), resulting in 1,4-migration of the
pyrimidine ring, have been observed several times when a
nucleophilic site is available at a specific position, as shown in
Scheme 137. These are specifically reported in the text whenever
they were noted in the original publication.
15.2.1.
Arylation. As many arylation reactions have been
reported before 2015 and many protocols are similar to those
developed for pyridine DGs, few examples will be reported here.
Li and Cheng reported the naphthylation of indoles using
7-oxabenzonorbornadienes as reactants under Co catalysis
(Scheme 138A).811,812 This class of compounds had been used
before with other DGs and under Rh catalysis,813,814 but the use of
base metals constitutes an important improvement. The reaction
occurs via addition of the indole to the double bond of the alkene,
leading to an intermediate cyclic allylation product.812 Interestingly,
Cheng found that the reaction can be stopped at this step
if performed at room temperature instead of 90 1C. Arylation
with arylboronic acids was reported by Pilarski and Niu/Song
Scheme 135
C–O bond formation on 8-methylquinolines.
Scheme 136
C(sp3)–H borylation and silylation.
Scheme 137
Common strategies for pyrimidine DG cleavage or migration.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6683
respectively with Ru and Co catalysts under oxidising condi-
tions (Scheme 138B and C).815,816 Despite the relatively high
amount of Co and the HFIP solvent used in the latter protocol,
the use of Co catalysis results in higher tolerance of electron-
withdrawing substituents on the indole moiety, which instead
result in low yields in the Ru-catalysed reaction (Scheme 138B).
15.2.2.
Alkylation. Some interesting reports on formal alkylation
reactions leading to complex molecules have been recently
published. Li showed an alkyne insertion/intramolecular Diels–
Alder process between N-pyrimidylindoles and benzoquinonic
1,6-enynes leading to fused and bridged polycyclic compounds
(Scheme 139A and B).817 While with Rh catalysis the fused
polycyclic product was obtained almost exclusively, the use of
Co allowed preferential formation of the bridged one, although
not exclusively. The product switch arises from the different
regioselectivities of the initial olefination step (Rh: alkyne
2,1-insertion; Co: 1,2-insertion), in turn due to different steric
sensitivities (the Co catalyst is suggested to be more sterically
sensitive, giving preferentially the least hindered insertion inter-
mediate). It is worth mentioning that the use of the classical
pyrimidine cleavage protocol (NaOEt in DMSO, see Scheme 137)
on the fused product did not result in DG cleavage, but in the
cleavage of the oxa-cycle, giving the corresponding phenol.817
Scheme 138
Pyrimidine-directed arylation of indoles.
Scheme 139
Pyrimidine-directed alkylation of indoles.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6684 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Alkylation with diazo compounds, followed by in situ intra-
molecular aldol or Michael-type reactions was reported by Zhou.
In this case, 2,3-fused indoles were obtained (Scheme 139C).818
Reactants featuring ester, amide, aromatic and heteroaromatic
rings could be successfully employed in the reaction with good
yields. Huang and Wang recently reported a multicomponent
reaction between N-pyrimidylindoles, acrolein derivatives and
TEMPO (Scheme 139D).819 The first step of this reaction is
the addition of indole to the double bond of the acrolein
(Rh-catalysed), followed by Cu-mediated introduction of the
TEMPO radical in a to the carbonyl. Interestingly, MeCN as
solvent proved crucial in suppressing other reaction pathways
(e.g. b-hydride elimination and protonation), despite failing to
do so when acrylic ketones were used instead of aldehydes. Apart
from acyclic derivatives, Li introduced the use of cyclopropanols
as new reactants for the introduction of carbonylethyl chains
(Scheme 139E).790 Not being electrophilic compounds, their
use constitutes a challenge and requires oxidising conditions
(superstoichiometric Cu used). The reaction requires low Rh
loadings (2%) and can be performed on arenes as well as
indoles, but the yields obtained do not appear competitive in
comparison to the use of the more common acrylates. Even in
this case, the use of NaOEt in DMSO for pyrimidine cleavage did
not result in the desired product, but in the migration of the
pyrimidine from the indole to the alkyl chain.790
The use of acryloyl silanes was reported by Loh and Feng,
and resulted in high yields of the corresponding alkylated
products (Scheme 139F).820 Li and Ackermann/Li reported the
use of sulfoxonium ylides (carbene precursors) and maleimide
for the alkylation of indoles (Scheme 139G and H).821,822 These
reactants have also been used with pyridine DGs, with some-
what diﬀerent procedures (cf. Scheme 110K and Scheme 111A).
In the case of Scheme 139H, again the use of NaOEt to cleave
the DG resulted in pyrimidine migration. Finally, Shi reported
an interesting Ni-catalysed trifluoroethylation of indoles using
trifluoroethyl iodide as reactant. Unfortunately, not very high
yields were obtained for a range of indoles and other hetero-
cycles, with most yields remaining below the 70% threshold
(Scheme 139I).823
15.2.3.
Allylation. As previously reported for pyridine DGs,
many allylation protocols involve reactions with allyl alcohols,
halides, or other activated allylic precursors (strained rings or
leaving groups). In this context, a few procedures using diﬀer-
ent precursors or methodologies have been reported for the
allylation of indoles. Li reported the use of both 4- and
6-membered rings as allylic precursors in Rh-catalysed reactions
(Scheme 140A and B).824,825 While in the first case the driving
force is the opening of the strained 4-membered lactone, the
release of CO2 facilitates the opening of the 6-membered ring.
Importantly, both reactions proved to be selective for the E isomer.
Another interesting procedure was reported by Kim for the
synthesis of trifluoromethylallylated indoles and indolines,
employing a-trifluoromethylallyl carbonates (Scheme 140C).826
The reaction was performed in THF, but tAmylOH was found
to be a valid alternative. Notably, the allylation of indolines
in C7 did not occur with the pyrimidinyl DG, but required
carbonyl-based DGs.826 The use of NaOEt on the allylated
indole did not result in the pyrimidyl cleavage, but in olefin
isomerisation instead, although in modest yields (52%). Moving to
base metals, Li reported the use of vinyloxiranes under Co catalysis
(Scheme 140D),811 allowing allylation of indoles in high yields and at
low temperatures, despite the low stereoselectivity. As vinyloxiranes,
vinyldioxolanones had also been previously reported as allylating
agents, but Yu disclosed their use in a solventless ball-milling
protocol under Co catalysis (Scheme 140E).827 Despite the neat
conditions and only requiring 30 min for completion, mixtures
of isomers were obtained from the reaction, as previously
observed with these reactants (cf. Scheme 113B).
An
interesting
Mn-catalysed
allylation
reaction
with
1,1-disubstituted allenes was reported by Wang (Scheme 140F).828
Very high yields were obtained for many examples, and the
procedure is applicable to a variety of (hetero)arenes apart from
indoles, using either pyrimidine or pyridine DGs. Unfortunately,
monosubstituted allenes resulted in isomeric mixtures, and tri-
and tetra-substituted ones proved ineﬀective in the reaction.
15.2.4.
Alkenylation. Olefination protocols have been investi-
gated on N-(2-pyrimidyl)indoles exploiting either oxidative dehydro-
genative coupling with alkenes (Fujiwara–Moritani reaction),
addition to alkynes or allenes, or via cross-coupling type reac-
tions. Loh and Feng reported the reaction with acryloyl silanes
for the formation of both alkylated (see Scheme 139F above)
and alkenylated products (Scheme 141A).820 In the case of
Scheme 140
Pyrimidine-directed allylation of indoles.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6685
alkenylation, 2 equiv. Cu(OAc)2 were used as oxidant, together
with 1 equiv. TEMPO, which was suggested to prevent silane
polymerisation and assist in the oxidative turnover of the Rh
catalyst. It is noteworthy that this reaction is somewhat sensitive
to the steric hindrance on both indole’s C3 and C7 (not commonly
observed) and on the identity of the silane group.820
Li and Lan reported a rare selective 1,2-insertion of
terminal alkynes using Co catalysis, giving a-gem-vinylindoles
(Scheme 141B).829 The use of Co and TFE as solvent was crucial
for the selectivity, due to the high steric sensitivity of Co and
the H-bonding abilities of TFE. Propargylic alcohols, amines
and silanes performed well when used as reactants, although
yields and selectivity depended on their structure. The use of
NaOEt for the cleavage of the DG resulted in the transfer of the
heterocycle to the hydroxyl of the propargylic moiety.
A complementary procedure, giving the 2,1-insertion product
with terminal alkynes was reported by Li and Lei using Mn as
catalyst (Scheme 141C).830 Aryl- and alkyl-substituted alkynes
proved eﬃcient reactants in most cases, and the reaction could
be performed on internal alkynes as well. A practical downside
here is the use of Et2O at 80 1C.
Rueping and Wang/Li independently reported the Mn-catalysed
olefination of indoles with allenic esters. The use of 1,3-disubstituted
allenes (Rueping) resulted in the hydroarylation product
(arylation at the C2 position of the allene) in a regio- and
stereoselective manner (Scheme 141D).831 Interestingly, the
reaction with tri- or tetra-substituted allenes (Rueping, Wang/
Li) resulted in a cascade hydroarylation/DG migration via a
Smiles-type rearrangement (see Scheme 137), furnishing the
products in Scheme 141E.831,832 While Rueping’s procedure831
resulted in higher yields (often 490%), but required 2 equiv. of
NaOAc as additive, Wang/Li’s protocol832 gave lower yields in
several cases (although a much broader substrate scope was
reported), but without the addition of any additive. A number of
post-functionalisation reactions were reported by both authors,
including: alkene reduction, amide hydrolysis (with consequent
pyrimidine migration back to the indole), decarboxylative ring
opening, and DG cleavage with LiAlH4 (concomitant carbonyl
reduction).831,832
The Co-catalysed hydroarylation of ketenimines resulted in
the olefination product depicted in Scheme 141F in generally
good yields (lower yields on pyrroles, arenes and indolines).833
The use of NaOEt on these compounds resulted in a pyrimidine
migration similar to that in Scheme 141E, via intramolecular
nucleophilic attack of the enamine to the pyrimidyne ring.833
Finally, a couple of substitution procedures for the olefination of
indoles were reported using alkenyl acetates or gem-difluoroalkenes.
The reaction with cyclic and acyclic alkenyl acetates and similar
Scheme 141
Pyrimidine-directed olefinations.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6686 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
electrophiles was reported by Ackermann under Co catalysis
(Scheme 141G).834 The Mn and Co-catalysed reaction with
difluoroalkenes was reported respectively by Loh/Feng and Li
(Scheme 141H).835,836 While the substrate scope remains simi-
lar, the Co-catalysed process performed much better in terms of
reaction temperature, yields and stereoselectivity (Z selective).
In this reaction, Ca(OH)2 is suggested to act as a scavenger for
the HF produced, pushing the reaction forward.836 It is worth
noting though, that the Mn-catalysed reaction shows a certain
preference for the less stable E isomer for certain substrates.835
15.2.5.
Alkynylation. Concerning alkynylation, although
the reactants used are very limited and are the same reported
for the pyridine DG, a few reports have appeared on the use of
base metal catalysis for these functionalisations (which is not
common for pyridine DG), mostly in halogenated solvents.
Thus, Ackermann reported both Co- and Mn-catalysed reac-
tions with bromoalkynes for the C2 functionalisation of indoles
(Scheme 142A and B).837,838 In particular, the Mn catalyst
(Scheme 142B)838 proved very versatile, allowing the use of either
silylated (common), and aryl-, alkyl-, alkenyl-functionalised bromo-
alkynes (rare). The key for the use of non-silylated reactants was
the addition of a small amount (0.05%) of BPh3 as Lewis acid,
which promoted yields in many cases 480%. This protocol shows
an overall good substrate scope, and peptides were tolerated on the
indole substrate. Another Co-catalysed protocol was reported by
Shi, making use of the hypervalent iodine reactant TIPS-EBX
(Scheme 142C).839 This protocol gave generally modest yields and
required 3 equivalents of Mg(OMe)2 as additive. Its role in the
reaction was not clarified.
Li and Zhou disclosed a good example of C7 alkynylation of
indolines using Ir catalysis (Scheme 142D).840 The protocol
presents several advantages, such as the high yields, the use
of ethanol as solvent at room temperature, and one example
of reaction with tBu-EBX (yield 84%). Finally, Hong reported a
Ru- or Rh-catalysed alkynylation of 4-quinolones and isoquino-
linones with TIPS-EBX (Scheme 142E).841 This is a rare example
of the use of pyrimidine as DG for the functionalisation of such
type of compounds, usually performed using pyridine as DG.
The reaction proceeds well in air, but no variation in the
reactant (other silyl or carbon groups) was investigated. It is
noteworthy that the cleavage of the pyrimidyl DG using basic
conditions (NaOEt or NaOMe) when silanes are present in the
final product results in the concomitant desilylation (see
also Scheme 137), which might constitute an advantage for
synthetic purposes.
15.2.6.
Cyanation, acylation and aminocarbonylation. An
example of cyanation of indoles using NCTS as reactant under
Rh catalysis has been reported by Kim (Scheme 143A).842 Only a
few examples of indole functionalisation were reported in his
publication (high yields, mostly 490%), but the same reaction
conditions (at 130 1C instead of 110 1C) can be applied to
the C7 cyanation of indolines, with carbonyl-based DGs. The
pyrimidine DG could be employed for the mono-cyanation of
pyrrole and carbazole.
As for the pyridine DG, a number of publications on the use
of Pd catalysis in combination with peroxides and acyl radical
precursors (aldehydes, a-diketones, toluene) for the introduction of
an acyl group onto N-pyrimidinylindoles have been reported.843–845
The general conditions are: 5–10% Pd(II) catalyst, 3–5 equiv. per-
oxide, apolar solvent (e.g. toluene, THF), at 90–120 1C, and the
reaction follows the general mechanism shown in Scheme 118.
Scheme 142
Pyrimidine-directed alkynylations.
Scheme 143
Pyrimidine-directed cyanation, acylation and aminocarbo-
nylation of indoles.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6687
From these conditions, Noel/Van der Eycken and Jana inde-
pendently reported a protocol for the group-directed acylation
of indoles with aldehydes using a dual photoredox-Pd catalytic
strategy which allows functionalisation at room temperature.846,847
Noel/Van der Eycken reported both a batch and a flow protocol.
Although only slightly higher or comparable yields were obtained
in flow, and much higher amounts of aldehyde and TBHP were
required, the reaction time was drastically decreased using this
methodology (2 h instead of 20 h), as well as the photocatalyst
loading (Ir) (Scheme 143B).846 Jana’s protocol (batch), although
requiring reaction times up to 48 h, was tested on more variedly
functionalised indole substrates, giving overall comparable yields
to the Noel/Van der Eyken protocol. An important advantage is
the avoidance of the external ligand and the use of a lower excess
of aldehyde/TBHP (Scheme 143C).847 Both protocols could be
applied to benzylic alcohols (oxidised to aldehydes in situ), and
the DG could be cleaved in basic conditions (NaOEt).
The photoredox catalyst in these procedures facilitates the
reaction by promoting the formation of the tBuO radical first,
needed to generate the acyl radical, and then the oxidation of the
Pd(III) intermediate to Pd(IV), required for the reductive elimina-
tion step (see also Scheme 118, bottom). As these activations are
not available in the simple Pd(II) catalytic reaction, high tempera-
tures are required to push the reaction forward.
Two very similar procedures for the aminocarbonylation of
indoles with aromatic or aliphatic isocyanates were reported by
Kim and Van der Eycken in 2015 using a Rh dimer as catalyst
(Scheme 143D).848,849 Both processes required 2.5 to 3 equiv. of
isocyanates to perform decently, but the yields remain modest in
both cases. Importantly for synthetic purposes, Kim observed the
reaction with aromatic isocyanates to be reversible, thus explaining
in these case the low yield obtained.848 Such reversibility had been
observed before for the Rh-catalysed hydroarylation of imines.850
Both aliphatic and aromatic amide products could be treated with
NaOEt to provide the deprotected indole. Interestingly, Kim showed
that the use of EtOH as co-solvent in the process (standard
solvent: DMSO) facilitates the reaction.848,851
15.2.7.
C–N bond formation. The C–N bond formation still
relies mostly on precious metal catalysis, and only few examples
are available in the literature on the use of base metals.
Indole phosphoramidation was reported by Kanai and
Matsunaga, notably under Co catalysis (Scheme 144A).852
Although the process presents some drawbacks, such as the
long reaction times and the sensitivity to steric hindrance in
the C3 position of the substrate, this is a rare base metal-
catalysed example of a C–H phosphoramidation reaction.
Substituted
dioxazolones
were
instead
employed
for
the
carboxyamidation of indolines at the C7 position at room
temperature (or 80 1C for several examples, Scheme 144B).853
The reaction proceeds giving generally good yields. Interestingly,
the reaction proved efficient on tetrahydroquinoline as well, a
not commonly studied substrate.
Concerning indoline amination, anthranils were used under
Rh catalysis by both Kim and Xu/Yang (Scheme 144C).854,855 The
substrate scope investigated and the results are comparable in
the two cases. For these substrates, subsequent intramolecular
cyclisation to quinoline fused indoline (as observed in indoles,
cf. Scheme 125), did not occur in situ, but can be promoted by
reaction of the formylaniline product (R1 = H) with TFA.854
15.2.8.
C–S bond formation. A few procedures for the C–S bond
formation in pyrimidyl-functionalised substrates have appeared.
Kambe reported on the use of disulfides and superstoichiometric
amounts of Cu(II) salts to promote the thiolation of carbazoles and
indoles. Although good yields were obtained in many cases, and
both aromatic and aliphatic disulfides could be efficiently employed,
temperatures in the range 140–160 1C were used, and difunctiona-
lisation of indoles at the C2 and C3 positions occurs under these
conditions.856,857 The thiolation of indolines was instead reported by
Wang using Rh catalysis and stoichiometric amounts of Ag oxidant;
even in this case, high temperatures had to be used.858 More
recently, two interesting reports were released by Ackermann
and Glorius for the thiolation of indoles and indolines
respectively. Glorius’s approach focused on the use of aromatic
thiols and Co(III) as catalyst, requiring the combined action of
superstoichiometric Cu and BQ as oxidants (Scheme 145A).859
Despite these drawbacks, short reaction times, much lower
temperatures than usual (60 1C) and a good FG tolerance make
this approach stand out. Unfortunately, functionalisation with
alkyl or heteroaryl thiols proved unsuccessful. The C7 thiolation of
indolines reported by Ackermann is also particularly interesting
since no stoichiometric oxidant was used apart from air, requiring
Scheme 144
Phosphoramidation and amination on indoles and indolines.
Scheme 145
Directed C–S bond formation on indoles and indolines.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6688 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
only a catalytic amount of Cu (Scheme 145B).860 The same
conditions proved effective also for thiolation and selenylation
of indoles. Drawbacks of this protocol are the high temperature
required and the relatively modest yields obtained for most
examples.
15.3.
N-, O-, S-, and Si-Linked (di)azines as DGs
The pyridine (and pyrimidine) DGs are not easily cleavable
when attached via a C–C bond. Nonetheless, when attached via
a C–heteroatom bond, the cleavage becomes relatively easy.
This type of bond is found, apart from pyridine- or pyrimidine-
functionalised indoles, indolines and pyridones, in a number
of other substrates, where the DG is attached via a NH2-, O-, Si-,
or SO/SO2 linker. Apart from their sometimes particular
reactivity pattern, the cleavage of these DGs is a very important
feature for synthetic purposes. Scheme 146 summarises the
different cleavage/modification methods available in the litera-
ture for such DGs.
The N-linked pyridine DG is by far the most explored among
this family of DGs, and several methods have been developed
with time for its cleavage, and routinely used. A common
method
utilises
the
‘‘quaternisation-hydrolysis/alcoholysis’’
strategy,861 which involves methylation of the pyridine with
MeOTf
(no
other
methylating
agent
is
generally
used),
followed by hydrolysis or alcoholysis. Other methods are the
‘‘quaternisation-hydride
reduction’’,862
where
hydrolysis/
alcoholysis is replaced by the reaction with a hydride donor.
Alternative cleavage procedures involve a first hydrogenation step,
leading to an unstable aminal. The cleavage of the latter can then
occur using a hydride donor, or via hydrazinolysis.862–864 The
quaternisation-based methods are most commonly encountered
in the literature, with little variations from the conditions shown
in Scheme 146, and are used for pyridine removal from indoles,
pyridone, indolines, aliphatic amines and even anilines.
O-Linked 2-pyridyl DGs can also be easily cleaved (Scheme 146).
A general procedure is the quaternisation of the pyridine ring,
followed by treatment with NaOMe, resulting in the corresponding
phenol.865 Apart from this traditional cleavage, a few cross coupling
methods have been reported by Chatani and Wang to cleave the
arene–O bond and introduce a boronic ester (which can be used
in subsequent cross couplings)866,867 or an amino functionality868
in its place.
The use of a Si-linked 2-pyridyl and 2-pyrimidyl DG has the
great advantage of being very easily cleaved at the arene–Si bond
via substitution or cross-coupling reactions, as demonstrated in a
seminal paper by the Gevorgyan group in 2011 (Scheme 146).869
Scheme 146
Protocols for the cleavage/modification of N-, O-, S-, and Si-linked pyridine DGs.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6689
The cleavage of S-linked 2-pyridyl DGs has been reported in
a few papers, although it has not been extensively explored on a
broad number of substrates. Interestingly, diﬀerent possibili-
ties are available for this linker, in particular modification
(oxidation or reduction of sulfoxides) is straightforward,870,871
and cleavages at both the pyridine–S bond and the aryl–S bond
have been reported (Scheme 146).870–872
15.3.1.
N-Linked (di)azines. Heteroaromatic DGs, in parti-
cular pyridines and pyrimidines have also been used as DGs
when linked to a substrate via a free NH moiety. Apart from
increasing the flexibility of the DG, the nucleophilicity of the
free NH makes a number of tandem reactions possible, in
particular with unsaturated moieties. This often leads to the
formation of unsaturated or saturated rings, and has been
exploited for the synthesis of various heterocycles. It is impor-
tant to note that, although pyridine and pyrimidine can often
promote the same transformation in the above cases, marked
reactivity diﬀerences are instead often observed in the case of
N-linked DGs, due to the presence of an amidine/guanidine
moiety with strong (Lewis) basicity. Due to the limited number
of examples in the literature, all recent transformations avail-
able with N-linked pyridine and pyrimidines will be reported in
two sub-sections only.
15.3.1.1. Functionalisation without cyclisation. A number
of
functionalisations
have
been
reported
which
do
not
involve tandem cyclisation at the free NH moiety. In the C–H
functionalised product, the DG can be removed via cleavage of
the NH-heterocycle bond, resulting in functionalised anilines
(Scheme 146).
The alkylation with diazodiesters has been reported a number
of times with Rh or Ir catalysts (Scheme 147A).873–875 Ackermann
reported the Ni-catalysed ortho-alkylation and alkynylation of
N-(2-pyrimidyl)anilines, using alkyl/alkynyl bromides (Scheme 147B
and C).876–878 The same group also reported a Ni-catalysed thiolation
with disulfides, leading mostly to difunctionalised products
(Scheme 147D).878 Interestingly, a similar protocol using Rh cata-
lysis and N-(2-pyridyl) or O-(2-pyridyl) as DG was shown to provide
selectively the monofunctionalised phenols (Scheme 147G
and Scheme 148I).879 Using N-(2-pyrimidyl), Cui reported the
Scheme 147
C(sp2)–H and C(sp3)–H functionalisation with NH-linked pyridine and pyrimidine DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6690 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Ir-catalysed reaction with sulfonyl azides adding only catalytic
amounts of AgSbF6 to the reaction. Although resulting in lower
yields (max 63%), two examples of alkylsulfonyl amides were also
reported, which adds value to the procedure (Scheme 147E).880 In
this case, the use of aq. HCl on the reaction products results in the
cleavage of both DG and amide, giving ortho-phenylenediamines.
Two procedures for ortho nitration were reported with AgNO2 as
nitro source. While Pd catalysis on N-(2-pyrimidinyl)anilines
using K2S2O8 as oxidant resulted in regioisomeric mixtures
in meta-substituted anilines (Scheme 147F),881 this was not
observed on the N-(2-pyridinyl) analogues using aerobic Co
catalysis (Scheme 147H).882 Noteworthy in this case is also the
range of other N-linked heterocycles effective in the reaction,
including pyrimidine, quinolines, pyridazine and benzothiazole.
Also two different cleavage protocols were reported, leading to
either the o-nitroaniline or the o-phenylenediamines.882 Finally,
Schnu¨rch reported the alkylation of benzylic C(sp3)–H bonds in
N-(2-pyridinyl)benzylamines using Rh catalysis and tetraalkyl-
ammonium halides as terminal olefins surrogates (Scheme 147I).883
To our knowledge this is the only case of C(sp3)–H functionalisa-
tion with this DG type.
15.3.1.2. Functionalisation with cyclisation. In these reactions
the free NH of the DG reacts with an unsaturated moiety,
leading to the formation of aza-heterocycles, particularly indole
derivatives. In the final compounds the heterocyclic DG can
be generally cleaved by the typical methods described in
Scheme 146. The reaction with diazo-b-ketoesters or similar
results in 3-alkoxycarbonyl-2-alkylindoles (Scheme 147J, cf.
Scheme 147A),873–875,884 while the use of Meldrum’s acid
furnishes 1,3-dihydroindol-2-ones, although the product obtained
strongly depends on the substitution pattern on the DG or the aryl
ring (Scheme 147K).885 2,3-Diarylated indoles can be obtained by
reaction with alkynes, of which Kantam recently reported a
heterogeneous version using Pd supported on nanocrystalline
Mg oxide [NAP–Mg–Pd(0)] (Scheme 147L).886 This heterogeneous
catalyst could be recycled and reused for at least 4 runs without
considerable changes in yields.
An interesting alternative, reported by Zeng, utilises aryl-
alkynylcycloalkanols for the regioselective formation of 2-acyl-
3-arylindoles, occurring via consequent ring opening of the
propargylic alcohol employed (Scheme 147M).887 The for-
mation of dihydroquinolinones via Rh-catalysed alkylation/
cyclisation with unsaturated aldehydes was recently reported
by Huang, and to our knowledge this is the only 6-membered
ring formation reported for such systems (Scheme 147N).888
Finally, an Ir-catalysed amidation/condensation protocol was
developed for the synthesis of functionalised benzimidazoles
(Scheme 147O).889 Unfortunately, the cleavage of the DG in
the final product did not succeed using previously reported
methods. In all these functionalisations, the heterocyclic DG is
maintained unaltered in the final product, and can be exploited
for further functionalisation of the heterocycles, e.g. at the C7
in indoles or analogous positions.
15.3.2.
O-Linked (di)azines. O-Linked (di)azines, mostly limited
to pyridine, have been used less often than the corresponding
N-linked analogues, but in general for diﬀerent transforma-
tions, e.g. acylation, C–O bond formation. The heterocycle can
be cleaved at the O-heterocycle bond to give functionalised
phenols, or at the arene–O bond (via cross coupling) giving
other doubly functionalised arenes (Scheme 146). As before, all
the transformations will be treated in one section.
The alkylation with diazocompounds under Rh catalysis
occurs in good yields on a variety of substituted phenols,
although monofunctionalisation was only possible in some-
what hindered substrates (Scheme 148A).890 When known
cleavage methods for pyridine/pyrimidine DGs were applied, no
cleavage was observed, instead a Smiles-type rearrangement took
place (see Scheme 137, unusual for pyridines). Interestingly, this
rearrangement proved consistent and occurred in good yields for
a number of diﬀerent products.890 Cui reported the aromatic
homologation of O-(2-pyridinyl)phenols with internal arylalkynes
to result in substituted 1-naphthols in good yields using tAmOH
as solvent (Scheme 148B). Unfortunately, the reaction with alkyl or
heteroarylalkynes did not occur, and asymmetric alkynes resulted
in very poor regioselectivity.891 Acylation reactions were reported
by Wu and Huo, using aldehydes and acyl chlorides as reactants.
The first method (Scheme 148C)892 uses TBHP as oxidant and
follows the mechanism depicted in Scheme 118, resulting mostly
in monoacylation (difunctionalisation is substrate-dependent),
giving low yields for strongly EWG-substituted phenols. The
second method (Scheme 148D)893 is a group-directed Friedel–
Crafts acylation, and does not require oxidants or additives, but
10% of expensive Pt catalyst was employed for the reaction. The
use of PhCl as solvent results in the formation of difunctiona-
lised phenols, while monoacylated ones could be obtained in
hindered substrates.
Comparatively more protocols for C–heteroatom bond
formation were reported with this class of DG, although suffering
in several cases from low yields (o70%). The reaction with
arylsulfonyl azides was reported by Cui (Scheme 148E),894 and
C–O bond formation can occur via reaction with PIDA or
carboxylic acids (Scheme 148F and G).895,896 The DG cleavage
on the products obtained results in ortho-hydroxyanilines
or in catechols. C–S bond formation has been reported
making use of sulfonyl chlorides or disulfides (Scheme 148H
and I),879,897 and C–Cl and C–F bonds are formed under Pd
catalysis using NCS of NFSI as electrophilic halogen sources
(Scheme 148J and K).898,899
15.3.3.
Si-Linked (di)azines. The use of pyridyl- and pyrimidyl-
diisopropylsilyl DGs was developed by the Gevorgyan group. These
DGs are characterised by a truly unique variety of cleavage options,
which makes this DG type synthetically very interesting
(Scheme 146). This advantage is, however, somewhat counter-
balanced by a lower eﬃcacy of these DGs, which results in long
reaction times, or the necessity of a large excess of reactants/
reagents.
Alkylation reactions were reported in 2016 by Gevorgyan
(pyrimidylsilyl) and Zhang (pyridylsilyl), using very similar
protocols: Pd catalysis, alkylboronic acids as reactants, super-
stoichiometric amounts of Ag salts as oxidant, an inorganic
base
and an aminoacid
as ligand
(Scheme
149A).900,901
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6691
Both protocols require long reaction times (48–72 h) and
produce yields often in the range of 40–70%. Notable features
are the smooth cleavage/substitution of the DG (Gevorgyan),
the use of variedly functionalised alkylboronic acids (Zhang)
and a single example of C(sp3)–H functionalisation (Zhang).
Alkoxycarbonylation was reported by Gevorgyan using CO and
hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP, Scheme 149B).902 A good sub-
strate scope and FG tolerance was obtained for this protocol;
particularly noteworthy is the use of several heterocyclic sub-
strates (dibenzofuran, thiophene, carbazole, indoline, and
tetrahydroquinoline), featuring medium to good yields (47–77%).
The same group also reported the C–O and C–halogen bond
formation on the same starting materials. Diacyloxylation with
hypervalent iodine reactant PhI(OPiv)2 proved effective on a
number of para-substituted arenes in good yields, but required
up to 120 h (Scheme 149C).903 C–halogen bond formation was
achieved using NXS as reactants (X = I, Br, Cl), with different
reaction conditions for each halogen (Scheme 149D).903
15.3.4.
S-Linked (di)azines. Only a couple of reports on the
use of S-linked (di)azines have appeared recently and focused
on the use of pyridine. Arylation with benzoyl peroxides was
reported by Sun, and halogenation with NXS by Hierso
(Scheme 150A and B).871,904 Several yields were o70% for both
reports, and product mixtures were obtained in the case of
halogenation (mono- + dihalogenated products). Interestingly,
modification (oxidation to sulfone, reduction to sulphide),
desulphurisation (to 2-arylpyridines), and cleavage of the DG
(obtaining thiols) was demonstrated by Sun (Scheme 146).871
15.4.
Quinoline-N-oxide as substrate/DG
While the activation of C–H bonds (either metal-catalysed or
metal-free) at the ortho position of pyridine-N-oxides has been
known for long time, this activation is mostly due to electronic
effects.905–907 These cases will therefore not be treated here.
Instead, metal-catalysed reactions where the N-oxide is thought
to have a coordinating and directing role will be discussed. It is
important to mention that the N-oxide moiety is the DG here,
and is therefore limited to the functionalisation of azines.
Although, strictly speaking, the coordinating atom is not itself
part of a heterocycle, this DG has been considered in the
heterocyclic section for simplicity and immediate analogy to
its heterocyclic precursors. For the use of different N-oxide
moieties in C–H functionalisation see Section 14.3.1 and
Section 16.9.
The functionalisation of quinoline-N-oxides at the 8 position
is most common in this area. Considering quinolines and
their analogues are very common motifs in biologically-active
molecules, the simple introduction (e.g. with peroxides) and
cleavage (e.g. sulphur or phosphorus reagents)907,908 of the N-oxide
moiety is very convenient for the selective functionalisation
of these substrates. The facility of the N-oxide removal or the
oxygen-transfer to the quinoline C2 (forming 2-quinolinones)
Scheme 148
Functionalisation with O-linked pyridine and pyrimidine DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6692 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
or to an unsaturated moiety in the product (N-oxide as internal
oxidant), make several of these procedures occur as cascade/
tandem processes, leading to interesting compounds. These
types of transformation have only been studied from 2014, and
all the examples till 2017 have been reported in this section.
Due to their limited number, all type or reactions are treated in
one single section.
In 2014 Chang reported iodination and amidation with
N-iodosuccinimide (NIS) and sulfonyl azides (Scheme 151A
and B),909 also applied to the synthesis of Zinquin ethyl ester
(a zinc indicator for biological systems). The only other report on
the functionalisation with heteroatoms involved the use of
selenyl chlorides for the formation of C–Se bonds. In this case,
however, the N-oxide was not the main DG investigated and only
5 examples (45–67% yield) were included (Scheme 151C).910
Two acylation procedures were reported by Wu and Cui,
both catalysed by PdCl2 in similar conditions. The use of TBHP
(tert-butylhydroperoxide) with benzaldehydes resulted in the
8-acylation followed by in situ oxygen transfer from the N-oxide
to the 2 position of the quinoline, producing 8-benzoyl-2-
quinolinones (Scheme 151D).911 The use of a-oxocarboxylic acids
as reagents in combination with K2S2O8 as oxidant produced
instead 8-benzoylquinoline-N-oxides via decarboxylative coupling
(Scheme 151E).912 A Pd-catalysed arylation with aryl iodides was
reported by Larionov. Interestingly, this reaction performs best in
AcOH/H2O, and no toxic solvents were required (Scheme 151F).913
On the other hand, high amounts of Ag3PO4 additive (1.5 equiv.
total [Ag]) were used, presumably acting as both base and
stoichiometric halide scavenger for the reactant. A similar proce-
dure was later reported by the same authors for the dehydrogena-
tive homocoupling of quinoline-N-oxides.914 8-Alkynylation can
Scheme 149
Functionalisation with Si-linked pyridine and pyrimidine DGs.
Scheme 150
Functionalisation with S-linked pyridine DGs.
Scheme 151
C8-Functionalisation of quinoline-N-oxides.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6693
be achieved using TIPS-EBX (Scheme 151G).915 This reaction,
although requiring DCE as solvent and the use of a wasteful
reactant, proceeds with good yields at room temperature.
Formal alkylation at the 8 position can be achieved with a
number of reactants. Chang reported the use of diazomalonates
or similar reactants at room temperature (Scheme 151H).915 Very
recently, alkylation via reaction with styrenes or aliphatic olefins
was reported by Sharma (Scheme 151I).916 Although the reported
yields are relatively low (o70% for styrenes and o50% for
aliphatic olefines), even long aliphatic chains could be attached
to the quinoline moiety, which is generally quite uncommon.
The reaction was suggested to take place via the olefinic inter-
mediate, then reduced in situ with formic acid, derived from the
DMF solvent. The suggested mechanism (only partially) explains
the requirement of stoichiometric amounts of both Cu and Ag
for an overall non-oxidative coupling.916 This method was also
applied to the total synthesis of an EP4 antagonist. In 2014 the
reaction with internal alkynes under Rh catalysis was indepen-
dently reported by Chang and Li. This reaction occurred via
formal addition to the alkyne, followed by an intramolecular
oxygen transfer from the N-oxide to the new functionality,
resulting in the ketones shown in Scheme 151J.917,918 The same
reaction was then reported by Sundararaju under Co catalysis,919
and showed considerable improvements in terms of coupling
partners: diaryl-, dialkyl-, and arylalkyl–alkynes could be easily
coupled with good yields. The reaction with allylic alcohols
resulted in two different compounds depending on the catalyst.
While the use of Rh produced aroylethyl-functionalised com-
pounds, the use of Co in the same conditions only resulted in
allylated compounds (Scheme 151K).920 A methylation procedure
using MeBF3K was recently reported by Liu (Scheme 151L);921
the same procedure can be applied for C–H arylation using
aromatic trifluoroborates, but very few examples with o40%
yields were reported in this case.
Two examples of olefination have appeared from 2014. Shibata
first reported the Rh(I)-catalysed reaction with internal alkynes, a
reaction that was plagued by isomeric mixtures and yields often
o70%.922 A second example was reported in 2015 by Sharma
via reaction with terminal olefins. Although even in this case
many yields were low (even o50%), olefination took place with
a number of acrylates, styrenes and other linear olefins, also
resulting in N-oxide cleavage in situ (Scheme 151M).923
15.5.
Pyrazole as DG
Pyrazoles are the most common 1H-diazole DG type used, and
an important pioneering publication by Chatani on the specific
use of this DG dates back to 2003.924 As many other hetero-
cycles, in recent years pyrazole DGs are often tested as secondary
DGs in procedures mostly developed using pyridine-based
groups. In general, in these cases pyrazole performs giving
comparable or little lower yields than the corresponding
pyridine-directed reaction, and only one or two examples are
nowadays generally reported in most publications. It is worth
noting that the lower yields obtained in these cases might
just be due to a lack of specific optimisation for pyrazole
DGs, and do not necessarily mean that pyrazole is a worse
DG than pyridine. In fact, from a practical point of view, there
are a few diﬀerences that might make pyrazole a much better
choice than pyridine depending on the synthetic aim. Most
commonly 1-aryl/alkyl-1H-pyrazoles are used as substrates,
while 3-aryl/alkyl-1H-pyrazoles are much less explored. In the
former substrates, the DG is linked to the substrate via a C–N
bond, thus making DG introduction easier than with a 2-pyridyl
DG requiring a C–C linkage. For example, 1-alkyl/aryl-1H-pyrazole
can be easily obtained by: (i) metal-free (or metal-catalysed) nucleo-
philic substitution/cross coupling; (ii) reaction of functionalised
hydrazines with 1,3-diketones or unsaturated carbon moieties,
including in situ hydrazine formation from amines.925 Moreover,
its cleavage/modification, although rarely reported, is easier than
with pyridine for arenes or olefins (e.g. ozonolysis/reduction926,927
or elimination reactions,928 Scheme 152), provided that there is FG
compatibility with the required reagents.
Although not too many, several C–H functionalisation
methods specifically developed for pyrazoles (or with more
than 1 or 2 examples anyway) have been published recently.
Greaney reported an elegant, atom economic one-pot DG
introduction/C–H arylation using diaryliodonium salts. In this
procedure, pyrazole is first reacted with the iodonium salt
in metal-free conditions (or with catalytic CuI) to provide the
1-phenyl-1H-pyrazole substrate, then a Ru catalyst is added to
the reaction to trigger the ortho C–H arylation with the aryl
iodide formed in situ during the first step (Scheme 153A).929
The most notable feature is the possibility to use asymmetric
diaryliodonium salts: N-arylation of the pyrazole occurs selec-
tively with the less electron-rich arene, or to the more sterically
hindered one. The same procedure can be applied to styryl-
(phenyl)iodonium salts, giving 1-styryl-1H-pyrazoles, and sub-
sequent arylation of the olefin.929 A number of alkylations have
been reported via addition to double bonds. Sundararaju demon-
strated the Co-catalysed addition to acrylates (Scheme 153B),930
while diastereoselective protocols have been reported by Ellmann.
A multicomponent/cascade reaction with 1-phenyl-1H-pyrazoles,
a,b-unsaturated ketones, and aldehydes provide access to function-
alised branched alkyl chains with two consecutive stereocentres,
which could be obtained in good diastereoselectivity (above
90/10, Scheme 153C).931
The addition of 1-phenyl-1H-pyrazoles to chiral N-perfluoro-
butanesulfinyl imines also occurs with good diastereoselectivity,
Scheme 152
Examples of cleavage/modification of pyrazole DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6694 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
furnishing phenylglycine derivatives (Scheme 153D).932 It is
worth mentioning that the same reaction does not work at all
on the corresponding non-fluorinated substrates. A dehydro-
genative allylation reaction was reported by Tanaka and Shibata
using terminal olefins and Cu/air as oxidant (Scheme 153E).
The reaction does not require leaving groups in the olefin,
thus increasing the atom economy of the process. However, it
has several disadvantages: (i) the exotic CpE ligand [1,3-bis-
(ethoxycarbonyl)cyclopentadienyl] is necessary for the reaction
to proceed; (ii) a large excess of the substrate (3 equiv.) is
required to prevent difunctionalisation in non ortho-substitutes
substrates; (iii) many of the reported yields remain below
the 70% threshold; and (iv) the reaction is slow (60 h,
Scheme 153E).933
Addition to 1,1-dialkylallenes under Co catalysis provides
olefinated arenes, although only medium yields were obtained
using pyrazole as DG (Scheme 153F). Olefination was also per-
formed via dehydrogenative coupling with acrylates with a Ru
catalyst under aerobic conditions (Scheme 153G).934 Under these
conditions, selective mono- or difunctionalisation was possible,
only using diﬀerent (small) excess of acrylates. Few examples were
reported, but a similar reaction was demonstrated also for olefina-
tion with styrenes.934 Sundararaju published in 2017 a study on the
reaction of 1-phenyl-1H-pyrazoles with propargyl alcohols, leading
to the corresponding allenylated product (Scheme 153H).935
Whereas mono-functionalised products could be obtained selec-
tively in good yields only on ortho/meta-substituted substrates,
difunctionalisation was obtained on para-substituted arenes.
Scheme 153
Pyrazole-directed C(sp2)–H functionalisation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6695
Two protocols for the aminocarbonylation of 1-phenyl-
1H-pyrazoles, both exploiting Co catalysis and isocyanates as
reactants, were reported independently by Ackermann and
Ellmann in 2015 (Scheme 153I).936,937 Ackermann’s protocol
could also be applied to heterocyclic substrates (thiophene
and furan) and to olefins, but only aromatic isocyanates were
used. Ellman’s protocol could instead be used with aliphatic
isocyanates (2 examples), and generally provided higher yields,
but 2 equiv. of the substrate were required.
Regarding C–heteroatom bond formation, selenation with
phenylselenyl chloride was reported by Zhang (Scheme 153J),938
and halogenation by Wang and Hierso. Wang used Na halides
and Rh catalysis for iodination, bromination and chlorination
of
a
few
1-phenyl-1H-pyrazoles
(Scheme
153K),772
while
fluorination could be achieved using NFSI with Pd catalysis,
as reported by Hierso (Scheme 153L).939 Notably, this function-
alisation proved to be fairly substrate-dependent, requiring
varying equivalents of NFSI or leading to mono or difluorinated
products depending on the substitution pattern.
Acetoxylation and iodination were finally reported using a
heavily functionalised pyrazole as DG. 4-Methyl-1,5-diaryl-1H-
pyrazole-3-ethylcarboxylate was used as a model representing a
class of pharmaceutically relevant substrates (Scheme 153M).940
Selective monoacetoxylation (due to steric hindrance) using
Pd(OAc)2/PIDA/AcOH was achieved in good yields on a number
of substrates, including aliphatic substrates (1 example). The
corresponding iodinated product was obtained using iodoacetic
acid instead under the same conditions.940 It is noteworthy that
the presence of a EWG substituent on the substrate reduces the
yields by 30–40% for both transformations.
Tandem C–H functionalisation/cyclisation processes similar
to those reported for pyridine DGs (see Schemes 112 and 115)
have also been developed for pyrazoles. Yi and Xu reported the
late stage modification of the drug Edaravone via alkylation/
cyclisation with Meldrum’s acid diazo derivative (Scheme 153N).941
The reaction of 1-phenyl-1H-pyrazole with internal alkynes, apart
from giving the typical olefination product, also results in neutral
or ionic cyclisation products similar to those observed with
pyridines and other heterocycles (Scheme 153O). In this case
three different cyclisation products can be obtained, including
‘rollover’-derived products, strongly depending on the reaction
conditions and the identity of the alkyne.942,943
Interestingly, a couple of C(sp3)–H bond functionalisation
studies have been recently reported using pyrazole DGs. Using
3,4,5-trimethyl-1H-pyrazole as DG, Zhao demonstrated that
both b and g arylation is possible using Rh catalysis and aryl
boroxines (Scheme 154A).928 While arylation at the b position is to
be expected because of the formation of a 5-membered metallacycle
intermediate, g-functionalisation via 6-membered metallacycle
selectively occurred when a tertiary or quaternary carbon in b was
present.928 Another notable feature is the absence of any diarylation
products, often observed when multiple functionalisable positions
are available. More recently, Daugulis reported a similar arylation,
but using Pd(OAc)2 and aryl iodides (Scheme 154B).926 A notable
feature is the possibility to arylate secondary and even tertiary
positions (1 example on adamantane substrate).
Although a few papers have appeared in the literature about
C(sp2)–H functionalisation of 3-aryl-1H-pyrazole derivatives,944,945
these are mostly related to olefination/cyclisation processes
similar to those previously described, and will therefore not
explicitly be discussed here. Nonetheless, two reports by Yu’s
and Stamos’ research groups on C(sp3)–H functionalisation
have appeared. A domino process was developed where an
initial C(sp3)–H functionalisation was promoted by a pyrazole
DG, followed by an intramolecular, dehydrogenative, amide-
directed C(sp2)–C(sp2) bond formation (Scheme 154C).946 The
use of two different DGs for two different activations in cascade
is a very innovative and useful concept for synthetic applica-
tions. The following year a C(sp3)–H olefination of 3-alkyl-1H-
pyrazoles was reported by the same authors using ethyl acrylate
and analogous reactants (Scheme 154D).947 To date this is the
only example of pyrazole-directed C(sp3)–H olefination.
15.6.
1,2,3-Triazole as DG
Due to the easy access to triazoles, these heterocycles have
also been used as DGs. Substrates can be attached to the DG
at two diﬀerent positions: (i) attached to the C4 atom of the
DG (1,4-disubstituted triazoles, obtained by click chemistry),
Scheme 154
Pyrazole-directed C(sp3)–H functionalisation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6696 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
or (ii) attached to the N2 atom (2-monosubstituted triazoles,
obtained via other methods).
15.6.1.
1,4-Disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles. C(sp2)–H arylation
and olefination on the aromatic ring in C4 were reported by
Jiang and Wu/Chen via Pd-catalysed reaction with aryl iodides
and Rh-catalysed Fujiwara–Moritani coupling with acrylates.
Although the reported yields are generally good, only difunc-
tionalisation could be obtained (unless ortho/meta substituents
were present in the substrate) (Scheme 155A and B).948,949
Acylation was reported using the classical Pd/TBHP method
(Scheme 155C),950 while acyloxylation and halogenation were
disclosed recently by Correa and co-workers, making use of
Pd/PIDA and Pd/NBS systems (Scheme 155D and E).951,952
While the acyloxylation gave rise to mixtures of mono-
and difunctionalised products in non ortho/meta substituted
substrates, this was not observed for the halogenation, and
selective monofunctionalisation was possible. Notably, in both
cases,
C(sp2)–H
functionalisation
of
benzylic
substrates
(formation of a 6-membered palladacycle) was also demon-
strated, and occurred with yields generally comparable to those
obtained for aryl substrates.951,952
The selective functionalisation of the aryl ring in the C4
position of the triazole in the presence of a second aryl
substituent in N1 (as for R = aryl in Scheme 155C–E) is
suggested to be due to the higher electron density on the N3
in comparison to N2, which promotes selective coordination to
this N atom and, consequently, selective functionalisation of
the aryl ring in C4.950,953
15.6.2.
2-Monosubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles. This class of
compounds can be prepared using a variety of methods,954
and has been subjected to C–H functionalisation studies in a
few recent examples.
Acylation in water using Pd/TBHP was reported by Jain
(Scheme 155F).955 Interestingly, benzyl alcohols were used
directly as reactant in this protocol, with oxidation to aldehyde
(and formation of the acyl radical) occurring in situ. Importantly,
heterocyclic-substituted (thiophene, furan) methylalcohols could
also be used in this protocol. These substrates were also used in
amidation reactions.
One protocol appeared making use of dioxazolones under
Co catalysis. (Scheme 155G).956 Unfortunately, this reaction
resulted in mixtures of mono- and difunctionalised products
unless ortho or meta substituted substrates were employed. The
same issue was observed using sulphonyl azides as reactants
with Ru catalysts.957 In this respect, an interesting contribution
came from Wu and Cui, who reported the use of triazole
N-oxide as DG (under Ir catalysis) to suppress the undesired
difunctionalisation due to the increased steric hindrance
(Scheme 155H).958
15.7.
9H-Purines and analogues as DG
Purine-based compounds are an important class of biologically
active molecules, and the modification of purine-containing
starting materials has recently been explored in C–H functio-
nalisation chemistry. The state of the art of the use of purines
as both substrates and DGs in C–H functionalisation before
2015 has been summarised by Kapdi/Fairlamb.959 In this sec-
tion the use of purine as heterocyclic DGs in the last few years is
summarised. As most of the papers included in this section
have already appeared in previous chapters (other heterocyclic
DGs), the present section has mostly the purpose of collecting
all the transformations together from a practical point of view
for the reader, given the importance of the core structure, but
little further discussion will be added. It is important to note
that purines are mostly tested as secondary DG, therefore no
specific optimisation and only few examples are typically
reported. If not specified in Scheme 156, yields are around
60–70%; in case of considerably different results (higher or
lower yields), these are specifically mentioned in the scheme.
Several types of functionalisation have been studied on
6-aryl-9H-purines, where the N1 atom of the pyrimidine ring
acts as the coordinating moiety. Arylation with diazonium salts
under photoredox catalysis was reported by Guo. The reaction
Scheme 155
1,2,3-Triazoles as DGs.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6697
worked nicely on a few purines and nucleosides, despite
requiring 6 equiv. of the diazonium reactant and the limited
substrate substitution investigated (Scheme 156A).960 Co-catalysed
allylation and olefination were reported by Matsunaga/Yoshino
and Yu/Chen respectively (Scheme 156B and C).688,961 Both these
processes occurred in higher yields than the average 60–70% for
these substrates, but only few examples were reported. Cyanation
could be performed using N-cyanosuccinimide and Co catalysis,
according to a protocol developed by Chang (Scheme 156D).711
Concerning the formation of C–heteroatom bonds in 6-aryl-
9H-purines, three amidation methods were reported using
electrophilic N-Boc O-acyl hydroxylamines or dioxazolones
(Scheme 156E–G).747,748,753 This last procedure, in particular,
furnished high yields, and offers the possibility of thiophene
functionalisation
(Scheme
156G).
Finally,
trifluoromethyl-
thiolation727 and halogenation962 were reported by Matsunaga/
Yoshino and Pawar, both under Co catalysis (Scheme 156H
and I). A good substrate screening was investigated for the
halogenation (especially for the iodination), allowing a compar-
ison of the results. This shows that para EWG substituents on
the aryl ring of the substrate generally result in much lower
yields than para EDG substituents.962
A rare example of functionalisation on 9-aryl-9H-purines
(coordinating atom: N3) was reported by Du. Alkoxylation was
studied under Pd catalysis using alcohols as reactants/solvents
and PIDA as oxidant. While methoxylation was successfully
achieved
on
the
8-azapurine
analogue
(Scheme
156J,
product A), ethoxylation did not occur on such substrate, and
standard purines had to be used (Scheme 156J, Product B).963
15.8.
7-Azaindoles as DG
7-Azaindoles have been used several times as DGs, due to their
presence in a number of biologically active compounds. An
important aspect of this DG is the relatively broad functional
group tolerance on its core, which ranges from halides, alkyl
chains, olefins, carbonyls, to (hetero)arenes.
A number of functionalisations have been reported using
procedures similar to those for other DGs, exclusively under Rh
(in one case Ir) catalysis. Among the alkylation and olefination
with a,b-unsaturated moieties (Scheme 157A–C),964–966 an inter-
esting cross-dehydrogenative olefination procedure which does
not require the presence of a stoichiometric oxidant (as is
usually the case), was reported by Dong (Scheme 157C).966 In
this reaction the Rh(III) hydride intermediate formed at the
final stage of the olefination process reacts with the acid,
releasing H2. This is in turn suggested to react with the excess
of unsaturated reactant (2 equiv.), which acts as a hydrogen
acceptor.966 Another version of this transformation (not shown
in scheme), was reported by Miura and Satoh. Despite the use
of superstoichiometric Ag as oxidant and DME as solvent, this
method allows fast reactions (3–6 h) under mild conditions
(40–90 1C), giving generally good to excellent results.967
Scheme 156
Purine-directed C–H functionalisations.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6698 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Reactions with TIPS-EBX, N-cyano-N-phenyl-p-toluenesulfon-
amide, and anthranils result in ortho alkynylation, cyanation
and amination as described in Scheme 157D–F.968–970 Notable
is the use of heterocyclic substrates such as (benzo)thiophenes
and furans in the cyanation protocol.969 One example of C–O
bond formation was reported by Deb using PIDA and Rh
catalysis. In contrast to many similar procedures employing
Pd catalysis, the use of Rh allowed the reaction to run at a low
temperature (40 1C) furnishing good yields often in a short time
(Scheme 157G).971
The Dong group reported four procedures for the cascade
alkylation–cyclisation
or
olefination–cyclisation,
where
a
‘‘rollover’’ mechanism after the initial C–H activation results in
the formation of p-conjugated fused systems (see Scheme 115,
bottom). The group-directed ortho-alkylation with diazocompounds
or via addition to alkenyl esters, followed by intramolecular activa-
tion of the azaindole C2, and finally by dehydration or b-H
elimination, results in the products in Scheme 157H and I.972,973
The reaction with alkynes, occurring as previously reported for
other DGs, was also investigated (Scheme 157J and K).974,975
Interesting in this respect is the reaction with 3 equiv. of alkyne,
which results in both ortho olefination–cyclisation and arene
homologation, ultimately furnishing azahelicenes, interesting
compounds for their fluorescent properties.975
Finally, the reaction with electron-deficient alkenes resulted in
an oxidative olefination, followed by rollover and intramolecular
Michael addition, giving the compounds shown in Scheme 157L.976
An interesting aspect is that steric hindrance at the C3 position of
the azaindole DG prevents the final intramolecular cyclisation,
selectively furnishing the olefination product.976
15.9.
Oxadiazoles and benzisoxazoles as DGs
In the same way that oximes can act as internal oxidants when
used as DGs (see Section 12), via cleavage of the N–O bond,
also 1,2,4-oxadiazoles and 1,2-benzisoxazoles (cyclic oximes
equivalents) have been used as DG/internal oxidant combina-
tions, in particular for the synthesis of isoquinoline derivatives
upon reaction with alkynes.
Zhu and Miura independently reported in 2017 the use of
1,2,4-oxadiazoles, leading to 1-aminoisoquinolines and 1-acyl-
aminoisoquinolines respectively, using Co and Rh catalysis977,978
(Scheme 158A and B). Either diaryl, dithiophenyl, or dialkyl
alkynes could be used as coupling partners, while terminal
alkynes seem unsuitable for this reaction.978 Interestingly, while
in the Co-catalysed reaction the use of unsymmetrical alkynes
gave rise to regioisomeric mixtures, under Rh catalysis only
one regioisomer was obtained. The mechanism proposed
for this transformation involves the insertion of the alkyne into
the initial metallacycle formed, followed by a concerted or
stepwise C–N bond formation/N–O bond cleavage, leading to
the 1-acylaminoisoquinoline product. The presence of TFE in
Scheme 157
C–H functionalisation directed by 7-azaindole moieties.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6699
Zhu’s protocol provides in situ hydrolysis and formation of the
unprotected 1-amino compound.977
Zhu also reported analogous reactions employing 1,2,4-
oxadiazolones as DGs. In this case the N–O cleavage results
in the elimination of CO2 from the reaction product.979,980
In 2017 the use of 1,2-benzisoxazoles as DGs for a similar
reaction with alkynes, was disclosed by Miura. With this procedure,
isoquinolines functionalised in C1 with a phenolic moiety were
formed (Scheme 158C).981 The mechanism suggested is analogous
to that proposed above.
15.10.
Oxazolines and benzoxazoles as DGs
Oxazolines have been used a few times as DGs in C–H func-
tionalisation. One of the reasons is that these functionalities
can be easily introduced from the corresponding carboxylic
acid, via condensation with 2-aminoalcohols, and can also be
easily cleaved to return to the original carboxylic acid using a
number of procedures: (i) strongly acidic or basic hydrolysis;
(ii) activation via N-chlorination, sulphonylation or acylation,
followed by hydrolysis (milder conditions). The oxazoline ring can
also be reductively cleaved to aldehydes using: (i) N-quaternization,
followed by reduction with NaBH4 and hydrolysis; (ii) reduction in
the presence of NiCl2, followed by acidic hydrolysis.982 These and
other methods are nicely summarised in a review by Meyers,983
and will therefore not be discussed in detail here. An interesting
one-pot hydrolysis/cyclisation method, first discovered by Harrity,
for ortho-amidated 2-aryloxazolines involves basic hydrolysis of the
amide, and subsequent cyclisation with formamidine acetate, with
consequent opening of the oxazoline ring (Scheme 159).754,984
Sparse examples of oxazolines as DGs are generally reported
in papers mostly dealing with other DGs, but a few specific
investigations have been recently published. Arylation with aryl
halides or aryl carbamates was reported by Ackermann and
Chatani using Ru, Co or Rh catalysis (Scheme 160A–C),653,985,986
typically requiring preformed catalysts or the addition of a
ligand to reach good results. An example of intramolecular
alkylation leading to the formation of heterocycles was reported
by Zhu (Scheme 160D).177 Interestingly, the intramolecular
addition to an unsaturated moiety occurs regiospecifically in
a-position to the carbonyl, instead of b, although the origin
of for such selectivity was not investigated. Olefination by
Fujiwara–Moritani coupling with acrylates and benzoxazoles as
DG was reported by Hou under Rh catalysis (Scheme 160E).987
This reaction proved generally substrate- and DG-dependent,
with yields ranging from 33 to 95%, and no monoselectivity
could be achieved in non ortho-functionalised substrates. None-
theless, this protocol was efficient for the coupling of different
classes of olefins, including allylbenzene (unusual reactant for
this type of reaction).987 Two protocols for amidation were
reported by Harrity and Ackermann, using amides or dioxazo-
lones respectively (Scheme 160F and G).754,984,988 A hydroxylation
reaction on 2-arylbenzoxazoles was demonstrated by Chakraborti
in 2015, where the hydroxy radical was generated in situ from
1,4-dioxane, used as solvent (Scheme 160H).989 Interestingly,
this protocol only required 2.5% Pd loading, considerably lower
than other analogous procedures. Finally, a C(sp3)–H silylation
on 2-ethyloxazoline derivatives was reported by Murata and
co-workers in 2016 (Scheme 160I).990 The reaction was per-
formed at 180 1C with HSi(Me)(OSiMe3)2. This reaction did not
require the use of a hydrogen acceptor, probably due to the
high temperature used.
15.11.
Benzothiazoles as DGs
A handful of papers on the use of benzothiazole DGs have
appeared in the recent literature. The cleavage/ring opening
of 2-functionalised (carbon chains/rings) benzothiazoles have
been reported in a few cases,991–995 but these protocols have not
been used in the context of DG cleavage in C–H functionalisation.
Chakraborti
investigated
the
use
of
benzothiazole
DGs
specifically for the olefination of heterocycles with alkynes using
Ru catalysis (Scheme 161A).996 This protocol resulted in good
yields of the desired olefinated products, and works eﬃciently on
2-thienyl, 2-furyl, 2-pyrrolyl and 3-indolyl substrates, and a few
examples of regioselective olefination with unsymmetrical alkynes
were demonstrated as well.996 Acylation of benzothiazole-
equipped arenes was reported using classical Pd/oxidant/acyl
radical precursor methods (mechanism in Scheme 118).762,997
Of note here, is the use of CAN (ceric ammonium nitrate) as a
new alternative oxidant instead of peroxides or O2. Patel
reported the use of CAN with a-ketocarboxylic acids for C–H
benzoylation of 2-arylbenzothiazoles and a variety of other
heterocyclic compounds (Scheme 161B).762 Another method
Scheme 158
Oxadiazoles and benzisoxazoles as DGs.
Scheme 159
Ring-opening/cyclisation involving oxazoline DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6700 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
sees the use of acylperoxycoumarins as acylating agents
(Scheme 161C).998 Strangely, this reaction does not proceed via
a (free) radical pathway, as demonstrated by radical trapping
experiments, but instead occurs via a b-carbon elimination from
an alkoxy-coordinated Pd species, which delivers the acyl groups
directly to the metal, and a subsequent reductive elimination
releases the acylated product.998 An example of Cu-catalysed C–H
nitration was reported making use of Fe(NO3)3 as nitro group
source (Scheme 161D).999 Although utilising a cheap nitro source,
the reaction still requires 2 equiv. of Ag2O (4 equiv. of Ag in total).
With a similar protocol to that shown in Scheme 161B, the
benzoxylation of 2-aryl benzothiazoles occurs using benzoic acids
(Scheme 161E).762 Mechanistically, a benzoxy radical is generated
by CAN, and subsequently coordinates to the intermediate
palladacycle, which ultimately results in its introduction onto
the substrate.
16. Other DGs employed in C–H
functionalisation
The synthetic value of C–H functionalisation chemistry is
strongly related to the modularity of the DG used. Ideally,
a DG should be traceless or easily convertible into an array
of common functionalities. An alternative approach consists in
direct utilisation of functionalities naturally present on a
molecule of interest to play the role of DG. In such a case
particularly sustainable transformations take place as installa-
tion and removal of the DG is not required anymore. Following
these considerations, over the last decade intensive efforts have
been focused on designing DGs based on heteroatoms such
as P, S, Si, O, N, etc. Notably, these modern DGs are generally
easily cleavable or may also remain present in the final product.
Scheme 160
Oxazolines and benzoxazoles as DGs.
Scheme 161
Benzothiazoles as DGs.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6701
An additional advantage of these scaffolds is their potentially
stereogenic character, and thus diastereoselective C–H functio-
nalisation reactions can be explored, even without the use of
external chiral ligands. In the following sections, recent
advances on the use of these increasingly important DGs are
summarised. Due to their less common nature though, relative
to the above reported DGs, important publications from before
2015 will also be included.
16.1.
Thioether as DG
Due to the strong coordination properties of the sulfur com-
pounds, and in particular thioethers, this motif has been
considered, for years, an ineﬃcient DG, leading to catalyst
poisoning. However, between 2012 and 2015 few reports have
been published showing that the thio unit can be astutely
employed in the context of directed functionalisation,1000–1003 and
these pioneering contributions have already been summarized.17
More recently, due to a widespread presence of thio groups
in natural products and biologically active scaffolds, several
research groups reported complementary studies.
In 2015, Urriolabeitia expanded the scope of previously known
Rh-catalysed direct olefinations of benzylthioethers1000,1002,1003
by developing a related C–H hydroarylation catalysed by the
[Ru(p-cymene)Cl2]2 complex (Scheme 162A).1004 Installation of
the thioether motif at the benzylic position is crucial to allow
efficient formation of a 5-membered ruthenacyclic intermediate.
The optimization study revealed that choice of a protic but not
too acidic solvent such as HFIP is essential for a high efficiency.
Unfortunately, moderate selectivity between mono- and diaryla-
tion is observed, calling for exemplification of this methodology
on ortho-substituted substrates. Interestingly, the reaction occurs
smoothly under microwave heating (100 1C for 30 min), which
enables to drastically reduce the reaction time (typically 24 h)
required under conventional heating. The reaction well tolerates
several aliphatic symmetric alkynes and the coupling occurs
as a syn addition, delivering E-trisubstituted vinylic fragments
(Scheme 162A).1004 Besides, a regioselective transformation was
achieved when using 1-phenylpropyne coupling partner (9: 1
isomeric ratio) although a significant drop in regioselectivity
was witnessed for 2-hexyne. The reaction shows good FG
tolerance on the substrate, both on the aromatic ring and
the S-substituent (aliphatic and aromatic motifs are efficient),
delivering the desired vinylic compounds in good to excellent
yields (16 examples, 54–96% yield).
To further expand the scope of molecular scaﬀolds accessible
via thioether-directed C–H functionalisation Liu and Zhang
reported a direct acetoxylation protocol (Scheme 162B).1005 As
in the previous example, the reaction requires benzothiophene
substrates but the DG may also be installed at homobenzylic
position (formation of 6-membered metallacyclic intermediate).
Using standard Pd(OAc)2 catalyst, in combination with Ac2O,
PIDA, and AgOAc, the desired C–O bond formation takes place.
Interestingly, this protocol permits selective mono-functionalisation
and a remarkable array of FGs is well tolerated, including bromine
and chlorine atoms, but also coordinating moieties such as
nitrile, ester and OCF3 moiety. Yields are generally moderate
to good (21 examples, 40–84% yield). Importantly, the DG may
be removed from the final product either using RANEYs
Ni to furnish the corresponding o-tolyl acetate, or by addition
of m-CPBA to convert the thio-motif into an aldehyde.
Thiol-directed C–H activation can also be astutely used to access
benzo-fused thiophenes via intramolecular C–H arylation, as illu-
strated in 2016 by Tobisu and Chatani (Scheme 162C).1006 The
authors discovered that biphenylsulfide, in the presence of Pd(OAc)2
and under carboxylic acid assistance (2,6-Me2C6H3CO2H used)
undergoes a tandem C–H cleavage/intramolecular C–S bond for-
mation/S–C cleavage, delivering the desired heterocyclic products
under oxidant-free conditions. This operationally simple and high-
yielding protocol using readily accessible starting materials and
reactants gives access to a large panel of unsymmetrical dibenzothio-
phenes, important scaffolds in advanced material science and
bioactive molecules. It is noteworthy that this oxidant-free protocol
allows the suppression of the usually observed reactivity for this
type of compounds, i.e. C–H/C–H intramolecular arylation to
give isomeric benzothiophene compounds.1007
In addition to this intramolecular thioether-directed aryla-
tion, Shi et al. developed a very interesting intermolecular
Scheme 162
C(sp2)–H functionalisation using thioether-based DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6702 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
coupling
between
benzylthioethers
and
carboxylic
acids,
yielding dibenzooxepinones (Scheme 162D).1008 This RhCp*-
catalysed transformation involves initial C–H metallation of
the
thiophene
substrate,
followed
by
carboxylate-assisted
second C–H activation and reductive elimination, and Rh- or
Ag-assisted cyclisation and C–S cleavage. Accordingly, the thio-
phene moiety is clearly a traceless DG. Although rather harsh
reaction conditions required (use of 4 equivalents of AgNO3
and reaction temperature of 160 1C) and the relatively low
yields (28–75%), the reaction still well tolerates substituents
such as Cl, Br, but also strongly electron withdrawing CF3 or
ester moieties.
In 2017 Kuninobu and Kanai designed an interesting ortho-
selective borylation of arylsulfides.1009 In this case the thioether
DG is directly installed on the aromatic ring as, contrary to the
previous examples, the S atom does not coordinate directly to
the Ir catalyst, but generates a Lewis acid–base intermediate
with a bipyridine-ligated boron species (Scheme 162E).1009 Such
an unusual interaction directs the borylation highly selectively
at the ortho-position. Fine-tuning of the catalytic system and
ligand design allowed the development of a truly efficient and
versatile transformation, occurring under mild reaction condi-
tions and compatible with a range of functionalised substrates.
Notably, the reaction is equally efficient at gram scale. As the
newly introduced Bpin substituent is a handle for further
modification of the molecular scaffolds, this transformation
holds great promise for widespread applications. Few months
later the authors further expanded the potential of this trans-
formation by conceiving an ortho-borylation of phenol and aniline
derivatives (Scheme 162F).1010 In this case the methylthiomethyl
group installed on hydroxy- or amino-moieties allows, via the
same type of interaction as above, directing the borylation at the
ortho-position. As previously, the high regioselectivity observed,
efficiency and possible post-modifications of the newly obtained
scaffolds, render this coupling attractive, as further illustrated
by its application in an expedient synthesis of a Ca receptor
modulator.1010 The removal of the DG (i.e. deprotection of
hydroxyl group) occurs smoothly using I2 in MeOH, furnishing
the corresponding phenol in high yield.
Drawing inspiration from the standard thioether-directed
C–H functionalisation, Satoh and Miura disclosed in 2015
the use of dithiane motifs (commonly used as aldehyde pro-
tecting group) as an effective DG for Rh-catalysed Fujiwara–
Moritani couplings (Scheme 163A).1011 This C–C bond forming
transformation, occurring under relatively mild conditions
(60 1C, no need for acidic additives and use of Cu(OAc)2H2O as
mild oxidant) is not only highly monoselective but also compatible
with an array of functionalised substrates bearing challenging
motifs such as nitro, ketone, ether, thioether or halide substituents.
The protocol is also compatible with a cyclic sulfide substrate. The
synthetic value of this transformation arises from a straightforward
post-modification of the dithiane-DG that can be either removed
using RANEYs-Ni or converted into aldehyde in the presence of
Dess–Martin periodinane.1011
Very recently, Li et al. used the same DG to achieve an
Ir-catalysed ortho-borylation (Scheme 163B).1012 This ligand-free
coupling with B2pin2 is eﬀective for the direct functionalisation
of both aromatic and heteroaromatic moieties, like thiophene
and ferrocene backbones. It is worth noting that the employ-
ment of the dithiane motif outcompetes thioether DGs as
mono-functionalisation occurs selectively, whereas mixtures
of mono- and biarylated products are typically generated when
thioethers are used. The cleavage of the 1,3-dithiane was
achieved using NaI, Fe(acac)3 in H2O2, delivering the corres-
ponding aldehyde.
Further exploring the potential of the thioether motif as DG and
drawing inspiration from the observation that benzylthioethers are
eﬀective in C–H activation reactions, Wang and Shi described
an elegant example of disulfide-directed C–H hydroxylation
(Scheme 164).1013 The optimized Cu-based catalytic system
allows a sequential transformation involving: (1) thiophenol
oxidation to disulfide, (2) disulfide-directed ortho-hydroxylation and
(3) S-arylation using boronic acid coupling partner, affording
otherwise difficult to access 1,2-thio-phenol derivatives. Remark-
ably, this complex transformation is rather high-yielding and shows
good substrate scope, in particular with regard to halogenated
substituents at both coupling partners. Besides, applying the same
concept for a synthesis of thiophenol-substituted quinones further
showcased the potential of this reaction. Few months later,
Wang and Li reported a closely related Cu-catalysed disulfide-
directed ortho-hydroxylation. In this case disulfide substrates
were directly employed, and a Cu–bipy complex was selected as
the optimal catalyst.1014
16.2.
Sulfoxide as DG
In addition to thioethers, higher oxidation state sulfur moieties
also established themselves as powerful DGs. In particular
between 2012 and 2014 several research groups employed with
success sulfoxide DGs in Pd,1015–1017 Rh,1018 and Ru1019-catalysed
C–H activation. Since 2015, few additional key contributions
have been published,29 mainly relating to the use of enantiopure
sulfoxides for stereoselective C–H activation.
Scheme 163
Rare examples of dithiane DGs.
Scheme 164
Disulfide-directed C–H hydroxylation.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6703
In 2013 Leroux and Colobert reported first example of
diastereoselective sulfoxide-directed oxidative olefination of
biaryl precursors leading to atropoenriched, axially chiral
scaﬀolds.1020 This pioneering work clearly showcases the
potential of enantiopure sulfinyl, accessible in a large scale
from cheap menthol,1021 to play the double role of DG and
chiral auxiliary. However, both eﬃciency and stereoselectivity
of the catalytic system were rather moderate. A clear improve-
ment was achieved in 2014 and 2016 by Wencel-Delord and
Colobert, who discovered that a much more powerful and
general transformation is achieved when changing the reaction
medium from DCE to HFIP (Scheme 165A).1022,1023 Under such
modified reaction conditions the Fujiwara–Moritani reaction
may be conducted at room temperature and using a signifi-
cantly lower amount of the Ag oxidant (2 equiv. vs. 6 equiv.
initially required), delivering a large panel of axially chiral
biaryls with excellent atroposelectivity and high yields. Besides,
as the sulfoxide moiety undergoes exchange with Li bases,
trapping of the resulting axially chiral Li species with an array
of electrophiles could be performed, delivering variety functio-
nalised biaryls without loss of stereopurity (introduction of
functionalities such as aldehydes, Me, OH, CO2H, etc.).1022
This methodology was also further used to perform direct
acetoxylation and iodination.1023 The synthetic potential of this
methodology was further illustrated while designing a novel
retrosynthetic route towards biologically active, axially chiral
Steganacine scaffolds.1024 Remarkably, the synthesis based on
this atropo-diastereoselective transformation delivered the
direct precursor of the targeted enantiopure molecule in only
10 steps and in very high total yield (42%).
Very recently the concept of sulfoxide-directed atropo-
selective C–H functionalisation was employed to build up original
tridimensional structures, i.e. ortho-orientated terphenyl scaffolds
with two perfectly controlled chiral axis (Scheme 165B).1025 These
molecules exhibiting ‘‘open clam shell architectures’’ could be
obtained via direct arylation of the biaryl-sulfoxide precursors
with ortho-substituted iodoarenes. During this process two chiral
Ar–Ar axes, are induced in a single transformation with very high
stereocontrol. Importantly, the traceless character of the sulfoxide,
combined with the good FG tolerance of the catalytic system
towards the iodoarene partner permits straightforward derivati-
zation into unprecedented bidentate ligands.
Dibenzothiophenes are important molecular motifs in natural
products, pharmaceuticals and functional materials. Accordingly,
designing of C–H functionalisation-based strategies to access these
molecular units has gathered the attention of several research
groups. In 2013 Colobert described a Pd-catalysed intramolecular
arylation of 2-bromodiarylsulfinyle, delivering dibenzothiophenes
S-oxides.1026 Going one step further, in 2015 Huang and Lin
reported an intramolecular two-fold C–H functionalisation
of diarylsulfoxides (Scheme 165C).1027 Interestingly, under
this Rh-based protocol deoxygenation of the newly formed
dibenzothiophenes S-oxides occurs in situ. Unfortunately, the
efficiency of the reaction is strongly affected by the nature
of the starting material and harsh reaction conditions are
required (140 1C).
16.3.
Sulfones, sulfonamides & sulfoximines DG
In contrast to thioether and sulfoxides that have been regularly
employed as DGs, the use of sulfones in this context has
remained fairly unexplored till recently, despite the easy access
to such molecules via electrophilic sulfonylation of aromatic
rings. Initially, the sulfone moiety was used as a handle to install
other DGs, as in the case to 2-pyridylsulfonate DG.1028 In this case
the heterocycle enhances and dictates the metallation event
whereas the SO2 moiety can be considered as a removable anchor
(for examples of such transformations see Section 15.3.4). Satoh
and Miura proved however in 2015 that sulfones may act as
eﬃcient DGs themselves, allowing ortho-selective alkenylation of
aromatics (Scheme 166A).1029 The catalytic system based on Rh
complexes, combined with adamantanecarboxylic acid additive
gave good results with internal aromatic and aliphatic alkynes,
delivering the desired vinylic products in moderate to good yields,
but a high reaction temperature was generally required.
An additional attracting example of sulfone-directed intra-
molecular transformation was reported in 2015 by Zhou
(Scheme 166B).1030 This cascade-type reaction involves sulfone-
directed metallation, followed by base-assisted 1,5-H shift
aﬀording allene intermediates. Insertion into the C–Rh bond
finally delivers seven-membered heteroaromatic products such
as benzothiepines. This strategy constitutes an interesting
pathway towards molecules of interest despite the complexity
of the starting materials used.
Sulfonamide is amongst the most significant pharmaco-
phores, frequently encountered in biologically active scaﬀolds.
Scheme 165
Sulfoxide-directed C–H functionalisation.
Scheme 166
Sulfone-directed C–H functionalisation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6704 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
However, this weakly coordinating motif has attracted only limited
attention from the scientific community working in the field of
directed C–H functionalisation. In 2011 Yu et al. described a late
stage modification of sulfonamide-containing motifs, via direct
olefination, carboxylation, carbonylation, iodination, arylation and
alkylation.1031 The variety of sulfonamide-directed transformations
was enlarged in 2016 when Singh developed a Pd-catalysed direct
arylation using iodoarenes as coupling partners (Scheme 167A).1032
This transformation is highly mono-selective, although the
products are isolated in moderate to good yields (typically
between 60–70%) and prolonged heating at 130 1C in acetic acid
is necessary to promote this transformation.
In parallel, Kerr and Tuttle endeavored on designing a
catalytic system to regioselectively install deuterium on aro-
matics (Scheme 167B).1033 Following this target they discovered
that primary sulfonamides undergo highly selective H/D exchange,
when using an Ir–NHC complex. Importantly, D2 may be employed
as deuterium source and this transformation is compatible with an
array of functionalities. Unfortunately, the level of deuterium
incorporation is highly dependent on the substitution pattern
of the substrates, possibly due to their different solubility in
DCM. This protocol could however be successfully used to label
pharmaceuticals, such as Celecoxib and Mavacoxib.1033 In
2017 the synthetic potential and field of application of this
methodology was further expanded by conceiving a closely
related deuteration of secondary and tertiary sulfonamides. Atzrodt
and Derdau established a protocol based on an Ir catalyst bearing
either a monodentate NHC or bidentate NHC/oxazoline ligand
(commercially available Burgess catalyst), effective in chlorobenzene
at higher temperature (typically 100–120 1C) (Scheme 167C).1034
However,
as
in
the
previous
example,
the
outcome
of
the transformation might be difficult to predict in terms of
deuterium incorporation and regioselectivity (in particular if
other coordinating moieties are present on the substrate or
when tertiary sulfonamides are employed).
Very recently, Yu and coworkers described an astute applica-
tion for sulfonamide motifs installed at the benzylic position to
promote meta-selective functionalisation (Scheme 167D).1035
The regioselectivity switch was reached using modified norbornene
(NBE-CO2Me: 2-carbomethoxynorbornene) as a transient mediator,
while addition of an external isoquinoline ligand was crucial for the
eﬃciency of the catalytic system. Remarkably, both meta-arylation
and meta-alkylations could be performed and the protocol
features broad substrate scope as well as excellent FG tolerance.
The synthetic value of this reaction was further illustrated by
the modularity of the obtained products, which could be easily
converted into the corresponding sodium sulfonates, sulfonate
esters, other sulfonamides or olefins. Besides, a two-step
procedure allows cleavage of the DG under Julia olefination
conditions delivering the corresponding styrene.1035
Finally,
sulfoximines
further
expand
the
portfolio
of
S-based DGs. In particular, heterocyclic molecules featuring
the sulfoximine group are tempting for drug design. Hence,
the development of modern, eﬃcient and straightforward
pathways to access them is of great importance. Accordingly,
several research groups astutely used sulfoximine-directed C–H
functionalisation/cyclisation protocols to access an array of
benzothiazines congeners. Amongst pioneering contributions
in this field, Bolm described in 2013 the Rh-catalysed oxidative
annulation of sulfoximines and internal alkynes, delivering
1,2-benzothiazines with fully substituted heterocyclic cores.1036
Despite the synthetic value of this methodology, the use of
unsymmetrical
alkynes
raised
regioselectivity
issues
and
mixtures of regioisomeric products were generally produced.
To tackle this limitation, in 2015 the same research group
combined Rh-catalysed sulfoximine-directed C–H alkylation with
diazo compounds (Scheme 168A).1037 Rewardingly, the reaction
between NH-sulfoximines and a large variety of alkyl- and
phenyl-containing diazo esters occurred smoothly in presence
of a Rh catalyst and NaOAc additive, delivering structurally
diversified 1,2-benzothiazines in generally excellent yields.
Besides, a scale-up of this reaction was achieved and the newly
obtained scaffold could be straightforwardly converted into
several added-value congeners.
Following this idea, Lee and coworkers developed an alternative
synthesis of 1,2-benzothiazine derivatives (Scheme 168B).1038 Using
pyridotriazoles as highly reactive diazoimine precursors (see also
Scheme 112), pyridine-substituted 1,2-benzothiazines were aﬀorded
via a domino C–H functionalisation/cyclisation/elimination
sequence in good to excellent yields regardless of the substitution
pattern of the aromatic substrate. Few months later the same
group further expanded the panel of related transformations,
now employing 3-diazoindolin-2-imines as coupling partners.1039
Under Rh catalysis the desired direct coupling/annulation
sequence occurred producing a indolo-1,2-benzothiazines with
various substituents at both, the substrate and the indole core
(Scheme 168C).1039
An eﬃcient cyclometallation event for sulfoximines sub-
strates combined with the high reactivity of the resulting
metallacyclic intermediates towards carbene migratory inser-
tion encouraged further elaboration of innovative synthetic
routes towards original heterocycles. Accordingly, in 2017
Chen performed direct C–H amidation of sulfoximines using
Scheme 167
Direct functionalisation using sulfonamides as DG.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6705
a Co catalyst and 1,4,2-dioxazol-5-ones as coupling partners
(Scheme 168D).1040 Under optimized microwave assisted condi-
tions, the expected aza-heterocycles were delivered, generating
only CO2 and H2O as waste.
The metallacyclic intermediates can be generally considered
as nucleophiles and may hence participate in reactions with
various electrophiles, such as Michael acceptors for example.
Such reactivity was surveyed by Li and Dong, who synthesized
benzoisothiazoles via Rh-catalysed coupling between sulfoxi-
mines and activated olefins (Scheme 168E).1041 Unfortunately,
although the original 5-membered heterocyclic products are
generally aﬀorded in good yields (typically 70–90%), poor stereo-
selectivity was observed (usually 1 : 1 ratio), clearly hampering
the synthetic potential of the reaction. A complementary reaction
delivering original heterocyclic scaffolds was achieved by com-
bining C–H activation and coupling with unsaturated ketones
(Scheme 168F).1042 The reaction sequence involving formal metal-
catalysed functionalisation and subsequent [4+3] annulations
produced 7-membered 1,2-benzothiazepines 1-oxides. Broad sub-
strate scope observed for this transformation, quite high efficiency
and compatibility with cheap 3d-metal catalysts render this trans-
formation appealing in drug-design science. Finally Bolm illu-
strated that benzothiazine may also be build-up while performing
a Rh(III)-catalysed domino allylation/oxidative cyclisation between
sulfoximines and allyl carbonates (Scheme 168G).1043 This trans-
formation is a synthetic route of choice to prepare 4-unsubstituted
1,2-benzothiazines, scaffolds difficult to access when employing
diazo-type coupling partners. Noteworthy, both electron rich and
electron poor substituents may be introduced on the aromatic ring
of the sulfoximine, and several different alkyl S-substituents
are well tolerated. Thus obtained benzothiazine may also
be rapidly diversified into few molecules of interest for pharma-
ceutical industry. An alternative route towards 4-unsubstituted
1,2-benzothiazines involves coupling between the metallacyclic
intermediate and sulfoxonium ylides, used now as novel C2
synthons (Scheme 168H).1044 This RhCp*-catalysed transforma-
tion was accelerated in presence of Zn(OTf)2 additive, is of
particular interest if benzothiazines bearing various, aliphatic
and aromatic substituents at 3-position are targeted as an
array of sulfoxonium yield performed very efficiently in this
transformation.
Finally, it should be mentioned that using a standard
RhCp*-catalyst, in combination with NH-Boc oxycarbamates,
direct amidation of sulfoximines occurs smoothly for both,
electron-poor and electron-rich aromatics (Scheme 168I).1045
Furthermore, as the newly accessed ortho-amidated sulfoximines
may be converted into few steps into thiadiazine 1-oxides. In
addition, still benefitting from eﬃcient metallation of sulfoximine
substrates in presence of RhCp*-catalysts, Bolm et al. reported
direct C–X coupling (Scheme 168J).1046 Indeed, in presence of NIS
or NBS as halogenating agents sulfoximes may be directly con-
verted into ortho-halogenated congeners in high to excellent yield.
This reaction allows therefore late-stage installation of amenable
motifs for further diversifications.
A further key contribution to the field of sulfoximine-
directed C–H activation was made by Sahoo who designed a
S-methyl-S-phenylsulfoximine (MPS) DG.16 This motif, straight-
forwardly installable on carboxylic acids, easily removable
(under basic conditions using NaOH in MeOH/H2O or acidic
conditions using aq. HCl at 80 1C) and recyclable, demonstrated
excellent reactivity under Ru- and Pd-catalysis, undergoing
efficiently direct hydroxylation1047,1048 or amidation1049 reactions.
Scheme 168
(Free-NH)-sulfoximine-directed C–H functionalisation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6706 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
In 2014 the versatility of this chemistry was further spread
by devising a protocol allowing ortho- and chemoselective
C–H alkenylations (Scheme 169A).1050 This oxidative Heck
reaction catalysed by Ru(p-cymene) complex was compa-
tible with an array of sulfoximine substrates but activated
olefines (typically acrylates) were required. Following this
exciting research field Sahoo discovered that MPS-equipped sub-
strates, in presence of the same Ru-complex and N-protected
phthalimides, undergo ortho-selective C–N bond formation
(Scheme 169B).1051 Interestingly, the reaction protocol tolerates
several functionalised aromatics (including halo-substituted
and N-heteroaroyl ones) and, in presence of a large excess of
the phthalimide, double ortho,ortho0-C–H activation occurs.
Subsequently, intramolecular direct heteroarylation of MPS-
sulfoximines was disclosed. Sahoo and coworkers installed on
an aromatic substrate a judiciously selected olefin tether
(Scheme 169C).1052 After the Ru-catalysed C–H cleavage, spacial
proximity between the metallacyclic intermediate and an external
double bond enhanced precoordination of a double bond by Ru, to
favour migratory insertion into the C–Ru bond and final proto-
demetallation liberating a cyclised product. Quite remarkably, the
same approach may also be used for two-fold unsymmetrical
functionalisation. In such a case after initial intramolecular
hydroarylation the Ru-catalyst re-enters a new catalytic cycle,
inserts into the C–H bond at ortho0-position and final inter-
molecular amidation delivers a large panel of highly decorated
scaffolds. MPS-bearing vinylic substrates are equally appealing
precursors for this chemistry.1053 Indeed, one-pot double annu-
lation of MPS-acrylamides occurred smoothly using a standard
Ru( p-cymene)-catalyst in combination with internal alkynes,
afforded pyrido-fused isoquinolone scaffolds (Scheme 169D).
In course of this reaction both, symmetrical alkynes and two
distinct unsymmetrical coupling partners may be employed.
Besides, heteroaromatics substituted by sulfoximine motifs
are equally efficient via a closely related protocol, delivering
p-conjugated polycyclic amides in high yields.1054 Noteworthy,
the MPS auxiliary is a traceless DG that can be readily removed
after the C–H functionalisation (under basic conditions) or is
directly cleaved during the annulation events.
In parallel, Ackermann designed a C–H oxygenation reaction
of sulfoximines. As for previous examples, Ru(p-cymene) is an
optimal catalyst and after fine optimization, an iodine(III) and
Ag(I)-free protocol was established to allow direct C–O coupling
between sulfoximine benzamides and aromatic carboxylic acids
(Scheme 169E).1055 This highly monoselective transformation
well tolerates both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing
substituents on the carboxylate, delivering the desired products
in moderate to good yields (typically 50–70%). Notably, the
functionalised sulfoximines may be readily converted into
salicylic acids under acidic conditions.
16.4.
Thioamide, thioketones, alkoxythiocarbonyls and
thiocarbamates as DG
Another possibility of employing sulfur in a coordinating group
relates to the use of thiocarbonyl motifs. Pioneering work in
this challenging field was reported in 2015 by Satoh and Miura
who disclosed Rh-catalysed direct coupling of benzothioamides
with olefines and alkynes.1056 In this case N,N-diisopropylthioamide
was used as DG and the expected functionalisation performed
well under standard conditions. Importantly, oxidative Heck
reaction with acrylates and styrenes delivers ortho-olefinated
products while intramolecular cyclisation and desulfurization
occur in presence of an alkyne partner, delivering indenone-
derived products (Scheme 170A). Both couplings are high
yielding and support well both electron-rich and electron-
poor substrates. Few months later Yu and co-workers show-
cased that installation of a thiocarbonyl moiety on heterocycles
such as pyrrolidine, piperidine, azapines or N-methyl amine is
an eﬃcient approach for a-arylation.1057 The corresponding
thioamides undergo smoothly Pd-catalysed metallation and
following coupling with boronic acids aﬀords functionalised
amine-derivatives (Scheme 170B). Remarkably, this protocol
well tolerates a large panel of boronic acids, including sterically
demanding ortho-substituted ones as well as heteroaromatic
partners. High levels of diastereoselectivity are generally reached
when substituted pyrrolidine substrates are used and complete
diastereoselectivity is observed when one pot, sequential diaryla-
tion is performed. Importantly, this thiocarbonyl motif can be
removed with methyl lithium as base and the generated amine is
protected as the Boc-carbamate. Alternatively, the corresponding
amide may also be accessed by oxidation with silver salts. In 2017
the same group reported an enantioselective version of this
transformation.1058 Chiral induction (up to 98/2 e.r.) was accessed
in presence of a phosphoric acid ligand (Scheme 170C). This
arylation reaction is compatible with both cyclic and acyclic
amines and as cleavage of the DG might be achieved (2-steps
procedure including reduction of the thiocarbonyl in presence
of NiCl2 and NaBH4, followed by BCl3-mediated debenzylation)
Scheme 169
(N-Benzoyl)sulfoximine and related DGs.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6707
it can be considered as an interesting strategy to access stereo-
genic amines.
Further potential of the thiocarbonyl moiety to enhance C–H
activation was illustrated by You who disclosed thioketone-
directed arylation of ferrocenes (Scheme 170D).1059 Under reaction
conditions close to the one developed by Yu, palladation of
thiocarbonylferrocene
occurs
straightforwardly,
delivering
either mono- or bi-arylated ferrocenes in generally high yields.
The protocol is also applicable for sequential diarylation. The
final product could be converted either into the corresponding
ketones or a RANEYs-nickel mediated reduction delivered a
benzylated congeners.
To further improve the traceless character of a thiocarbonyl
based DG, Yu designed in 2017 an alkoxythiocarbonyl auxiliary.1060
This novel sulfur-based DG is particularly appealing in Ir-catalysed
C–H activation, affording alkylated compounds in presence
of non-activated olefin coupling partners (Scheme 170E).
Thanks to a large scope of this coupling and convenient
removal of the auxiliary (treatment with ac. solution of TFA
followed by N-protection) an array of original aliphatic amines
may be build-up efficiently.
An alternative CQS type directing group, thiocarbamate,
was disclosed by Xia.1061 Remarkably, in this case the DG group
is truly traceless; in presence of an internal alkyne coupling
partner, the C–H activation step and subsequent C–C bond
formation event are followed by annulation, delivering coumarins
(Scheme 170F).
16.5.
Phosphine oxides and sulfides as P-based DG
Organophosphorus molecules are key structural motifs in a
large panel of pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and organic
materials. Straightforward access to such scaﬀolds hence pre-
sents an appealing synthetic challenge for organic chemists and
therefore it is not surprising that diversification of phosphorus-
containing molecules by means of C–H activation has been
attracting a great deal of attention. The pioneering key contribu-
tion in this field were already elegantly summarized elsewhere.17
The use of auxiliary phosphorus-containing DGs, such as mono-
phosphonic acid phosphonate, presented however a serious
drawback related to a low modularity of these DGs. Accordingly,
the improvements that were expected in this domain concerned:
(1) design of transformations implying generation of the
functionalised P-containing molecules where the auxiliary is
voluntarily presented in a final product skeleton; (2) conception
of innovative, readily transformable or traceless DGs.
Amongst phosphorus-based DGs, phosphine oxides are
particularly interesting motifs. Indeed biaryl phosphines are
key ligands for both non-asymmetric and stereoselective trans-
formations and thus synthesis of (chiral) biarylphosphine
oxides is highly appealing and much work has been already done
in this field.1062 This coordinating group exhibits a modular
activation mode as coordination of the metal catalyst can be
achieved either via oxygen or phosphorus atoms, depending on
the (1) hard/soft properties of the catalyst used and (2) geometrical
considerations and size of a metallacyclic intermediate formed.
Accordingly, if functionalisation of biaryl substrates bearing the
phosphine oxide-DG is targeted, Pd-based catalytic systems seem
particularly suited as a precoordination of this soft metal by the
soft P-atom is expected. In accordance with these predictions, a
variety of Pd-catalysed functionalisations of phosphine oxides
biaryls have been achieved. More recently, this approach was
valorized by synthesis of axially chiral phosphine ligands. Initially,
a diastereoselective approach has been devised using a chiral
phosphine based DG, bearing a menthol substituent as chiral
source (Scheme 171A). Rewardingly, direct functionalisation of
the corresponding substrates occurred smoothly, delivered atropi-
somerically highly enriched products via C–C, C–O and C–I
couplings.1063a Subsequently, a closely related acylation of biaryl
substrates bearing now a P-chiral DG was disclosed.1063b,c This
methodology was further complemented with an enantioselective
transformation. Indeed, Yang et al. discovered that if a simple
diphenylphosphine oxide DG is installed on biaryl substrates,
Fujiwara–Moritani coupling catalysed by Pd(OAc)2 in presence
of a chiral amino acid ligand, takes place efficiently in ortho0-
position with an excellent enantioselectivity (Scheme 171B).1064
Scheme 170
Thioamide, thioketones, alkoxythiocarbonyls and thiocarb-
amates as DG.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6708 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
The extensive ligand screening revealed that structurally simple
Boc-L-Val-OH ligand is optimal in terms of chiral induction,
delivering the atropisomeric olefin/phosphineoxides in typi-
cally 90% ee. The reaction occurs under relatively mild reaction
conditions (60 1C) and probably implies a dynamic transforma-
tion such as dynamic kinetic resolution and/or dynamic cata-
lytic asymmetric transformation.
Aside from Pd-catalysed transformations, phosphine oxide
DGs are also compatible with Ru, Rh and Ir-based catalysts.
Likewise sulfoxide-DGs, as phosphine oxide coordinate these
rather hard catalysts via the O-atom, a 5-membered metalla-
cyclic intermediates is hence generated when this DG is
installed directly on an aromatic ring. Following this analysis,
Soule´ reported recently direct alkylation of arylphosphine
oxides in presence of a Ru-based catalyst (Scheme 171C).1065
This monoselective C–C coupling occurs with moderate to high
yields, but the newly accessed scaffolds can be considered as
original phosphoros ligand.
Straightforward ortho-metallation of arylphosphine oxides
may also be performed in presence of a RhCp*-catalyst, as
illustrated by Satoh and Miura (Scheme 171D).1066 The authors
discovered that heterocyclic compounds are also suitable
coupling partners, allowing direct arylation. This strategy is
an interesting alternative to commonly used iodoarenes as
coupling partners, delivering biaryl compounds in variable
yields ranging from 30 to 91%. Metallacyclic Ir/phosphine oxide
intermediates are also prone to undergo migratory insertion of
metal carbenes (Scheme 171E).1067 This synthetic route delivers
original biaryl scaﬀolds up to gram scale and their diversifica-
tion via FG interconversion was illustrated.
Outstanding application of the phosphine oxide DG was
reported in 2016 by Shi.1068 The authors installed this coordi-
nating motif on the N-atom of indole substrates and observed
unexpected regioselectivity during a Pd-catalysed coupling with
boronic acids. Indeed, selective arylation at C7, over generally
observed C2-functionalisation could be attained in syntheti-
cally useful yields when installing bulky phosphine oxide
DGs, such as P(O)(tBu)2 (Scheme 171F). Due to steric reasons,
the O-atom is perfectly oriented to perform C–H activation at
this specific C7 position. In addition, bulky tBu-substituents on
P-atom prevent N–P bond rotation further favouring the
observed selectivity. Few months later the same research group
succeeded in designing a complementary Cu-catalysed, C6-selective
transformation. Drawing inspiration from Gaunt,1069 they
reacted the same di-tBu-phosphine oxide substituted indole
with iodanes.1070 In line with the expectations, C7 vs. C6
regioselectivity shift occurred via transfer of the aromatic ring
bound to Cu (resulting from oxidative addition of Cu into
iodine) to C6 position via the Heck-type four-membered-ring
transition state. Accordingly, using the same indol substrate
with a judiciously selected DG the functionalisation could be
triggered at unusual position, by simple changing the catalyst
used and the nature of the arylating agent. Importantly, the DG
can be removed by treatment with lithium aluminum hydride
to give the unprotected indole derivatives.
In addition to phosphine oxide, phenylphosphine sulfides
may also act as eﬃcient DG in RhCp*-catalysed transforma-
tions. Such a PQS DG was used in 2014 by Satoh and Miura to
provide new protocols for direct alkenylation occurring either via
oxidative Heck reaction or redox-neutral coupling with internal
alkynes (Scheme 171G).1071 Also thiophosphinamides exhibit a
somehow related reactivity as illustrated Satoh and Miura who used
this P-DG in Rh-catalysed coupling with heterobicyclic alkenes.1066
The same substrates may also undergo ortho-alkenylation and
subsequent cyclisation delivering arylthiophosphinamides,1072
compounds of interest due to their intriguing electronic and
optical properties (Scheme 171H).
Phosphonic acids constitute another sub-category of P-based
DGs. The originality of this DG arises from the presence of
an OH-free group on the phosphorus atom and accordingly
precoordination
of
a
metal
by
this
motif
is
expected.
Scheme 171
Phosphine oxide- and sulfide-directed transformations.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6709
Several interesting examples of C–H activation reactions direc-
ted by this moiety have been reported before 2015 and they
were highlighted elsewhere.17 More recently, the group of Lee
focused on synthesis of phosphaisocoumarins via C–H activation
strategy directed by P-containing DG (Scheme 172A). The first
successful protocol relates to a phosphoannulation reaction of
aryl- and benzylphosphonic acids with unactivated alkenes via
direct C–H coupling/C–O cyclisation step sequence.1073 This
reaction is efficient for both, aryl-and benzylphosphonic acids.
The olefination reaction delivers products in moderate to good
efficiency. Few months later the same research group provided
an alternative approach towards dihydrophosphaisocoumarins
via C–H activation followed by C–O cyclizing bond formation
(Scheme 172B).1074 In this case 1,3-dienes are used as coupling
partners and the regioselectivity of this transformation may
be arguably attributed to a formation of Pd p-intermediates.
Unfortunately, the reaction does not allow diastereocontrol and
the products are obtained as mixture of diastereomeric products
albeit in high yields.
Targeting design of transformable/traceless P-containing
DGs, several research groups focused on auxiliaries installed
on an aromatic substrate via a heteroatom like O, or NH motif.
Following this idea, enol phosphate DGs have been designed1075–1078
and employed them in direct functionalisation of aromatics. In 2015
Loh expanded this reactivity by developing a catalytic system able to
functionalise vinyl C–H bonds (Scheme 172C).1079 Cationic RhCp*
catalyst in combination with Cu(OAc)2 and pivalic acid allowed
selective alkenylation of phenylvinyl phosphates. The reaction well
tolerates an array of alkene substrates and the diene products
are generally obtained in high yields (typically 70–90%) and good
E/Z selectivity (approx. 90 : 10). Besides, when using vinyl ketones
as coupling partners selective hydroalkenylation occurs and also
unsymmetrical alkynes may be used in this C–C coupling.
Finally, in accordance with the general target of devising trace-
less DGs, efficient removal of this motif using DIBAL-H or TBAF
based protocols. In addition, the O-tethered DG may also
be considered as a reactive site to perform Ni-catalysed C–C
coupling delivering an arylated product.
Besides O-tethered P-containing DGs, use of N-linked directing
groups also attracted scientific curiosity. In 2013 Lee developed
phosphoramidite-directed arylation.1076 More recently, Oestrich
et al. designed phosphinic amides as novel handle for Fujiwara–
Moritani reaction (Scheme 172D).1080 Both, NH and NMe anilline
derived phosphonic amides performed well. Besides, the oxidative
olefination with this DG occurred smoothly at temperature as low
as 40 1C, vs. 90 1C required for the activation of substrates bearing
an NH-anilide. The transformation well tolerates few electron-
donating substituents on the aromatic ring of the substrate as
well as few activated olefins.
Alternative, as P-chiral molecules are intriguing motifs, in
particular for asymmetric synthesis, design of stereoselective
C–H activation reactions directed by P-motifs and delivering chiral
molecules is highly appealing. Following this idea Han surmised
that if symmetrical phosphinamides are used, a direct activation
of one of the aromatic substrates would result in a desymmetrisa-
tion of the product, hence delivering P-stereogenic molecules
(Scheme 172E).1081 As expected, when using a Pd-catalyst in combi-
nation with mono protected amino acid ligands, desymmetrizative
arylation of phosphinamides occurred, delivering the corresponding
P-chiral molecules in moderate to good yields and good enantio-
meric excess of approx. 90%. Notably, the post-diversifications
were performed with little or no loss of chiral information.
In 2017 Cramer reported a complementary catalytic system
based on the use of chiral RhCp-derived catalyst bearing an
Scheme 172
Other P-based DGs in C–H functionalisation.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6710 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
atropisomeric Cp-type ligand (Scheme 172F).1082 During this
directed alkynylation intramolecular annulation takes place
delivering P-chiral cyclic phosphinamides. The reaction shows
large scope, good tolerance towards substrates bearing a variety
of electron-withdrawing and electron-donating substrates and
very
high
regioselectivity
with
respect
to
unsymmetrical
alkynes. The yields are moderate to good end ees of roughly
90% were obtained. Subsequently, this chemistry was employed
to functionalise racemic dissymmetric phosphinic amides. The
same catalytic system was now employed to perform direct
stereoselective C–C coupling via kinetic resolution.1083
Finally, the panel of P-based DGs is complemented by using
simple phosphines as coordinating motifs. This approach
seems highly challenging and counterintuitive as phosphines
are excellent ligands and their use in a stoichiometric amount
as DG could lead to ‘‘catalyst poisoning’’. In addition, oxidative
conditions frequently applied in C–H activation might lead
to the oxidation of this DG. However, in 2014 Clark reported
Ir-catalysed phosphine-directed ortho-borylation of aromatics
(Scheme 172G).1084 Like in a case of thioether (see Section 16.1),
the phosphine is installed at the benzylic position to allow
generation of 5-membered metallacyclic intermediates. This
reactivity could also be extended to diaryl and heteroaryl
compounds where a PR2-motif directs functionalisation at
ortho0-position. Noteworthy, in situ protection of the phosphine
as the borane complex takes place, enabling convenient isolation
of otherwise air-sensitive boronate esters, and deprotection in
presence of Et2NH can be conducted when requested.
Following this seminal work, in 2017 Shi discovered that
direct C–H functionalisation may be applied as an efficient
handle to diversify privileged biaryl-monophosphine ligands.
Indeed, a PR2-motif is able to transiently coordinate a Rh(I)-
catalyst and via formation of a metallacyclic intermediate direct
the metallation step at the ortho0-position and further promoting
C–C coupling with arylbromides (Scheme 172H).1085 Use of an
equimolar ratio between a phosphine substrate and Ar–Br partner
permits selective mono functionalisation while an increased amount
of the coupling partner favours formation of diarylated congeners.
Remarkably, this protocol is compatible with an array of commer-
cially available monophosphine ligands such as CyJohnPhos,
DavePhos and cataCXium auxiliaries like PinCy or POMeCy.
Noteworthy, with enantiopure substrates such as binaphthyl-
phosphine H-MOP or Tang’s ligand, the arylation occurs with
no loss of the chiral information. Accordingly, this reaction is a
unique tool for the late stage diversification of ligands.
Noteworthy, the phosphine motif can also be applied in
Cu-mediated alkynylation reactions, delivering, after a cyclisa-
tion step, an array of phosphindolium salts.1086 Unfortunately,
although this protocol gives straightforwardly access to impor-
tant heterocyclic motifs, need for 2 equivalents of the metal salt
limits its synthetic attractiveness.
16.6.
Si-Based DGs
One of the major limitations of directed C–H activation relates to the
need for preinstalled coordinating motifs, prompt to precoordinate
a metal catalyst and thus enhance regioselective metallation.
Although over the last years particular attention has been
focused on devising C–H activation reactions benefitting from
the functionalities inherently present on a desired product that
may play a role of a DG, many catalytic systems still call for the
use of non-modular and/or difficult to remove DGs that become
static entities. In such a case synthetic value of the C–H
activation methodology is clearly reduced. To obviate this
serious limitation, the concept of ‘‘traceless’’ DGs emerged
recently, enhancing conception of innovative coordinating
motifs that are easy to install but also readily cleaved or
transformed under mild reaction conditions after the C–H
activation step.1087 In this context use of silicone moieties is
particularly appealing due to: (1) relative stability and easy
access to silicone derivatives; (2) availability of cheap silicone
precursors; (3) straightforward Si–X bond cleavage allowing
removal of these tethers under mild and often chemoselective
protocols, such as the Tamao–Fleming oxidation1088 or the
Hiyama coupling.1089 Besides, in intramolecular transforma-
tions, if a SiR1R2H motif is used, this moiety can play a dual
role of both DG and reagent.
Following this general concept several research groups entered
the field of Si-based DGs in C–H functionalisation.735,1090,1091
Already more than one decade ago several research groups
questioned the potential of ‘‘SiR2H’’ to play a double role of
a DG to drive the C–H activation event at one specific position
and to provide, in an intramolecular fashion, a silicone-based
coupling partner. The potential of such reactions holds also a
major synthetic value as the newly formed C–Si bonds might be
further interconverted into several functionalised motifs.
Following this concept, before 2015 several catalytic systems
allowing direct silylation of aromatics and heteroaromatics
were reported whereas direct functionalisation of aliphatic
substrates remained a less developed field.1092–1094 Besides,
design of stereoselective transformations was a challenging
goal. Following several pioneering key contributions, Murai
and Takai reported in 2015 an improved Rh-based catalytic
system for intramolecular silylation of unactivated C(sp3)–H
bonds (Scheme 173A).1095 The authors discovered that replace-
ment of the previously employed dppp diphosphine ligand by
an axially chiral, structurally well defined SEGPHOS auxiliary in
combination with an hydrogen acceptor (such as an olefin)
drastically accelerates the desired reaction, enhancing smooth
conversion of the starting materials into products at a tempera-
ture as low as 50 1C vs. 180 1C previously requested. Impor-
tantly, use of a chiral ligand and milder reaction conditions
permitted a stereoselective outcome of this transformation,
however only moderate chiral induction was observed (ee up
to 40% was reached using the BINAP ligand). Highly enantio-
selective silylation of aliphatic substrates was achieved two
years later, in 2017. Hartwig et al. discovered that switching
from Rh–diphosphine catalyst towards an Ir complex bearing a
chiral N,N-donor ligand, such as indane-fused oxazoline, clearly
improved this challenging C–H activation reaction that now
delivers the silylated compounds in high yields and good enantio-
selectivities (ee of approx. 90%) (Scheme 173B).1096 Impor-
tantly, the newly generated stereoenriched dihydrobenzosiloles
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6711
(accessible also on gram scale using a largely decreased catalyst
loading) are a unique platform to access an array of chiral
molecules via chemoselective functionalisation of each C–Si bond.
In addition to stereoselective silylation of unactivated
C(sp3)–H bonds, several research groups applied the same
concept to synthesize chiral molecules via functionalisation
of C(sp2)–H bonds of prochiral substrates. The pioneering
key contribution by Takai and Kuninubu provided access to
original enantiomerically pure spirosilabifluorenes via two-fold
intramolecular silylation.1097 Expanding this methodology, He
reported in 2017 a tandem transformation involving C–H
desymmetrizating silylation, followed by intermolecular dehydro-
genative silylation (Scheme 173C). Such a transformation, catalysed
by a Rh–SEGPHOS complex, allows the interconversion of
silacyclobutanes into chiral tetraorganosilicons in moderate
to good yields and ees between 65 and 93%.1098
Intramolecular stereoselective C(sp2)–H silylation was also
astutely used to access planar chiral benzosiloloferrocenes. The
groups of Shibata,1099 Murai/Takai1100 and He1101 reported
simultaneously but independently intramolecular silylation of
metallocenes. Although when employing the first protocol
(Scheme 173D) based on a Rh-catalyst and a chiral diene ligand
only moderate chiral induction was observed (up to 86% ee),1099
clearly more appealing ees were obtained in presence of
Rh–SEGPHOS catalyst (Scheme 173E).1100,1101 Notably, using
the second protocol either reaction temperature could be
decreased to 40 1C or significantly lower catalyst loading
(2.5 equiv.) was employed.
An alternative approach to push even further the synthetic
value of the above described methodology consists of installing the
silicone moiety as a temporary tether such as a silyl ether group.
This elegant concept, developed in 2010 by Hartwig, implies
in situ generation of silyl ethers from ketones or aldehydes via
Ir-catalysed hydrosilylation, followed by direct intramolecular
silylation catalysed by a second Ir-catalyst.1102 Importantly, thus
accessed scaﬀolds may now be chemoselectively converted into
an array of functionalised molecules via selective O–Si or C–Si
cleavage reactions using standard protocols such as Tamao–
Fleming oxidation or Hiyama coupling. A further key step
forward in this field consisted of designing a related stereo-
selective
transformation.
Following
this
target,
Hartwig
described in 2015 a (hydrido)silyl-directed desymmetrisation
reaction of benzophenone derived substrates.1103,1104 The
authors discovered that while conserving the Ir-catalyst for
the first step, i.e. ketone hydrosilylation, high reactivity and
excellent chiral induction for the C–Si bond formation are
reached in presence of Rh(I)-catalyst coordinated diphosphine
ligand, in particular catASium or Walphos-derivatives and non-
bornene as a hydrogen acceptor. The reaction takes place under
mild reaction conditions (50 1C). Accordingly, a large panel of
highly enantioenriched diarylmethanols is accessed. Noteworthy,
when dissymmetric enantiomerically pure diaryketones are used
as substrates high catalyst-controlled site-selectivity is observed.
Very recently, the same research group designed an alternative
catalytic system based on Ir(I) bearing an N,N-bidentate quinoline-
oxazoline ligand.1105 The reaction is equally efficient and enantio-
selective as the Rh-based protocol but even lower reaction
temperature, i.e. 35 1C, could be used. In addition, kinetic
resolution took place when submitting racemic silyl ethers to
the standard reaction protocol, affording the silylated products
with high selectivity (Scheme 174).
In addition to direct C(sp2)–H activation under mild reaction
conditions, the concept of intramolecular silylation using a silyl
ether moiety could be expanded to the functionalisation of
simple aliphatic substrates. Such a transformation holds great
promise for synthetic chemists as, considering high modularity
of both C–Si and O–Si bonds, new synthetic routes towards
diols could hence be envisioned. Following this inspiration
Hartwig described in his pioneering work in 2014 hydroxy-
directed silylation of secondary C(sp3)–H bonds (Scheme 175A).1106
Scheme 173
Silanes as DGs (intramolecular silylation).
Scheme 174
In situ formed silyl ethers as DGs (C(sp2)–H intramolecular
silylation).
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6712 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
When a (hydrido)silyl ether (obtained via dehydrogenative
coupling between a ketone and diethylsilane) is reacted with
the Ir-catalyst supported by phenanthroline type ligand, for-
mation of a 6-membered metallacyclic intermediate operates
furnishing 5-membered oxasilolane. Finally, smooth oxidation
of the newly generated oxasilolanes using TBHP, in combi-
nation with CsOH monohydrate and tert-butyl ammonium
delivers the expected 1,3 diols. Accordingly, the overall trans-
formation allows conversion of aliphatic ketones into 1,3-diols,
fully validating the initial hypothesis of the project. Very
recently, design of protocols devoted to a synthesis of 1,2
and 1,4-diols spread the outlook of this methodology further.
The regioselectivity switch towards more distal, d-position
was possible by means of catalyst design (Scheme 175B).1107
Hartwig discovered, in accordance with his previous work, that
while using a Rh-catalyst with previously employed phenan-
throline or common diphosphine ligands, such as BINAP or
SEGPHOS, silylation occurs selectivity at 3-position. However,
quite unexpectedly, addition of large bite angle Xanthpos ligand
drastically altered the outcome of this C–H activation, directing the
metallation event at 4-position and thus providing 6-membered
oxasilolanes in good yields (around 70%). Accordingly, a 3-step
procedure for direct conversion of aliphatic alcohols into 1,4-diols
was devised.
In contrast, 1,2-selectivity for this direct silylation reaction was
possible thanks to the substrate designed (Scheme 175C).1108
Accordingly, an easy to install and readily cleavable linker needs
to be placed between an oxygen atom of a substrate and the silyl-
moiety. Detailed investigations revealed that perfluoroacetal is
perfectly suited to deliver the silyl DG in close proximity to the
targeted d-position. Accordingly, a reaction sequence including
hydrosilylation of a perfluoroalkyl ester, followed by silylation
of a C(sp3)–H bond and final Tamao–Fleming oxidation at the
C–Si bond provides 1,2-diols. The protocol requires use of the
Ir-catalysts in two initial steps and harsher reaction conditions
are necessary to favour this short-distance functionalisation.
An additional challenge to be addressed in this field con-
cerns stereoselectivity issues and development of an enantio-
selective directed silylation. The first step towards this goal was
achieved in 2016 when the same group disclosed enantio-
selective synthesis of cyclopropane derivatives (Scheme 175D).1109
The authors hypothesized that the hydrosilyl ether of 1-aryl-
cyclopropylmethanol may be an eﬀective substrate under
Rh(I)-based protocol. Despite significant steric hindrance, the
expected C–Si coupling occurs at the more activated (presence
of a phenyl substituent), tertiary carbon. Interestingly, the
previously employed SEGPHOS type ligand outcompeted other
axially chiral diphosphines such as BINAP, MeOBIPHEP and
GARPHOS derivatives, delivering the expected cyclised products
with high optical purity of approx. 90% yet in moderate to good
yields. The reaction well tolerates an array of aromatic sub-
stituents on the cyclopropane substrate. Besides, oxidation of
the oxasilolanes occurred with no erosion of the enantiopurity.
In his seminal work in 2008 Hartwig reported for the first
time the Ir-catalysed ortho borylation of aryldimethylsilanes
(Scheme 176A).1110 In this case, the Si moiety acts as a tradi-
tional DG, rather than a silylating agent, as in the previous
cases in this section (i.e. the Si only coordinates to the metal,
rather than being involved in a Si–C bond). The desired C–H
functionalisation required Ir(I)–dtbpy complex and B2pin2
supplemented with a catalytic amount of HBpin, to provide the
expected ortho-functionalised compounds. This methodology
could be further expanded to silyl phenol-ethers. A sequential
transformation thus permits direct conversion of phenols into
2-phenyl trifluoroborate salts (Scheme 176A, box). Besides, the
structurally related 5-membered metallacyclic intermediates
may also be generated when C–H activation occurs at the
benzylic position of 2-alkylarylsilanes.1111
In addition, following the same concept, original 7-selective
functionalisation of indoles was performed (Scheme 176A). In
this example the silyl DG was installed in situ on the N-atom and
drives the metallation event at C7, suppressing the inherent
C2 reactivity of such substrates.1112 Accordingly, simple indoles
Scheme 175
In situ formed silyl ethers as DGs (C(sp3)–H intramolecular
silylation).
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6713
were readily converted into 7-Bpin substituted heterocycles
using [Ir(cod)Cl]2 catalyst in combination with dtbpy ligand.
A further major challenge in this field was taken up in 2016,
when Hartwig devised a slightly modified catalytic system,
suﬃciently active to promote directed functionalisation of simple
aliphatic substrates (Scheme 176B).1113 The strategy proposed by
the authors consisted in (1) straightforward installation on the
Si-based DG on an olefin via alkene hydrosilylation generating
highly stable compounds; (2) hydrosilyl-directed Ir-catalysed
direct borylation; (3) diversification of the accessed molecules
via chemoselective cleavage and conversion of the C–Si and
C–B bonds. The optimization study revealed that efficient and
reproducible C–B coupling occurs when using an isolated
Ir-complex bearing a mesityl-substituted phenanthroline ligand
in combination with highly reactive Et3SiBpin boron source, in
isooctane and at 80 1C. Via this protocol, selective mono-
borylation occurs selectively at a secondary g-position generating
trans-adducts with high stereoselectivity. Noteworthy, in case
of cyclic substrates, geometrical considerations (size of the
metallacyclic intermediate formed) override steric issues, as the
functionalisation of a secondary carbon at g-position is favoured
over borylation of a primary d-position.
In 2017, the first example of an enantioselective silyl-
directed C–B coupling was disclosed. Drawing inspiration from
their previous work on desymmetrizative silylation of diaryl-
ketones, Hartwig and Shi developed directed borylation of
diarylmethylsilanes (Scheme 176C).1114 As Ir-catalysed boryla-
tion are generally milder, the intensive efforts were focused on
designing a chiral ligand able to promote this challenging
transformation at room temperature. Although enantiopure
ligands such as BINAP, various bisoxazolines and bipyridine
derivatives failed, the desired coupling took place in presence
of a quinolyl oxazoline auxiliary. Further fine-tuning of the
ligand structure led to the design of the optimal chiral inductor,
allowing the desired C–H activation to occur smoothly even at
0 1C and with high chiral induction. As previously mentioned,
this catalytic system is robust and the reaction performed at
5 mmol scale delivered the product in comparable yield and ee,
albeit significantly decreased catalyst loading (0.75% vs. 3%
used for small scale reactions). Besides, the enantioenriched
borylated products could be further diversified via selective
FG interconversions.
A complementary application of silyl moieties in the context
of C–H activation consists in using these motifs as temporary
tethers allowing installation of proper strongly coordinating
DGs, like heteroaromatics, or a remote nitrile function. This
type of DG is presented in Section 10.2. Alternatively, Si-atom
may also be used as linker connecting two moieties of a
molecule for an intramolecular coupling initiated by oxidative
addition of Pd into a C–X bond.1115,1116 Finally, inspired from
the recent regain of interest in using weakly coordinating DGs,
concerns use of silanols and effective precoordination of a
metal via hydroxy motif.
Silanols have established themselves as appealing weakly
coordinating DGs at the beginning of this decade,1117 mainly
based on key contributions by Gevorgyan1118,1119 and Ge.1120
Accordingly, an OH group directly installed on an aromatic ring
allowed eﬃcient and selective Pd-catalysed ortho-alkenylation1118
and oxygenation.1119 More recently, silanol-directed C–H carboxyl-
ation has been used to prepare salicylic acid derivatives
(Scheme 177A).1121 Indeed, this new methodology implying:
(i) conversion of an phenol into silanol, (ii) direct C–C bond
formation using CO as a coupling partner and (iii) final depro-
tection of the OH in presence of TBAF delivers an array of
salicylic acids in high yields, almost regardless the substitution
pattern of the starting material (an array of FGs is well tolerated).
The potential of silanols has been further expanded by Cui
and Xu who astutely tethered a second silicone unit on this
DG (a siloxane moiety), thus targeting intramolecular C–H
silylation (Scheme 177B).1122 Rewardingly, using an Ir-based
protocol in combination with phenanthroline ligand they
established a general protocol for direct C–Si bond formation.
Notably, the reaction is compatible not only with arylsilanols,
Scheme 176
Silane-directed borylation reactions.
Scheme 177
Silanols and siloxanes as DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6714 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
but
also
benzylsilanols
and
aryloxysilanols
are
efficient
substrates. The design of the substrates allows installation of
different substituents on the distinct silicone atoms hence
chemoselective cleavage of C–Si and C–O bond occurs, ensuring
remarkable
post-modularity
of
the
unsymmetrical
cyclic
siloxanes obtained.
16.7.
OH- and OR-Based DGs
Although initially it was commonly recognized that metal-
catalysed C–H functionalisation reactions require strongly
coordinating DGs to enhance formation of stable metallacyclic
intermediates, key contributions by Yu33,248 and others1123
clearly showed the potential of weakly coordinating DGs. This
discovery encouraged the scientific community to explore the
potential of many different ‘‘naturally occurring’’ DGs, amongst
which the hydroxy group has attracted particular attention.1124
Indeed, between 2010 and 2015 many innovative direct C–H
activation reactions have been reported, relating mainly to the
functionalisation of phenols, benzylic alcohols or biarylphenols
and they are already elegantly summarized elsewhere.17 In 2016
Cheng et al. illustrated that OH-directed C–H activation may
also be achieved when using CoCp*-catalyst (Scheme 178A).1125
The authors astutely used the hydroxy-motif to enhance direct
metallation of a vinylic C–H bond, located ortho to the DG and
subsequent reaction with an allene, acting as a one-carbon
coupling partner allows [5+1] annulation to occur delivering
2H-chromenes. The reaction occurs under very mild reaction
conditions, delivering the targeted heterocyclic products in
moderate to good yields. High regioselectivity is attaint when
using a simple, mono-substituted allene, however mixtures of
products were generally formed when structurally more complex
coupling partners were employed.
Alternatively, the OH motif was also used as thether to
install temporarily a second, strongly coordinating DG. In this
context many examples of O-Py and O-heteroaromatic moieties
have been disclosed and these examples are already shown in
Section 15.3. Recently, an interesting example of in situ conversion
of the OH moiety into a potent DG was disclosed by Maleczka,
Singleton and Smith (Scheme 178B).1126 These research groups
reported an ortho-borylation of phenols, a reaction elegantly
complementing other C–H borylation protocols, for which
regioselectivity is usually imposed by steric factors. The unu-
sual selectivity of this reactions results from in situ borylation of
the hydroxy group and subsequent electrostatic interactions
between the OBpin motif and the bipyridine ligand coordinating
the Ir-complex driving the metal catalyst at the ortho position.
While excellent ortho-selectivity was observed for the function-
alisation of para-substituted phenols (para-substituent larger
than CN or F) with B2pin2, use of less sterically demanding
B2eg2 was required to induce total regioselectivity for arenes not
biased by para-substitution.
Although the quite widespread use of the hydroxy motif as
DG, ethers are only rarely employed to precoordinate a catalyst
and drive the metallation event.1127,1128 Recently, Echavarren
addressed this challenge by designing a RhCp*-based catalytic
system promoting highly eﬃcient ortho-alkynylation of benzyl
ethers (Scheme 178C).1129 When TIPS-protected bromoacetylene
is used as a coupling partner, a panel of benzylethers is available,
as the reaction well tolerates several substituents on the aromatic
ring (mainly halogens). However, for para-substituted substrates
mono- vs. difunctionalisation issues arise. Unfortunately, the
reaction is eﬃcient only for methyl-benzylethers. It is impor-
tant to highlight that other weakly coordinating DGs, such as
sulfoxides, thioethers, sulfones, dialkylamines, sulfones, etc
also perform well under a very similar protocol.
Another interesting example for the use of a methoxy-
group as coordinating motif was disclosed by Hou. The authors
devised a catalytic system based on half-sandwich rare earth
catalysts to enhance unusual simultaneous chain-growth poly-
merization (by continuous CQC insertion) and step-growth
polymerization (C–H addition of anisole units to vinyl groups).1130
The same catalyst was further exploited in a copolymerization
process between 1,4-dimethoxybenzene and 1,4-divinylbenzene
or norbornadiene, delivering original polymeric materials
(Scheme 178D).1131
16.8.
Amine-based DGs
Amines occupy a particular position in the field of C–H activa-
tion. This motif was amongst the first ones to be explored as a
DG while studying stoichiometric cyclometallation reactions.1132
Not surprisingly, dialkyl amines have thus been used with some
success in catalytic reactions.17 In recent years, dialkylamine
DGs were astutely used to enhance direct functionalisation
of the ferrocene scaffold. In presence of Pd-based catalysts in
Scheme 178
Hydroxy- and methoxy-directed transformations.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6715
combination with a chiral ligand, powerful protocols for stereo-
selective arylation, alkynylation/dehydrogenative annulation
and
olefination
have
been
designed.
These
works
were
already elegantly summarized elsewhere1133–1135 and will not
be detailed in this review.
Aside from ferrocene chemistry, the amine moiety is also a
handy tool to promote regioselective, direct diversification of
biaryl scaﬀolds. Indeed, much attention has been focused on
20-functionalisation of biaryl-2-amines as, likewise biarylsulf-
oxide substrates for example, coordination of a metal catalyst by the
N-atom generates a 6-membered metallacyclic intermediate. This
general approach was used for both intramolecular couplings
(synthesis of carbazoles for instance)1136–1139 and intermolecular
transformations,
like
domino
olefination/cyclisation,1140,1141
direct carbonylation delivering heterocyclic compounds1142,1143
or C–H arylation.1144,1145
In 2015 Wang and Ji spread the portfolio of such biaryl
functionalisations
by
developing
20-selective
acylation
(Scheme 179).1146 The optimized protocol allows selective
mono-acylation of the Ts-protected biaryl-2-amines, under
Pd-based catalysis and in presence of aldehydes as coupling
partners and peroxide oxidants (TBHP). The reaction well
tolerates several diﬀerent FGs, both electron-withdrawing and
electron-donating, on the biaryl substrates and a large panel of
aldehydes is compatible with this protocol. Besides, in presence
of a larger excess of the coupling partner and replacing the
AcOH additive by PivOH, difunctionalisation is favoured.
Amine DGs are also a unique handle for one-step carbazole
synthesis.1136–1139,1147–1149 Biaryls bearing an NH2-motif in the
ortho position are indeed potent substrates for Ir-catalysed C–H
activation followed by intramolecular C–N bond formation,
delivering the heterocyclic product (Scheme 179B).1150 This
generally high-yielding protocol is compatible with an array of
either electron-rich or electron-poor substrates, straightforwardly
furnishing dissymmetric carbazoles.
A conceptually diﬀerent strategy towards amine-directed
C–H activation has been developed over the last three years by
Gaunt and coworkers. This group recognized a lack of prece-
dents in direct functionalisation of aliphatic substrates, and in
particular they were interested in devising transformations
showing complementary regioselectivity with respect to com-
monly observed g-C–H direct couplings. Following this target,
they discovered that aliphatic amines may undergo metallation
at unusual b-position (via formation of an unprecedented
4-membered metallacycle intermediate) and in presence of an
oxidant, such as PIDA, aziridine-type products are generated
(Scheme 180A).1151 This unusual reaction is possible thanks to
the steric hindrance of the amine that prevents formation of
inactive bis(amine)–Pd complexes but consequently this trans-
formation is mainly limited to structurally complex secondary
cyclic amines, typically aminolactone congeners. Importantly,
aziridine ring opening can be performed efficiently on the
isolated products, delivering a panel of complex amine con-
geners, including quaternary amino acids. Moreover replace-
ment of the hypervalent iodine oxidant with carbon monoxide
results in a clean carbonylation reaction delivering b-lactams,
albeit higher reaction temperatures are necessary to obtain
synthetically useful yields (120 1C vs. 70–80 1C required for
the aziridation process). Following this pioneering work, in
2017 the same research group reported a stereoselective version
of this transformation. High chiral induction was achieved using
BINOL-derived phosphoric acid ligands.1152 Another major step
forward in this field was achieved by modifying the oxidation
system.1153 Indeed, replacement of the previously used PIDA-
type hypervalent iodine by benziodoxole tosylate in combination
with AgOAc alters regioselectivity of the transformation, yet
favouring azetidine formation (Scheme 180B). This regioselec-
tivity switch is attributed to the influence of the OTs group.
Formation of a 4-membered product is believed to occur via a
two-step process including initial g-tosylation followed by inter-
nal displacement of OTs by the amine moiety. The broad range
of original azetidine compounds could hence be accessed and
derivatization of these scaffolds delivers nitrogen-containing
original compounds such as diols, amides, hydroxyl acids and
hemiaminals.
Following this seminal work, Gaunt expanded also the field of
amine-directed C(sp3)–H carbonylation reactions (Scheme 180C).
Firstly, a general catalytic system promoting highly selective
Scheme 179
Aromatic amines as DGs.
Scheme 180
Functionalisation of C-sp3 centres directed by aliphatic
amines.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6716 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
b-functionalisation of primary carbons (even in presence of
protons at g-position) was devised thanks to the addition of
hindered carboxylic acid derivatives in combination with a
quinone oxidant.1154 This modified protocol shows exceptional
tolerance towards an array of secondary aliphatic amines so
that a large panel of 4-membered amides was formed in good to
excellent yields, including few biologically active scaffolds. Few
months later it was discovered that addition of an external
diphosphine ligand and replacement of the Cu-based oxidant
by Ag salts generates a much more reactive catalytic system,
prompt now to activate methylene b-C–H bonds of aliphatic
amines.1155 The reaction is highly regioselective and compatible with
an ample panel of substrates, bearing not only electron-donating
and electron-withdrawing substituents, but also structurally complex
motifs such as heterocycles. The reaction proceeds smoothly even
when sterically congested a-tertiary amines are selected as starting
materials.1156 Accordingly, a large panel of b-lactams may now be
accessed from simple, non-protected and non-prefunctionalised
aliphatic amines. In addition to the carbonylation reactions,
Gaunt and coworkers described in 2017 alkenylation reactions
(Scheme 180D). This formal dehydrogenative C–C coupling is
assisted by an amino acid ligand (under this protocol the
metallation step is reversible yet promoting and facilitating the
targeted reactivity) and hence the C–H coupling followed by the
annulation step leads to formation of complex heterocyclic
structures.1157 Also a closely related arylation using arylboronic
esters as coupling partners takes place under ligand-assistance
(Scheme 180E).1158 To further illustrate the synthetic value and
versatility of the above-presented projects, Gaunt proposed a new
retrosynthetic route towards K-252 (stauroeporinone) implying
two amine-directed C–H activation events, i.e. Cu-catalysed ortho-
arylation of dibenzyl para-toluidinearyl iodane, followed by
aromatic carbonylation/intramolecular C–C bond formation.1159
In addition to this elegant work on amine-free directed C–H
activation, several examples of C–H transformations based on
the use of N-protected DGs have been reported. In particular,
nosyl-protected phenylethylamine, benzylamines and 2-aryl
aniline derivatives could be successfully used in Catellani-
inspired1160 meta-selective arylation (Scheme 181A).1161 The
catalytic system combining Pd-catalyst and a pyridine-derived
ligand promotes meta-functionalisation thanks to the partici-
pation of norbornene in a catalytic cycle. The scope of this
transformation is rather remarkable, as not only three substrate
scaffolds are effective, but also a diversity of both electron-rich
and electron-poor aryliodanes may be used, although the products
are generally isolated in rather modest to good yields.
Quaternary ammonium salts have also met growing interest
in the context of direct C–H functionalisation. The cationic
nature of this moiety renders it particularly appealing in
devising alternative, supramolecular strategies for C–H activa-
tion. In 2016 Phipps focused on direct C–B coupling catalysed
by Ir-bipyridine type complex (Scheme 181B).1162 This research
group stipulated that a quaternary ammonium moiety present
on a substrate should participate in ion-pairing interactions with
a modified bipyridine ligand bearing an anionic substituent.
Such DG–ligand interactions should thus direct the Ir-catalyst
to a more distal position, yet allowing remote C–H activation.
Rewardingly, it was found that an Ir-catalyst coordinated by a
bipyridine ligand with an appended sulfonate tether participates in
strong ionic interactions with a quaternized benzylamine DG, con-
sequently validating the initial hypothesis. This catalytic system
allowed formation of the expected meta-borylated aromatics in high
yields and generally high regioselectivity. The reaction is particularly
efficient if ortho-substituted substrates are used and for unsubsti-
tuted precursors double borylation might be expected. In addition,
as the ammonium moiety can be further valorized via Pd-catalysed
C–C couplings, the newly obtained products are highly modular. The
concept of ion pair-directed C–H functionalisation is also effective
for meta-selective borylation of benzylamine, phenylethylamine and
phenylpropylamine-derived amides.1163
An alternative approach based on supramolecular recognition
between a cationic amine-type DG and a catalyst was disclosed
recently by Olivo, Di Stefano and Costas (Scheme 181C). In order
to achieve remote and site-selective functionalisation of aliphatic
chains, a bioinspired catalyst, i.e. Mn complex equipped with
18-benzocrown-6 ether receptors was designed. Reversible pre-
association of the crown ether with the protonated aliphatic primary
amines approaches C8 and C9 positions of the aliphatic chain to the
Mn-atom, yet enhancing regioselective oxidation. Remarkably, the
length of the aliphatic chain does not impact the reaction outcome.
This conceptually unprecedented transformation is, for the moment,
limited to simple, non-substituted substrates and the regioselectivity
level still needs improvement.1164
Finally we would like to highlight a recent contribution by
Suzuki and Yamashita who designed original aluminabenzene–
Rh and Ir complexes. Catalytic activity of this new Ir-based
complex was evaluated studying C–H borylation of aliphatic
tertiary amines and N,N-diethylbenzylamine.1165
16.9.
Nitrone as DGs
In 2013, the panel of coordinating motifs employed as DG was
further expanded, as a potential of nitrones to precoordinate a
metal catalyst yet directing its insertion into a particular C–H
Scheme 181
Amine-directed remote functionalisations.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6717
bond was evidenced by Li.1166 Following this pioneering report,
several examples of nitrone-directed couplings with alkenes,
alkynes, diazo compounds and arenes were reported till
2015. More recently, several research groups astutely used this
coordinating motif to build up heterocyclic compounds, and in
particular indole derivatives. In 2015 Liu and Lu discovered
that nitrone may play the role of an oxidizing DG in RhCp*-
catalysed direct coupling with alkynes (Scheme 182A).1167 This
redox-neutral C–H annulation occurs in absence of an external
oxidant affording an array of 2,3-disubstituted indoles with
moderate to high yields. Substituents such as CN, F, Br or OMe
are well tolerated on the aromatic ring and both aryl–aryl and
alkyl–aryl disubstituted alkynes are effective. Targeting more
reliable and industrially appealing transformations, Ackermann
and collaborators designed a closely related Co-catalysed transfor-
mation (Scheme 182B).1168 This redox-neutral coupling between
nitrones and alkynes, proceeding via C–H/N–O functionalisation
proceeds smoothly when a cationic CoCp*-catalyst is used in
combination with either sodium acetate or an amino acid
ligand. The reaction displays an excellent site- and regio-
selectivity with unsymmetrical nitrones and alkynes, shows
outstanding FG tolerance and is easily scalable.
Alternatively, indole synthesis may also be achieved using
a RhCp*-catalyst in combination with diazo compounds as coupling
partners (Scheme 182C).1169 In contrast to the previous examples, this
transformation requires a substoichiometric amount of Cu(OAc)2 as
Scheme 182
Nitrone-based DGs.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6718 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
oxidant but the substituent present on the nitrone is conserved in a
final product (as C2-substituent of the indole scaﬀold). Accordingly,
this strategy is of particular interest if indoles bearing an aromatic
moiety at C2 position and an ester group at C3 are targeted.
In 2018 Li astutely used nitrone DG to construct fused
isoxazolidines (Scheme 182D).1170 The corresponding regio- and
diastereoselective C–H coupling of nitrones with perfluoroalkyl-
olefines delivers rare heterocyclic compounds with three continu-
ous stereogenic centers and features remarkable atom economy.
The reaction proceeds under Ru(II)-based catalysis and, although
rather harsh reaction conditions are required (temperature of
120 1C) it is compatible with an array of functional motifs,
delivering the desired products in moderate to good yields.
A traceless character of the nitrone moiety is an additional key
advantage, of particular importance for the C–H activation field.
This purpose was elegantly illustrated by Li when conceiving a
new synthetic route towards 1-naphthols, based on RhCp*-
catalysed coupling of N-tert-butyl nitrones with cyclopropenones
(Scheme 182E).1171 In this original reaction strained cycloprope-
nones are used as C3-type coupling partners and the catalytic cycle
is believed to be completed by in situ removal of the nitrone
moiety delivering 2,3-disubstituted naphthols. Besides, an alter-
native scenario is operative for ortho-substituted nitrones; a C–H
acylation step is followed by [3+2] dipolar cyclo addition pathway,
affording complex bicyclic structures. Noteworthy, the reaction
occurs under oxidant free conditions and compounds otherwise
difficult to access may now be constructed efficiently and straight-
forwardly. Naphthols may also be obtained via direct coupling
between a-carbonyl nitrones and alkynes (Scheme 182H).1172 This
redox-neutral RhCp*-catalysed transformation also implies in situ
cleavage of the tert-butyl nitrone moiety. However, contrary to the
previous example, symmetric 3,4-disubstituted naphthols are
generated. It should be noted however that in this particular case
the carbonyl moiety is rather expected to precoordinate the
catalyst and direct the metallation event into the ortho-position.
In 2017, a nitrone-directed C–H activation protocol was used to
construct indenes (Scheme 182F).1173 This reaction implies a direct
coupling with internal nitroalkenes and, likewise previous examples,
the N-tert-butylnitrone moiety is released via a Henry-type reaction
delivering an ample selection of nitro-functionalised indenes, con-
vertible via reduction into the corresponding ketones.
To complement the portfolio of direct functionalisation
reactions compatible with nitrone DGs, Li and Wang developed
site-selective amidation (Scheme 182G).1174 This RhCp*-catalysed
transformation implies use of 1,4,2-dioxazol-5-ones as coupling
partners and the DG decomposes at the end of the reaction
releasing ortho-functionalised aldehydes. The optimized protocol
allows installation of various amide moieties and several function-
alities are also tolerated on the aromatic backbone furnishing the
desired products in rather high yields.
17. Conclusions and outlook
It can be seen that the field of DG assisted catalytic C–H
functionalisation has come a long way since its beginnings
more than two decades ago. Most of the FGs you can think of
have been used in one or the other example as DG in one or
more transformation. This allows making the statement that
most of the compounds which occur in a multistep sequence
carry a FG which can be exploited as DG in C–H functionalisa-
tion chemistry, at least in principle. The question remains why
the methodology is still not explored more frequently in
complex synthesis or in R&D processes. The following critical
outlook discusses the shortcomings of C–H functionalisation,
which need to be addressed in the future.
C–H functionalisation chemistry is very often said to be the
future technology replacing cross coupling reactions because of
its inherent potential for greenness in comparison to the latter.
As green chemistry is a major concern for industry, considera-
tions related to its future application in process chemistry need
to be made. Nowadays cross coupling reactions can be per-
formed in a variety of (green) solvents, under air, with catalyst
loadings lower than 0.5%, catalytic amounts of ligands and
stoichiometric bases. These reactions are now routinely used in
chemical development and production of fine chemicals. C–H
functionalisation, instead, still requires very often specific
cocktails of a number of compounds (as discussed in the
introduction), often under inert atmosphere, and additionally
necessitate installation and cleavage of a DG, unless already
present in the starting materials or found in the target product.
The demonstration of the cleavage of a DG was specifically
highlighted throughout this review since in most examples DG
cleavage has not been investigated. Consequently, progress
in the area of cleavable or traceless DGs is highly desirable in
the near future.
Apart from these issues, less obvious limitations appear evident
from the analysis of the literature in the field of C–H functionalisa-
tion. For example, a large number of protocols make use of toxic
solvents, in particular DCE and other halogenated solvents are
widely used. Although other solvents might be used as replace-
ments in some cases, these are normally not thoroughly investi-
gated, and often result in much lower yields. The efficiency of the
reaction in more sustainable solvents is therefore not guaranteed.
In a typical process the solvent accounts for 50–60% of the entire
mass,1175 and the use of greener media is therefore of major
importance in chemical development programs, although still less
studied in academia. In case a C–H functionalisation protocol
would be of interest to industry, the process chemists will have to
spend considerable efforts in finding a valid replacement solvent
before even considering using such a protocol. While investiga-
tions on green solvents are nowadays common for many type of
reactions, this is not yet the practice for C–H functionalisations.
Nonetheless, several examples were reported recently of func-
tionalisations in alcoholic media, and some in alkyl acetates.
Both these classes of compounds are listed as preferred
solvents in solvent guides.1176,1177 In particular, the latter type
of solvents has been used in a variety of transition metal-
catalysed reactions,908,1178–1182 and EtOAc has for instance been
demonstrated by Chang to be an effective replacement of DCE
in a larger scale (200 mmol) C–H amidation protocol.751 This
will hopefully inspire further research in this direction.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6719
Regarding the metal catalysts which dominate the field, we
still see Pd, Rh, and Ru as the three major players. In a society
ever more aware of environmental issues, it is highly desirable
to substitute these metals for more abundant ones. Conse-
quently, the number of examples using Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Mn
are increasing. Not only are these metals less toxic (with the
exception of Co, see below), but also their extraction from soil is
much simpler and requires less energy or less hazardous
chemicals. Hence, as in all fields of metal catalysis, the quest
for switching from precious metals to more abundant ones is
ongoing and one of the big driving forces of innovation.
Sticking to the issue of the catalyst another important aspect
is the often high catalyst loading necessary for C–H function-
alisation reactions. Although many protocols utilise lower
amounts, it is not uncommon to find a loading of 10% [total
metal] in Pd, Rh, Ru or Ir catalysed reactions. While such
loadings are still acceptable when using base metals, efforts
should be devoted to lowering of these amounts when using
noble metals. Aside from matters of cost, the accepted residual
levels in e.g. formulated drugs, based on permitted daily
exposure (PDE), are typically higher for base metals (e.g. Cu
and Fe) than for noble metals.1183 On the other hand, although
base metal catalysis is developing quickly in this field, in many
cases up to 20% of the metal is used, and several protocols are
also reported making use of stoichiometric amounts of metal
(e.g. for Cu). Catalyst recycling is not often considered in
academic publications, but a few interesting examples of
heterogeneous catalysts for C–H functionalisation have been
reported, which allow easy catalyst recycling and reuse.1184
Research in this direction, involving both heterogeneous
and homogeneous catalysts, should be developed further.1185
Concerning base metals, a very important note has to be made:
base metals are not by definition less toxic. In fact, despite the
growing use of Co catalysis in C–H functionalisation, Co is not
a low-toxicity metal, and the permitted daily exposure for this
metal is actually lower than for noble metals used in catalysis
such as Pd, Rh, Ru and Ir.1183
Concerning the regioselectivity of C–H functionalisation
reactions, most examples of DGs listed in this review are
ortho-DGs, with respect to aromatic C–H functionalisation. This
has been identified as a shortcoming and several groups have
started to address this issue. A handful of meta- and para-DGs
have been reported and this area will without doubt see more
examples in the near future.
Other selectivity issues have also been identified. It is true
that regioselectivity, for example on an aromatic substrate,
is achieved using a DG, but monofunctionalisation is often
challenging. Many of the protocols included in this review
produce in several cases mixtures of mono and difunctionalised
compounds. This is common, for example, in arylation and
olefination reactions, while with other functionalities this is less
of a problem. In the less selective cases, monofunctionalisation is
generally achieved by blocking (substitution) one of the reactive
positions, or of a contiguous one (e.g. in arenes substituted in the
5 position, the DG in position 1 often selectively promotes
functionalisation
in
position
2
based
on
steric
reasons).
Although this might be considered an acceptable solution in
academia, this will be more important to tackle when these
protocols are used in the synthesis of specific target molecules,
where this specific substitution pattern might not be required/
desired. Another strategy to deal with difunctionalisation found
in the academic literature is the use of an excess of the DG-
equipped substrate to avoid difunctionalisation. Although this
might not be a big problem per se (as the substrate can be easily
recovered), the excess substrate is often the most complex and
expensive molecule in the mixture (e.g. it contains the DG), and
therefore this is also not the ideal solution as eﬃcient separation
avoiding column chromatography might be tricky.
Furthermore, in some transformations, the applied coupling
partners to date leave significant room for improvements. As an
example, arylation reactions are often performed with the use
of aryl iodides, which the fine chemical industry typically
avoids, while relatively few examples currently involve the use
of cheaper, widely available and less wasteful aryl chlorides.
At a more general level, stereoselective transformations
for the formation of chiral quaternary centres are still quite
limited. Enantioselectivity is here achieved using a chiral ligand,
and several examples demonstrate that good to excellent selectivity
is possible. The mechanism-guided stereoselective formation
of alkenes (e.g. after Fujiwara–Moritani reactions or hydro-
functionalisation of alkynes) is often not achieved and mediocre
E/Z ratios are obtained in many cases. As alkenylation is one of
the most studied transformations, we believe more emphasis
should be put in the development of selective strategies. Similarly,
the hydrofunctionalisation of unsymmetrical alkynes usually
results in regioisomeric mixtures.
Important advancements are being made concerning the
use of aerobic conditions for oxidative couplings. Despite the
safety issues related to the use of air/O2 in a chemical process
(especially in development and production scale),1186 the use of
oxygen results in higher atom economy and cheaper processes,
especially in comparison to the use of other (super)stoichio-
metric Ag and Cu salt oxidants (utterly common for group 8–10
metal catalysis, see also introduction). Sometimes O2/air is used
in combination with Cu salt allowing for their use in catalytic
amounts. The variety of reported oxidants is anyway limited.
While a huge variety of C(sp2)–H functionalisation protocols
have appeared, C(sp3)–H functionalisation still lags behind,
due to higher inherent difficulty in activating these bonds.
Nonetheless, important developments have been brought forward
by a number of groups, mostly using bidentate amides as DGs.
These transformation in many cases require external ligands
(such as monoprotected amino acids, MPAA), and conformational
restraints (aliphatic rings as substrates or Thorpe–Ingold effect) to
be efficient. This field is however very promising, due to the many
different compounds potentially obtained via this strategy.
It has been stated that many of the most frequently occurring
FGs have been explored as DGs in C–H activation chemistry. This
offers on the one hand great potential in applications, but on the
other hand it also raises questions regarding selectivity, in cases
a substrate carries more than one potential DG. Hence, research
focused on exploring such substrates and eventually developing
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6720 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
orthogonal sets of conditions in which first DG1 and then DG2
exhibits its directing potential would be highly interesting.
However, such reports are scarce192,1031,1187–1190 and much more
work in this direction would be highly desirable, since it would
increase the number of cases in which C–H functionalisation
could be practically applied.
This very critical discussion is not meant to discourage the
use or development of this type of chemistry. Quite the contrary
in fact! We hope that by critically analysing the weak points
of this technology, research groups around the world would
realise where important advancements need to be made, and
focus their research not just in developing higher-yielding
reactions, changing the metal for catalysis, or developing new
reagents/reactants, but also in making these protocols more
general, selective, and actually greener and industry-appealing.
List of abbreviations
@
Supported on
acac
Acetylacetonate
Ac2O
Acetic anhydride
AcOH
Acetic acid
AdOH
Adamantane carboxylic acid
AIBN
Azobisisobutyronitrile
Ala
Alanine
ampaphos
tBu2PCH2P(o-C6H4OMe)2
APAQ
Acetylprotected aminoethyl quinolone
ArF
Pentafluorophenyl
BADME
Bis(2-dimethylaminoethyl)ether
B2eg2
Bis(ethylene glycolato)diboron
B2pin2
Bis(pinacolato)diboron
BarF4- or BARF
Tetrakis[3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)-
phenyl]borate
9-BBN
9-Borabicyclo(3.3.1)nonane
bipy
2,20-Bipyridine
Boc
tert-Butoxycarbonyl
BP
Benzophenone
BQ
1,4-Benzoquinone
Brij 35
Poly(oxy-1,2-ethanediyl), a-dodecyl-o-
hydroxy-polymer
BTP
2-Bromo-3,3,3-trifluoropropene
CAN
Ceric ammonium nitrate
CDC
Cross dehydrogenative coupling
cod
Cyclooctadiene
Cp*
1,2,3,4,5-Pentamethylcyclopentadienyl
CpE
Diethyl-2,4,5-trimethylcyclopentadienyl-
1,3-dicarboxylate
m-CPBA
m-Chloroperbenzoic acid
CPME
Cyclopentyl methyl ether
Cy
Cyclohexyl
cymene
p-Cymene
cym
p-Cymene
DABCO
1,4-Diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane
dba
Dibenzylideneacetone
DBE
Dibutylether
DCB
1,2-Dichlorobenzene
2,3-DCB
2,3-Dichlorobutane
DCDMH
1,3-Dichloro-5,5-dimethylhydantoin
DCE
Dichloroethane
DCP
Dicumyl peroxide
DCM
Dichloromethane
dcpm
Bis(dicycloheylphosphine)methane
DG
Directing group
DIAD
Diisopropyl azodicarboxylate
DIBAL-H
Diisobutylaluminium hydride
DIOP
O-Isopropyliden-2,3-dihydroxy-1,4-
bis(diphenylphosphino)butan
DIPEA
N,N-Diisopropylethylamine
dippz
1,2-Bis(diisopropylphosphino)benzene
DMAc or DMA
Dimethylacetamide
2,6-DMBQ
2,6-Dimethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone
DME
1,2-Dimethoxyethane
DMF
Dimethylformamide
DMI
1,3-Dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone
DMPU
1,3-Dimethyl-3,4,5,6-tetrahydro-2(1H)-
pyrimidinone
dppb
1,4-Bis(diphenylphosphino)butane
dppe
1,2-Bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane
dppen
trans-1,2-Bis(diphenylphosphino)ethene
dr
Diastereomeric ratio
drs
Diastereomeric ratios
DTBEDA
N,N0-Di-tert-butylethylenediamine
dtbpy
4,40-Di-tert-butyl-2,20-dipyridyl
EBX
Ethynyl-1,2-benziodoxol-3(1H)-one
EDG
Electron donating group
ee
Enantiomeric excess
EWG
Electron withdrawing group
FG
Functional group
Gly
Glycine
HBpin
Pinacolborane
hfacac
Hexafluoroacetylacetone
HFIP
Hexafluoroisopropanol
HODmb
2,2-Dimethylbutyric acid
Ile
Isoleucine
IPr-HCl
1,3-Bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-
imidazolium chloride
LDA
Lithium diisopropylamide
LED
Light-emitting diode lamp
Leu
Leucine
LiHMDS
Lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide
Men
Menthyl-OC(O)
Me2-TP
4-(Bis(2-(diphenylphosphanyl)phenyl)-
phosphanyl)-N,N-dimethylaniline
Mes
Mesitylene
MOF
Metal–organic framework
MPS
Methyl phenylsulfoximine
MTBE
Methyl tert-butyl ether
MS
Molecular sieves
o-NBA
o-Nitrobenzoic acid
nbd
Bicyclo[2.2.1]hepta-2,5-dienyl
(= norbornadiene)
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6721
NBE
Norbornene
NBS
N-Nromosuccinimide
NCTS
N-Cyano-N-phenyl-p-toluenesulfonamide
nep
Neopentyl glycolato
NFSI
N-Fluorobenzenesulfonimide
NHC
N-Heterocyclic carbene
NHPI
N-Hydroxyphthalimide
NIS
N-Iodosuccinimide
NMO
N-Methylmorpholine-N-oxide
NMP
N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone
Nphth
Phthalimide
NXS
N-Halosuccinimide (X = halogen)
ODCB
1,2-Dichlorobenzene
o-PBA
o-Phenylbenzoic acid
OTf
Trifluoromethanesulfonate
PCC
Pyridinium chlorochromate
PE
2-(2-Pyridyl)ethylamine
PEG
Poly ethylene glycol
PEPPSI-IPr
[1,3-Bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)imidazol-
2-ylidene](3-chloropyridyl)palladium(II)
dichloride
1,10-phen or phen
1,10-Phenanthroline
Phe
Phenylalanine
PIDA
Phenyliodine diacetate
pin
Pinacolato
PivOH
Pivalic acid
PM
2-(Aminomethyl)pyridine
PTSA
p-Toluenesulphonic acid
PyO
Pyridyl-N-oxide
rt
Room temperature
SDS
Sodium dodecylsulfate
SIXylHCl
Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)imidazolinium
chloride
SPGS-550-M
b-Sitosterol methoxypolyethyleneglycol
succinate
TAM
Triazolyldimethyl
tAmOH
tert-Amylalcohol
TBAA or TBAOAc
Tetrabutylammonium acetate
TBAB
Tetrabutylammonium bromide
TBAF
Tetra-n-butylammonium fluoride
TBAI
Tetrabutylammonium iodide
TBHP
tert-Butylhydroperoxyde
TBPB
tert-Butyl peroxybenzoate
TBS
tert-Butyldimethylsilyl
TCC
Trichloroisocyanuric acid
TCP
1,2,3-Trichloropropane
TEMPO
(2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl
TFA
Trifluoroacetic acid
TFE
2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol
THF
Tetrahydrofurane
THP
Tetrahydropyran
TIPS
Triisopropylsilyl
TMBzOH
2,4,6-Trimethylbenzoic acid
TMEDA
Tetramethylethylenediamine
TMS
Trimethylsilyl
TON
Turn over number
Tween20
Sorbitan, monododecanoate, poly(oxy-
1,2-ethanediyl) derivatives
Val
Valine
XPhos
2-Dicyclohexylphosphino-20,40,60-
triisopropylbiphenyl
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an Excellence of Science (EOS)
project of the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) under
Grant no. G0H0918N and by INSA Rouen, Rouen University,
CNRS, EFRD, Labex SynOrg (ANR-11-LABX-0029) and Re´gion
Normandie (Crunch Network). CS is grateful to the University of
Antwerp for funding (BOF fellowship). TB and RB thank the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
agreement no. 758710). All authors would like to acknowledge
the contribution of the COST action CA15106 (CHAOS – C–H
Activation in Organic Synthesis). The authors acknowledge the
TU Wien University Library for financial support through its
Open Access Funding Program.
References
1 T. Swamy, B. V. Subba Reddy, R. Gree and V. Ravinder,
ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 47–70.
2 D. L. Davies, S. A. Macgregor and C. L. McMullin, Chem.
Rev., 2017, 117, 8649–8709.
3 R. Shang, L. Ilies and E. Nakamura, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117,
9086–9139.
4 W. Ma, P. Gandeepan, J. Li and L. Ackermann, Org. Chem.
Front., 2017, 4, 1435–1467.
5 N. K. Mishra, S. Sharma, J. Park, S. Han and I. S. Kim,
ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2821–2847.
6 X.-S. Xue, P. Ji, B. Zhou and J.-P. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2017,
117, 8622–8648.
7 Z. Dong, Z. Ren, S. J. Thompson, Y. Xu and G. Dong,
Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9333–9403.
8 V. P. Mehta and J.-A. Garcia-Lopez, ChemCatChem, 2017,
9, 1149–1156.
9 Y. Yang, J. Lan and J. You, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117,
8787–8863.
10 F. Roudesly, J. Oble and G. Poli, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem.,
2017, 426, 275–296.
11 N. Della Ca, M. Fontana, E. Motti and M. Catellani, Acc.
Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1389–1400.
12 D. Pla and M. Gomez, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3537–3552.
13 T. Gensch, M. N. Hopkinson, F. Glorius and J. Wencel-Delord,
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2900–2936.
14 D. Wei, X. Zhu, J.-L. Niu and M.-P. Song, ChemCatChem,
2016, 8, 1242–1263.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6722 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
15 J. Wencel-Delord and F. Colobert, Synlett, 2015, 2644–2658.
16 M. R. Yadav, R. K. Rit, M. Shankar and A. K. Sahoo, Asian
J. Org. Chem., 2015, 4, 846–864.
17 Z. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Yu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang,
Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 1107–1295.
18 M. S. Khan, A. Haque, M. K. Al-Suti and P. R. Raithby,
J. Organomet. Chem., 2015, 793, 114–133.
19 J. Mo, L. Wang, Y. Liu and X. Cui, Synthesis, 2015,
439–459.
20 U. Sharma, A. Modak, S. Maity, A. Maji and D. Maiti, RSC
Catal. Ser., 2015, 21, 551–609.
21 J. J. Topczewski and M. S. Sanford, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6,
70–76.
22 D. A. A. Wilton, C–H Activation of Heteroaromatics, in
C–H Activation in Organic Synthesis, ed. J. J. Li, CRC Press,
2015, pp. 267–304.
23 X.-F. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 12252–12265.
24 M. Schnuerch, N. Dastbaravardeh, M. Ghobrial, B. Mrozek
and M. D. Mihovilovic, Curr. Org. Chem., 2011, 15, 2694–2730.
25 J. C. Lewis, R. G. Bergman and J. A. Ellman, Acc. Chem.
Res., 2008, 41, 1013–1025.
26 K. R. Campos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1069–1084.
27 R.-Y. Zhu, M. E. Farmer, Y.-Q. Chen and J.-Q. Yu, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10578–10599.
28 J. C. K. Chu and T. Rovis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57,
62–101.
29 A. P. Pulis and D. J. Procter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016,
55, 9842–9860.
30 Y. Yang, K. Li, Y. Cheng, D. Wan, M. Li and J. You, Chem.
Commun., 2016, 52, 2872–2884.
31 A. Ros, R. Fernandez and J. M. Lassaletta, Chem. Soc. Rev.,
2014, 43, 3229–3243.
32 C. Zhu, R. Wang and J. R. Falck, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7,
1502–1514.
33 K. M. Engle, T.-S. Mei, M. Wasa and J.-Q. Yu, Acc. Chem.
Res., 2012, 45, 788–802.
34 J. Maes and B. U. W. Maes, in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., ed.
E. F. V. Scriven and C. A. Ramsden, Academic Press, 2016,
vol. 120, pp. 137–194.
35 S. Murai, F. Kakiuchi, S. Sekine, Y. Tanaka, A. Kamatani,
M. Sonoda and N. Chatani, Nature, 1993, 366, 529–531.
36 R. Bandichhor, A. Bhattacharya, L. Diorazio, P. Dunn,
K. Fraunhoﬀer, F. Gallou, J. Hayler, M. Hickey, B. Hinkley,
D. Hughes, L. Humphreys, B. Kaptein, S. Mathew, L. Oh,
P. Richardson, T. White and S. Wuyts, Org. Process Res.
Dev., 2014, 18, 863–874.
37 R. Bandichhor, A. Bhattacharya, A. Cosbie, L. Diorazio,
P. Dunn, K. Fraunhoﬀer, F. Gallou, J. Hayler, M. Hickey,
B. Hinkley, L. Humphreys, B. Kaptein, L. Oh, P. Richardson,
S. Roberts, T. White, S. Wuyts and J. Yin, Org. Process Res.
Dev., 2015, 19, 1924–1935.
38 R. Ely, P. Richardson, A. Zlota, A. Steven, D. P. Day,
R. Kargbo, C. C. Nawrat, A. Ramirez and J. Knight, Org.
Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21, 675–688.
39 M. Jean and P. van de Weghe, Transition metal C–H
activation: application to stereoselective synthesis of
natural products and drugs, in Stereoselective Synthesis
of Drugs and Natural Products, ed. V. Andrushko and
N. Andrushko, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2013, vol. 1,
pp. 667–686.
40 M. Anada, H. Nambu and S. Hashimoto, CSJ Curr. Rev.,
2011, 5, 175–191.
41 D. Y. K. Chen and S. W. Youn, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18,
9452–9474.
42 Y. Qiu and S. Gao, Nat. Prod. Rep., 2016, 33, 562–581.
43 P. B. Brady and V. Bhat, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017,
5179–5190.
44 L. McMurray, F. O’Hara and M. J. Gaunt, Chem. Soc. Rev.,
2011, 40, 1885–1898.
45 R. R. Karimov and J. F. Hartwig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2018, 57, 4234–4241.
46 D. Lapointe and K. Fagnou, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39,
1119–1126.
47 Y. Boutadla, D. L. Davies, S. A. Macgregor and A. I.
Poblador-Bahamonde, Dalton Trans., 2009, 5820–5831.
48 J. Vana, J. Hanusek and M. Sedlak, Dalton Trans., 2018,
47, 1378–1382.
49 O. Baudoin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1114–1123.
50 M. Fultz, Rhodium-Catalyzed C–H Activation, in C–H
Activation in Organic Synthesis, ed. J. J. Li, CRC Press,
2015, pp. 95–112.
51 G. Song and X. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1007–1020.
52 G.-F. Zha, H.-L. Qin and E. A. B. Kantchev, RSC Adv., 2016,
6, 30875–30885.
53 A. Molnar and A. Papp, Curr. Org. Chem., 2016, 20,
381–458.
54 S. De Sarkar, W. Liu, S. I. Kozhushkov and L. Ackermann,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 1461–1479.
55 G. Pototschnig, N. Maulide and M. Schnurch, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2017, 23, 9206–9232.
56 A. C. Williams, Nickel-Catalyzed C–H Activation, in C–H
Activation in Organic Synthesis, ed. J. J. Li, CRC Press, 2015,
pp. 113–144.
57 L. C. M. Castro and N. Chatani, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44,
410–421.
58 J. Yamaguchi, K. Muto, K. Itami and K. Itami, Top. Curr.
Chem., 2016, 374, 55.
59 S. Prakash, R. Kuppusamy and C.-H. Cheng, ChemCatChem,
2018, 10, 683–705.
60 N. L. Snyder and E. J. Medici, Cobalt-Catalyzed C–H
Activation, in C–H Activation in Organic Synthesis, ed.
J. J. Li, CRC Press, 2015, pp. 217–250.
61 M. Moselage, J. Li and L. Ackermann, ACS Catal., 2016, 6,
498–525.
62 N. Yoshikai, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 732–734.
63 B. Su, Z.-C. Cao and Z.-J. Shi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48,
886–896.
64 T. K. Hyster, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145, 458–467.
65 J. G. Kim, K. Shin and S. Chang, Top. Organomet. Chem.,
2016, 55, 29–51.
66 J. Wencel-Delord, F. W. Patureau and F. Glorius, Top.
Organomet. Chem., 2016, 55, 1–27.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6723
67 N. M. Ahmad, Copper-Mediated C–H Activation, in C–H
Activation in Organic Synthesis, ed. J. J. Li, CRC Press, 2015,
pp. 175–216.
68 K. Hirano and M. Miura, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 868–873.
69 J.-L. Hu, J. Li and Y.-F. Zhou, Curr. Green Chem., 2015, 2,
170–191.
70 G. Cera and L. Ackermann, Top. Curr. Chem., 2016, 374,
1–34.
71 N. B. Ambhakir, Iron-Catalyzed C–H Activation, in C–H
Activation in Organic Synthesis, ed. J. J. Li, CRC Press, 2015,
pp. 145–174.
72 W. Liu and L. Ackermann, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3743–3752.
73 W. Liu and J. T. Groves, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48,
1727–1735.
74 C. Wang, Synlett, 2013, 1606–1613.
75 Z. Huang, H. N. Lim, F. Mo, M. C. Young and G. Dong,
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7764–7786.
76 Y. Ogiwara, M. Miyake, T. Kochi and F. Kakiuchi, Orga-
nometallics, 2017, 36, 159–164.
77 B. Zhang, H.-W. Wang, Y.-S. Kang, P. Zhang, H.-J. Xu,
Y. Lu and W.-Y. Sun, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 5940–5943.
78 C. Zhang and Y. Rao, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4456–4459.
79 M. Weitzberg, E. Abu-Shakra, A. Azeb, Z. Aizenshtat and
J. Blum, J. Org. Chem., 1987, 52, 529–536.
80 D. E. Ames and A. Opalko, Tetrahedron, 1984, 40, 1919–1925.
81 D.-B. Zhou and G.-W. Wang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358,
1548–1554.
82 D. J. Paymode and C. V. Ramana, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
11551–11558.
83 K. R. Bettadapur, V. Lanke and K. R. Prabhu, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 4408–4411.
84 S. H. Han, S. Kim, U. De, N. K. Mishra, J. Park, S. Sharma,
J. H. Kwak, S. Han, H. S. Kim and I. S. Kim, J. Org. Chem.,
2016, 81, 12416–12425.
85 S. Pan, H. Jiang, Y. Zhang, D. Chen and Y. Zhang, Synlett,
2016, 1997–2002.
86 N. Kimura, T. Kochi and F. Kakiuchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2017, 139, 14849–14852.
87 R. Shang, L. Ilies and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2016, 138, 10132–10135.
88 Y.
Kommagalla,
K.
Srinivas
and
C.
V.
Ramana,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7884–7889.
89 K. Srinivas, Y. Dangat, Y. Kommagalla, K. Vanka and
C. V. Ramana, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 7570–7581.
90 X.-X. Chen, J.-X. Wang, J.-T. Ren, H. Xie, Y. Zhao, Y.-M. Li
and M. Sun, Synlett, 2017, 1840–1844.
91 S. Yu, S. Liu, Y. Lan, B. Wan and X. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2015, 137, 1623–1631.
92 S. Zhou, J. Wang, L. Wang, C. Song, K. Chen and J. Zhu,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9384–9388.
93 G. Li, L. Wan, G. Zhang, D. Leow, J. Spangler and J.-Q. Yu,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4391–4397.
94 M. Bakthadoss, P. V. Kumar and T. S. Reddy, Eur. J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 4439–4444.
95 F. Hu and M. Szostak, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52,
9715–9718.
96 V. Lanke, K. R. Bettadapur and K. R. Prabhu, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 5496–5499.
97 X. Li, G. Wu, X. Liu, Z. Zhu, Y. Huo and H. Jiang, J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 82, 13003–13011.
98 P.-Y. Lee, P. Liang and W.-Y. Yu, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
2082–2085.
99 K. Raghuvanshi, D. Zell, K. Rauch and L. Ackermann, ACS
Catal., 2016, 6, 3172–3175.
100 P. Shi, L. Wang, K. Chen, J. Wang and J. Zhu, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 2418–2421.
101 F. Wang, L. Jin, L. Kong and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
1812–1815.
102 P. Gandeepan and L. Ackermann, Chem, 2018, 4, 199–222.
103 Q. Zhao, T. Poisson, X. Pannecoucke and T. Besset,
Synthesis, 2017, 4808–4826.
104 X. Liu, X. Li, H. Liu, Q. Guo, J. Lan, R. Wang and J. You,
Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2936–2939.
105 J. Luo, S. Preciado, S. O. Araromi and I. Larrosa,
Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 347–350.
106 S. Chen, B. Feng, X. Zheng, J. Yin, S. Yang and J. You, Org.
Lett., 2017, 19, 2502–2505.
107 M. Pichette Drapeau and L. J. Goossen, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2016, 22, 18654–18677.
108 Z. Chen, B. Wang, J. Zhang, W. Yu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang,
Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 1107–1295.
109 J. Schwarz and B. Konig, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 323–361.
110 Y. Wei, P. Hu, M. Zhang and W. Su, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117,
8864–8907.
111 M. Font, J. M. Quibell, G. J. P. Perry and I. Larrosa, Chem.
Commun., 2017, 53, 5584–5597.
112 A. Modak and D. Maiti, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 21–35.
113 L. Huang, D. Hackenberger and L. J. Goossen, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12607–12611.
114 Z. Xu, T. Yang, X. Lin, J. D. Elliott and F. Ren, Tetrahedron
Lett., 2015, 56, 475–477.
115 C. Zhu, Y. Zhang, J. Kan, H. Zhao and W. Su, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 3418–3421.
116 M. Simonetti, D. M. Cannas, A. Panigrahi, S. Kujawa,
M. Kryjewski, P. Xie and I. Larrosa, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017,
23, 549–553.
117 A. Biafora, T. Krause, D. Hackenberger, F. Belitz and L. J.
Goossen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14752–14755.
118 L. Huang and D. J. Weix, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5432–5435.
119 R. Mei, C. Zhu and L. Ackermann, Chem. Commun., 2016,
52, 13171–13174.
120 H. Gong, H. Zeng, F. Zhou and C.-J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2015, 54, 5718–5721.
121 H. Zhang, G.-J. Deng, S. Li, C.-J. Li and H. Gong, RSC Adv.,
2016, 6, 91617–91620.
122 X. Qin, X. Li, Q. Huang, H. Liu, D. Wu, Q. Guo, J. Lan, R. Wang
and J. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7167–7170.
123 N. Dastbaravardeh, T. Toba, M. E. Farmer and J. Q. Yu,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9877–9884.
124 L. Huang and D. J. Weix, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5432–5435.
125 D. Sun, B. Li, J. Lan, Q. Huang and J. You, Chem.
Commun., 2016, 52, 3635–3638.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6724 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
126 X. S. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, Z. W. Li, F. X. Luo and Z. J. Shi,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5478–5482.
127 H. A. Chiong, Q.-N. Pham and O. Daugulis, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2007, 129, 9879–9884.
128 S. Mochida, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, J. Org.
Chem., 2011, 76, 3024–3033.
129 J. Luo, S. Preciado and I. Larrosa, Chem. Commun., 2015,
51, 3127–3130.
130 C. Arroniz, J. G. Denis, A. Ironmonger, G. Rassias and
I. Larrosa, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3509–3514.
131 A. J. S. Johnston, K. B. Ling, D. Sale, N. Lebrasseur and
I. Larrosa, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 6094–6097.
132 X. Qin, D. Sun, Q. You, Y. Cheng, J. Lan and J. You, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 1762–1765.
133 Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, M. Zhang and W. Su, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3817–3821.
134 N. Y. P. Kumar, T. Rogge, S. R. Yetra, A. Bechtoldt, E. Clot
and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 17449–17453.
135 J. L. Yu, S. Q. Zhang and X. Hong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017,
139, 7224–7243.
136 J.-L. Yu, S.-Q. Zhang and X. Hong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017,
139, 7224–7243.
137 A. Mandal, H. Sahoo, S. Dana and M. Baidya, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 4138–4141.
138 K. R. Bettadapur, V. Lanke and K. R. Prabhu, Chem.
Commun., 2017, 53, 6251–6254.
139 T. A. Davis, C. Wang and T. Rovis, Synlett, 2015, 1520–1524.
140 R. Shang, L. Ilies and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2016, 138, 10132–10135.
141 D. A. Loginov and V. E. Konoplev, J. Organomet. Chem.,
2018, 867, 14–24.
142 M. Simonetti and I. Larrosa, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8,
1086–1088.
143 S. Warratz, C. Kornhaaß, A. Cajaraville, B. Niepo¨tter,
D. Stalke and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2015, 54, 5513–5517.
144 E. Kudo, Y. Shibata, M. Yamazaki, K. Masutomi, Y. Miyauchi,
M. Fukui, H. Sugiyama, H. Uekusa, T. Satoh, M. Miura and
K. Tanaka, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14190–14194.
145 R. Mandal and B. Sundararaju, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
2544–2547.
146 M. Zhang, H. J. Zhang, T. Han, W. Ruan and T. B. Wen,
J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 620–627.
147 W. J. Han, F. Pu, J. Fan, Z. W. Liu and X. Y. Shi, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2017, 359, 3520–3525.
148 X.-G. Liu, H. Gao, S.-S. Zhang, Q. Li and H. Wang, ACS
Catal., 2017, 7, 5078–5086.
149 J. Zhang, H. Chen, B. Wang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 2768–2771.
150 R. Prakash, K. Shekarrao and S. Gogoi, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
5264–5267.
151 H. Miura, K. Tsutsui, K. Wada and T. Shishido, Chem.
Commun., 2015, 51, 1654–1657.
152 A. Bechtoldt, C. Tirler, K. Raghuvanshi, S. Warratz,
C. Kornhaaß and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2016, 55, 264–267.
153 Y.-Q. Zhu, T.-F. Han, J.-L. He, M. Li, J.-X. Li and K. Zhu,
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 8598–8603.
154 N. Y. P. Kumar, A. Bechtoldt, K. Raghuvanshi and
L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6929–6932.
155 J. Zhang, R. Shrestha, J. F. Hartwig and P. Zhao, Nat.
Chem., 2016, 8, 1144–1151.
156 A. Biafora, B. A. Khan, J. Bahri, J. M. Hewer and
L. J. Goossen, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 1232–1235.
157 L. Huang, A. Biafora, G. Zhang, V. Bragoni and L. J. Goossen,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6933–6937.
158 H. Chen, C. Lin, C. Xiong, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org. Chem.
Front., 2017, 4, 455–459.
159 K. Kim, D. Vasu, H. Im and S. Hong, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2016, 55, 8652–8655.
160 C. Chen, P. Liu, J. Tang, G. Deng and X. Zeng, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 2474–2477.
161 C. Chen and X. Zeng, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017, 4749–4752.
162 E. Tan, A. I. Konovalov, G. A. Ferna´ndez, R. Dorel and
A. M. Echavarren, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 5561–5564.
163 R. Mei, S.-K. Zhang and L. Ackermann, Org. Lett., 2017,
19, 3171–3174.
164 Y. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Shi, X. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Cheng and
J. You, Organometallics, 2016, 35, 1350–1353.
165 X.-Y. Shi, K.-Y. Liu, J. Fan, X.-F. Dong, J.-F. Wei and C.-
J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 1900–1903.
166 Y.-Q. Zhu, Y. Liu, H. N. Wang, W. B. Liu and C.-J. Li, Org.
Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 971–974.
167 D. Lee and S. Chang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 5364–5368.
168 A. Mandal, S. Dana, H. Sahoo, G. S. Grandhi and
M. Baidya, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 2430–2433.
169 Y. Zhu, X. Chen, C. Yuan, G. Li, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Nat.
Commun., 2017, 8, 14904.
170 G. Chen, Z. Zhuang, G.-C. Li, T. G. Saint-Denis, J.-Q. Yu,
Y. Hsiao and C. L. Joe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
1506–1509.
171 K. K. Ghosh and M. van Gemmeren, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017,
23, 17697–17700.
172 B. M. Trost, K. Imi and I. W. Davies, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
1995, 117, 5371–5372.
173 S. Motohiro, K. Fumitoshi, K. Asayuki, C. Naoto and
M. Shinji, Chem. Lett., 1996, 109–110.
174 S. Sueki, Z. Wang and Y. Kuninobu, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
304–307.
175 G. Li, L. Wan, G. Zhang, D. Leow, J. Spangler and J. Q. Yu,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4391–4397.
176 J. Hu, M. Guan, J. Han, Z.-B. Huang, D.-Q. Shi and
Y. Zhao, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 7896–7904.
177 H. Jin, Z. Zhu, N. Jin, J. Xie, Y. Cheng and C. Zhu, Org.
Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 378–382.
178 L. Kong, X. Yang, X. Zhou, S. Yu and X. Li, Org. Chem.
Front., 2016, 3, 813–816.
179 W. Yu, W. Zhang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun.,
2016, 52, 6837–6840.
180 A. Banerjee, S. K. Santra, P. R. Mohanta and B. K. Patel,
Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 5678–5681.
181 J. Mo, L. Wang and X. Cui, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 4960–4963.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6725
182 G. Wang, L. Liu, H. Wang, Y.-S. Ding, J. Zhou, S. Mao and
P. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 91–94.
183 M. E. Hoque, R. Bisht, C. Haldar and B. Chattopadhyay,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7745–7748.
184 D.-D. Li, T.-T. Yuan and G.-W. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2012,
77, 3341–3347.
185 P. Gao, L. Liu, Z. Shi and Y. Yuan, Org. Biomol. Chem.,
2016, 14, 7109–7113.
186 P. Gao, W. Guo, J. Xue, Y. Zhao, Y. Yuan, Y. Xia and Z. Shi,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12231–12240.
187 E. Kianmehr and A. Tanbakouchian, Tetrahedron, 2017,
73, 5337–5343.
188 B. P. Mathew, H. J. Yang, J. Kim, J. B. Lee, Y.-T. Kim,
S. Lee, C. Y. Lee, W. Choe, K. Myung, J.-U. Park and
S. Y. Hong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5007–5011.
189 V. Kondapalli, X. Yu, Y. Yamamoto and M. Bao, J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 82, 2288–2293.
190 Y. Jaiswal, Y. Kumar, R. Thakur, J. Pal, R. Subramanian
and A. Kumar, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 12499–12505.
191 M. H. Daniels, J. R. Armand and K. L. Tan, Org. Lett., 2016,
18, 3310–3313.
192 W. Yang, S. Ye, D. Fanning, T. Coon, Y. Schmidt,
P. Krenitsky, D. Stamos and J.-Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2015, 54, 2501–2504.
193 T. Gensch, S. Vasquez-Cespedes, D.-G. Yu and F. Glorius,
Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3714–3717.
194 H. Dai, C. Yu, C. Lu and H. Yan, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016,
1255–1259.
195 T. Sato, T. Yoshida, H. H. Al Mamari, L. Ilies and
E. Nakamura, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 5458–5461.
196 J. Li and L. Ackermann, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2,
1035–1039.
197 Y. Xia, Z. Liu, S. Feng, Y. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Org.
Chem., 2015, 80, 223–236.
198 D. C. Simko, P. Elekes, V. Pazmandi and Z. Novak, Org.
Lett., 2018, 20, 676–679.
199 P. Keshri, K. R. Bettadapur, V. Lanke and K. R. Prabhu,
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 6056–6065.
200 B. L. Toth, S. Kovacs, G. Salyi and Z. Novak, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1988–1992.
201 D. Xing and G. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139,
13664–13667.
202 T. J. Coxon, M. Fernandez, J. Barwick-Silk, A. I. McKay,
L. E. Britton, A. S. Weller and M. C. Willis, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2017, 139, 10142–10149.
203 P. Patel and G. Borah, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 443–446.
204 P. Bai, Y.-Q. Li and Z.-Z. Huang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
1374–1377.
205 G. S. Kumar, P. Kumar and M. Kapur, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
2494–2497.
206 X. Chen, X. Hu, S. Bai, Y. Deng, H. Jiang and W. Zeng, Org.
Lett., 2016, 18, 192–195.
207 H.-J. Zhang, W. Lin, F. Su and T.-B. Wen, Org. Lett., 2016,
18, 6356–6359.
208 L. Zhang, C. Chen, J. Han, Z.-B. Huang and Y. Zhao, Org.
Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 1271–1275.
209 L. Guo, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, Q. Peng, L. Xu and X. Pan,
Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 289–292.
210 H. Ikemoto, M. Kanai, R. Tanaka, T. Yoshino, S. Matsunaga,
K. Sakata, K. Sakata, T. Yoshino and S. Matsunaga, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7156–7160.
211 J. A. Boerth and J. A. Ellman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017,
56, 9976–9980.
212 D. Wang, X. Yu, X. Xu, B. Ge, X. Wang and Y. Zhang,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 8663–8668.
213 F. Li, C. Yu, J. Zhang and G. Zhong, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
4582–4585.
214 K. Meng, J. Zhang, F. Li, Z. Lin, K. Zhang and G. Zhong,
Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 2498–2501.
215 Q. Zhao, V. Tognetti, L. Joubert, T. Besset, X. Pannecoucke,
J.-P. Bouillon and T. Poisson, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 2106–2109.
216 L. Kong, S. Yu, X. Zhou and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
588–591.
217 Q. Lu, S. Vasquez-Cespedes, T. Gensch and F. Glorius,
ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2352–2356.
218 N. S. Upadhyay, V. H. Thorat, R. Sato, P. Annamalai, S.-
C. Chuang and C.-H. Cheng, Green Chem., 2017, 19,
3219–3224.
219 K. Fukuzumi, Y. Unoh, Y. Nishii, T. Satoh, K. Hirano and
M. Miura, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 2474–2481.
220 R. N. P. Tulichala, M. Shankar and K. C. K. Swamy, J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 82, 5068–5079.
221 S. Ruiz, C. Carrera, P. Villuendas and E. P. Urriolabeitia,
Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 8904–8913.
222 L. Song, G. Tian, Y. He and E. V. Van der Eycken, Chem.
Commun., 2017, 53, 12394–12397.
223 Y. Lu, H.-W. Wang, J. E. Spangler, K. Chen, P.-P. Cui,
Y. Zhao, W.-Y. Sun and J.-Q. Yu, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6,
1923–1927.
224 O. Tischler, Z. Bokanyi and Z. Novak, Organometallics,
2016, 35, 741–746.
225 K. Jing, J.-P. Yao, Z.-Y. Li, Q.-L. Li, H.-S. Lin and
G.-W. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 12715–12725.
226 Z. Xiong, D. Liang and S. Luo, Org. Chem. Front., 2017, 4,
1103–1106.
227 S. Sharma, S. H. Han, Y. Oh, N. K. Mishra, S. H. Lee,
J. S. Oh and I. S. Kim, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2568–2571.
228 P. S. Aparna, A. Vijayan, S. P. Raveendran, E. Suresh,
R. L. Varma and K. V. Radhakrishnan, Synlett, 2017,
572–576.
229 F. Lied, A. Lerchen, T. Knecht, C. Mueck-Lichtenfeld and
F. Glorius, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7839–7843.
230 R. Das and M. Kapur, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 1114–1126.
231 V. Pascanu, F. Carson, M. V. Solano, J. Su, X. Zou,
M. J. Johansson and B. Martin-Matute, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2016, 22, 3729–3737.
232 L. Yang, S. Li, L. Cai, Y. Ding, L. Fu, Z. Cai, H. Ji and G. Li,
Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 2746–2749.
233 Z.-W. Yang, Q. Zhang, Y.-Y. Jiang, L. Li, B. Xiao and Y. Fu,
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6709–6711.
234 C. Chen, Y. Pan, H. Zhao, X. Xu, J. Xu, Z. Zhang, S. Xi,
L. Xu and H. Li, Org. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 415–422.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6726 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
235 K. Seth, M. Nautiyal, P. Purohit, N. Parikh and A. K.
Chakraborti, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 191–194.
236 J. Park, J. Lee and S. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017,
56, 4256–4260.
237 H.-W. Wang, Y. Lu, B. Zhang, J. He, H.-J. Xu, Y.-S. Kang,
W.-Y. Sun and J.-Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
7449–7453.
238 G. Chen, W. Gong, Z. Zhuang, M. S. Andrae, Y.-Q. Chen,
X. Hong, Y.-F. Yang, T. Liu, K. N. Houk and J.-Q. Yu,
Science, 2016, 353, 1023–1027.
239 Q.-F. Wu, P.-X. Shen, J. He, X.-B. Wang, F. Zhang, Q. Shao,
R.-Y. Zhu, C. Mapelli, J. X. Qiao, M. A. Poss and J.-Q. Yu,
Science, 2017, 355, 499–503.
240 J. He, H. Jiang, R. Takise, R.-Y. Zhu, G. Chen, H.-X. Dai,
J.-Q. Yu, T. G. M. Dhar, J. Shi, H. Zhang and P. T. W. Cheng,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 785–789.
241 S. L. Yedage and B. M. Bhanage, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81,
4103–4111.
242 B. Li, J. Lan, D. Wu and J. You, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2015, 54, 14008–14012.
243 G. Chen, T. Shigenari, P. Jain, Z. Zhang, Z. Jin, J. He, S. Li,
C. Mapelli, M. M. Miller, M. A. Poss, P. M. Scola,
K.-S. Yeung and J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137,
3338–3351.
244 Z. Chen, L. a. Hu, F. Zeng, R. Zhu, S. Zheng, Q. Yu and
J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4258–4261.
245 J.-Q. Wu, Z.-P. Qiu, S.-S. Zhang, J.-G. Liu, Y.-X. Lao,
L.-Q. Gu, Z.-S. Huang, J. Li and H. Wang, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 77–80.
246 W. Liu, Q. Yu, L. A. Hu, Z. Chen and J. Huang, Chem. Sci.,
2015, 6, 5768–5772.
247 R. Das and M. Kapur, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 16986–16990.
248 G. Li, L. Wan, G. Zhang, D. Leow, J. Spangler and J.-Q. Yu,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4391–4397.
249 J. Wen, A. Wu, P. Chen and J. Zhu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015,
56, 5282–5286.
250 C. Yu, F. Li, J. Zhang and G. Zhong, Chem. Commun.,
2017, 53, 533–536.
251 X. Wang, H. Tang, H. Feng, Y. Li, Y. Yang and B. Zhou,
J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 6238–6249.
252 S. L. Yedage and B. M. Bhanage, Green Chem., 2016, 18,
5635–5642.
253 J.-Q. Wu, S.-S. Zhang, H. Gao, Z. Qi, C.-J. Zhou, W.-W. Ji,
Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Q. Li, X. Li and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2017, 139, 3537–3545.
254 J.-P. Krieger, D. Lesuisse, G. Ricci, M.-A. Perrin, C. Meyer
and J. Cossy, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 2706–2709.
255 R. Boobalan, P. Gandeepan and C.-H. Cheng, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 3314–3317.
256 X. Zhou, Z. Peng, H. Zhao, Z. Zhang, P. Lu and Y. Wang,
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10676–10679.
257 X. Wang, T. Gensch, A. Lerchen, C. G. Daniliuc and
F. Glorius, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6506–6512.
258 S. Sharma, S. H. Han, Y. Oh, N. K. Mishra, S. Han,
J. H. Kwak, S.-Y. Lee, Y. H. Jung and I. S. Kim, J. Org.
Chem., 2016, 81, 2243–2251.
259 S. Sharma, S. H. Han, H. Jo, S. Han, N. K. Mishra,
M. Choi, T. Jeong, J. Park and I. S. Kim, Eur. J. Org. Chem.,
2016, 3611–3618.
260 T. K. Beng, S. Langevin, H. Braunstein and M. Khim, Org.
Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 830–834.
261 F. M. Moghaddam, G. Tavakoli, B. Saeednia, P. Langer
and B. Jafari, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 3868–3876.
262 T. Morita, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
1800–1803.
263 S. Kovacs, B. L. Toth, G. Borsik, T. Bihari, N. V. May, A. Stirling
and Z. Novak, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 527–532.
264 D. Yamauchi, T. Nishimura and H. Yorimitsu, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7200–7204.
265 T. Nishikata, A. R. Abela, S. Huang and B. H. Lipshutz,
Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2016, 12, 1040–1064.
266 H. Lv, J. Shi, J. Huang, C. Zhang and W. Yi, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2017, 15, 7088–7092.
267 M. K. Manna, A. Hossian and R. Jana, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
672–675.
268 S.-S. Chen, M.-S. Wu and Z.-Y. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2017, 56, 6641–6645.
269 Y. Kuninobu, H. Ida, M. Nishi and M. Kanai, Nat. Chem.,
2015, 7, 712–717.
270 J.-H. Liu, M. Cui, X.-Y. Lu, Z.-Q. Zhang, B. Xiao and Y. Fu,
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1242–1245.
271 J. A. Leitch and C. G. Frost, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46,
7145–7153.
272 A. Dey, S. Agasti and D. Maiti, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016,
14, 5440–5453.
273 R.
Sharma,
K.
Thakur,
R.
Kumar,
I.
Kumar
and
U. Sharma, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 2015, 57, 345–405.
274 N. E. Ihanainen, E. T. T. Kumpulainen and A. M. P. Koskinen,
Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 3226–3229.
275 Y. Ren, C. Yan, J. Jia and H.-S. Wu, J. Organomet. Chem.,
2016, 824, 88–98.
276 S. Li, L. Cai, H. Ji, L. Yang, G. Li and G. Li, Nat. Commun.,
2016, 7, 10443.
277 A. Modak, A. Mondal, R. Watile, S. Mukherjee and
D. Maiti, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13916–13919.
278 L. Yang, L. Fu and G. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359,
2235–2240.
279 J. Wencel-Delord and F. Colobert, Org. Chem. Front., 2016,
3, 394–400.
280 I. Colomer, A. E. R. Chamberlain, M. B. Haughey and
T. J. Donohoe, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0088.
281 Y. Deng and J.-Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54,
888–891.
282 A. Maji, B. Bhaskararao, S. Singha, R. B. Sunoj and
D. Maiti, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3147–3153.
283 M. Bera, S. Agasti, R. Chowdhury, R. Mondal, D. Pal and
D. Maiti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5272–5276.
284 A. Modak, T. Patra, R. Chowdhury, S. Raul and D. Maiti,
Organometallics, 2017, 36, 2418–2423.
285 S. Bag, T. Patra, A. Modak, A. Deb, S. Maity, U. Dutta,
A. Dey, R. Kancherla, A. Maji, A. Hazra, M. Bera and
D. Maiti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11888–11891.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6727
286 T. Patra, S. Bag, R. Kancherla, A. Mondal, A. Dey,
S. Pimparkar, S. Agasti, A. Modak and D. Maiti, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7751–7755.
287 S. Maity, E. Hoque, U. Dhawa and D. Maiti, Chem.
Commun., 2016, 52, 14003–14006.
288 F. Hu and M. Szostak, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 4186–4189.
289 S. J. Pastine, D. V. Gribkov and D. Sames, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2006, 128, 14220–14221.
290 W. Xu and N. Yoshikai, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5299–5304.
291 M. Y. Wong, T. Yamakawa and N. Yoshikai, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 442–445.
292 K. Gao and N. Yoshikai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133,
400–402.
293 W. Xu, J. H. Pek and N. Yoshikai, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016,
358, 2564–2568.
294 W. Xu and N. Yoshikai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55,
12731–12735.
295 R. Pollice, N. Dastbaravardeh, N. Marquise, M. D. Mihovilovic
and M. Schnu¨rch, ACS Catal., 2014, 5, 587–595.
296 H. Wang, M. M. Lorion and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6339–6342.
297 S.-S. Zhang, X.-G. Liu, S.-Y. Chen, D.-H. Tan, C.-Y. Jiang,
J.-Q. Wu, Q. Li and H. Wang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358,
1705–1710.
298 Q. Lu, S. Gressies, S. Cembellin, F. J. R. Klauck,
C. G. Daniliuc and F. Glorius, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2017, 56, 12778–12782.
299 J. H. Kim, S. Gressies and F. Glorius, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2016, 55, 5577–5581.
300 J. Wang, S. Zha, K. Chen, F. Zhang, C. Song and J. Zhu,
Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2062–2065.
301 X. Wang and N. Jiao, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2150–2153.
302 X. Jin, X. Yang, Y. Yang and C. Wang, Org. Chem. Front.,
2016, 3, 268–272.
303 N. Lv, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 2588–2591.
304 Y. Yi, H. Lee and C.-H. Jun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52,
10171–10174.
305 S.
Raju, P.
Annamalai, P.-L.
Chen, Y.-H.
Liu and
S.-C. Chuang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 4134–4137.
306 C.-Z. Luo, J. Jayakumar, P. Gandeepan, Y.-C. Wu and
C.-H. Cheng, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 924–927.
307 J. Jayakumar and C.-H. Cheng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22,
1800–1804.
308 C. Lin, Z. Chen, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
850–853.
309 S.-J. Lou, Y.-J. Mao, D.-Q. Xu, J.-Q. He, Q. Chen and
Z.-Y. Xu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3890–3894.
310 D. M. Reddy, S.-C. Wang, K. Du and C.-F. Lee, J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 82, 10070–10076.
311 J. Peng, C. Chen and C. Xi, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1383–1387.
312 H. Wang, S. Yu, Z. Qi and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2812–2815.
313 X. Zhou, S. Yu, L. Kong and X. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 647–651.
314 T. Nanjo, C. Tsukano and Y. Takernoto, Chem. Pharm.
Bull., 2016, 64, 1384–1392.
315 J. Ye and M. Lautens, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 863–870.
316 K. Guo, X. Chen, M. Guan and Y. Zhao, Org. Lett., 2015,
17, 1802–1805.
317 M. Sen, D. Kalsi and B. Sundararaju, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015,
21, 15529–15533.
318 H.
Wang,
J.
Koeller,
W.
Liu
and
L.
Ackermann,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15525–15528.
319 K. Muralirajan, R. Kuppusamy, S. Prakash and C.-H. Cheng,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 774–783.
320 L. Zheng, Y. Bin, Y. Wang and R. Hua, J. Org. Chem., 2016,
81, 8911–8919.
321 Y.-F. Liang, X. Li, X. Wang, Y. Yan, P. Feng and N. Jiao,
ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1956–1963.
322 Y.-F. Liang, X. Wang, C. Tang, T. Shen, J. Liu and N. Jiao,
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1416–1419.
323 J. R. Hummel and J. A. Ellman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015,
137, 490–498.
324 Z. Ren, J. E. Schulz and G. Dong, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
2696–2699.
325 L.-Y. Shao, C. Li, Y. Guo, K.-K. Yu, F.-Y. Zhao, W.-L. Qiao,
H.-W. Liu, D.-H. Liao and Y.-F. Ji, RSC Adv., 2016, 6,
78875–78880.
326 Q.-L. Yang, Y.-Q. Li, C. Ma, P. Fang, X.-J. Zhang and
T.-S. Mei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3293–3298.
327 S. J. Thompson, D. Q. Thach and G. Dong, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11586–11589.
328 Y.-F. Liang, X. Wang, Y. Yuan, Y. Liang, X. Li and N. Jiao,
ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6148–6152.
329 M. Zou, J. Liu, C. Tang and N. Jiao, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
3030–3033.
330 H. Wang, G. Tang and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,
54, 13049–13052.
331 S. Yu, B. Wan and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 58–61.
332 K. Muralirajan, R. Haridharan, S. Prakash and C.-H. Cheng,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 761–766.
333 S. Zhou, J. Wang, F. Zhang, C. Song and J. Zhu, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 2427–2430.
334 Z. Yang, X. Lin, L. Wang and X. Cui, Org. Chem. Front.,
2017, 4, 2179–2183.
335 B. V. S. Reddy, C. R. Reddy, M. R. Reddy, S. Yarlagadda
and B. Sridhar, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3730–3733.
336 P. Shi, L. Wang, S. Guo, K. Chen, J. Wang and J. Zhu, Org.
Lett., 2017, 19, 4359–4362.
337 A. Lerchen, S. Vasquez-Cespedes and F. Glorius, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3208–3211.
338 B. Yu, Y. Chen, M. Hong, P. Duan, S. Gan, H. Chao, Z. Zhao
and J. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14365–14368.
339 J. Wang, S. Zha, K. Chen and J. Zhu, Org. Chem. Front.,
2016, 3, 1281–1285.
340 S. Zhang, D. Huang, G. Xu, S. Cao, R. Wang, S. Peng and
J. Sun, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 7920–7923.
341 Z. Huang, C. Wang and G. Dong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2016, 55, 5299–5303.
342 J. Wen, A. Wu, Y. Miao and J. Zhu, Tetrahedron Lett., 2015,
56, 5512–5516.
343 Y. Yu, C. Kuai, R. Chauvin, N. Tian, S. Ma and X. Cui,
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 8611–8616.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6728 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
344 V. G. Zaitsev, D. Shabashov and O. Daugulis, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2005, 127, 13154–13155.
345 M. Corbet and F. De Campo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013,
52, 9896–9898.
346 G. Rouquet and N. Chatani, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013,
52, 11726–11743.
347 H. Tang, X.-R. Huang, J. Yao and H. Chen, J. Org. Chem.,
2015, 80, 4672–4682.
348 O. Daugulis, J. Roane and L. D. Tran, Acc. Chem. Res.,
2015, 48, 1053–1064.
349 R. K. Rit, M. R. Yadav, K. Ghosh and A. K. Sahoo, Tetra-
hedron, 2015, 71, 4450–4459.
350 X. Yang, G. Shan, L. Wang and Y. Rao, Tetrahedron Lett.,
2016, 57, 819–836.
351 Y. J. Park, J.-W. Park and C.-H. Jun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008,
41, 222–234.
352 Z. Shao and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38,
2745–2755.
353 C. Zhong and X. Shi, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2010, 2999–3025.
354 Y. Qin, L. Zhu and S. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117,
9433–9520.
355 D.-S. Kim, W.-J. Park and C.-H. Jun, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117,
8977–9015.
356 S. Afewerki and A. Co´rdova, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116,
13512–13570.
357 Z. Du and Z. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1337–1378.
358 H. Sun, N. Guimond and Y. Huang, Org. Biomol. Chem.,
2016, 14, 8389–8397.
359 P. Gandeepan and L. Ackermann, Chem, 2018, 4, 199–222.
360 Y. Dou, Z. Xie, Z. Sun, H. Fang, C. Shen, P. Zhang and
Q. Zhu, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 3570–3574.
361 C. J. Whiteoak, O. Planas, A. Company and X. Ribas, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 1679–1688.
362 Y. Yin, J. Xie, F.-Q. Huang, L.-W. Qi and B. Zhang, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 1037–1042.
363 M. D. Reddy, F. R. Fronczek and E. B. Watkins, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 5620–5623.
364 J.-M. Li, J. Weng, G. Lu and A. S. C. Chan, Tetrahedron
Lett., 2016, 57, 2121–2124.
365 J. Wei, J. Jiang, X. Xiao, D. Lin, Y. Deng, Z. Ke, H. Jiang
and W. Zeng, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 946–955.
366 H. Chen, P. Li, M. Wang and L. Wang, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
4794–4797.
367 H. Qiao, S. Sun, F. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. Zhu, Y. Dong, Y. Wu,
X. Kong, L. Jiang and Y. Wu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
6086–6089.
368 Y. Kuninobu, M. Nishi and M. Kanai, Org. Biomol. Chem.,
2016, 14, 8092–8100.
369 L.-K. Jin, G.-P. Lu and C. Cai, Org. Chem. Front., 2016, 3,
1309–1313.
370 R. Parella and S. A. Babu, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
2339–2355.
371 B. Gopalakrishnan, S. A. Babu and R. Padmavathi, Tetra-
hedron, 2015, 71, 8333–8349.
372 R. Parella and S. A. Babu, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
12379–12396.
373 H.-Y. Xiong, T. Besset, D. Cahard and X. Pannecoucke,
J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 4204–4212.
374 X. Cheng, Z. Chen, Y. Gao, F. Xue and C. Jiang, Org.
Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 3298–3306.
375 L. Grigorjeva and O. Daugulis, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
1204–1207.
376 S.-Y. Zhang, Q. Li, G. He, W. A. Nack and G. Chen, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 531–539.
377 B. K. Singh and R. Jana, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 831–841.
378 D. P. Aﬀron and J. A. Bull, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016, 139–149.
379 Q. Gui, X. Chen, L. Hu, D. Wang, J. Liu and Z. Tan, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 509–514.
380 L. Hu, Q. Gui, X. Chen, Z. Tan and G. Zhu, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2016, 14, 11070–11075.
381 L. Hu, X. Chen, Q. Gui, Z. Tan and G. Zhu, Chem.
Commun., 2016, 52, 6845–6848.
382 L. D. Tran, I. Popov and O. Daugulis, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2012, 134, 18237–18240.
383 C. Li, D. Zhang, W. Zhu, P. Wan and H. Liu, Org. Chem.
Front., 2016, 3, 1080–1083.
384 A. Chabrier, A. Bruneau, S. Benmahdjoub, B. Benmerad,
S. Belaid, J.-D. Brion, M. Alami and S. Messaoudi,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 15006–15010.
385 Y. Liu, K. Yang and H. Ge, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2804–2808.
386 O. Verho, M. Pourghasemi Lati and M. Oschmann, J. Org.
Chem., 2018, 83, 4464–4476.
387 B. B. Yann, G. Corinne and D. Gre´gory, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2017, 23, 10043–10047.
388 M.
Berger,
R.
Chauhan,
C.
A.
B.
Rodrigues
and
N. Maulide, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 16805–16808.
389 T. Deguchi, H.-L. Xin, H. Morimoto and T. Ohshima,
ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3157–3161.
390 S. A. Ruider and N. Maulide, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,
54, 13856–13858.
391 R. Padmavathi, R. Sankar, B. Gopalakrishnan, R. Parella
and S. A. Babu, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 3727–3742.
392 N. Bisht and S. A. Babu, Tetrahedron, 2016, 72, 5886–5897.
393 M. Sattar, Praveen, C. Durga Prasad, A. Verma, S. Kumar
and S. Kumar, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 240–253.
394 H. Qiao, S. Sun, F. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. Zhu, Y. Wu and
Y. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 59319–59326.
395 C. Shan, X. Luo, X. Qi, S. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Lan, Organo-
metallics, 2016, 35, 1440–1445.
396 Y. Xie, D. Xu, W.-W. Sun, S.-J. Zhang, X.-P. Dong, B. Liu,
Y. Zhou and B. Wu, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2016, 5, 961–965.
397 C. Du, P.-X. Li, X. Zhu, J.-F. Suo, J.-L. Niu and M.-P. Song,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13571–13575.
398 K. Takamatsu, K. Hirano and M. Miura, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2017, 56, 5353–5357.
399 T.-Y. Zhang, J.-B. Lin, Q.-Z. Li, J.-C. Kang, J.-L. Pan,
S.-H. Hou, C. Chen and S.-Y. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
1764–1767.
400 Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, M. Huang and J.-P. Wan, RSC Adv., 2015,
5, 46192–46196.
401 Y. Aihara, J. Wuelbern and N. Chatani, Bull. Chem. Soc.
Jpn., 2015, 88, 438–446.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6729
402 L. Ilies, S.
Ichikawa, S. Asako,
T. Matsubara and
E. Nakamura, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2175–2179.
403 R. Shang, L. Ilies and E. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2015, 137, 7660–7663.
404 H. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Wang, M. He and K. Xu, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 5628–5631.
405 K. Xu, Z. Tan, H. Zhang and S. Zhang, Synthesis, 2017,
3931–3936.
406 T. Kubo and N. Chatani, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 1698–1701.
407 J. Singh, M. Deb and A. J. Elias, Organometallics, 2015, 34,
4946–4951.
408 D. Schmiel and H. Butenschoen, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017,
3041–3048.
409 K. Shibata and N. Chatani, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 240–245.
410 P. Gandeepan, P. Rajamalli and C.-H. Cheng, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4308–4311.
411 K. Shibata, T. Yamaguchi and N. Chatani, Org. Lett., 2015,
17, 3584–3587.
412 W. Ma and L. Ackermann, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2822–2825.
413 W. Miura, K. Hirano and M. Miura, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
4034–4037.
414 R. Manoharan and M. Jeganmohan, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
5884–5887.
415 Q. He, T. Yamaguchi and N. Chatani, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
4544–4547.
416 N. Barsu, D. Kalsi and B. Sundararaju, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2015, 21, 9364–9368.
417 S. Maity, R. Kancherla, U. Dhawa, E. Hoque, S. Pimparkar
and D. Maiti, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5493–5499.
418 R. Manoharan, G. Sivakumar and M. Jeganmohan, Chem.
Commun., 2016, 52, 10533–10536.
419 T. Yamaguchi, Y. Kommagalla, Y. Aihara and N. Chatani,
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10129–10132.
420 H.-W. Liang, W. Ding, K. Jiang, L. Shuai, Y. Yuan, Y. Wei
and Y.-C. Chen, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2764–2767.
421 R.
Boobalan,
R.
Kuppusamy,
R.
Santhoshkumar,
P. Gandeepan and C.-H. Cheng, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9,
273–277.
422 A. Deb, A. Hazra, Q. Peng, R. S. Paton and D. Maiti, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 763–775.
423 M. Liu, Y. Niu, Y.-F. Wu and X.-S. Ye, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
1836–1839.
424 K. Shibata, S. Natsui and N. Chatani, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
2234–2237.
425 C. Shao, G. Shi and Y. Zhang, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016,
5529–5538.
426 J. Yi, L. Yang, C. Xia and F. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
6213–6221.
427 V. G. Landge, C. H. Shewale, G. Jaiswal, M. K. Sahoo,
S. P. Midya and E. Balaraman, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6,
1946–1951.
428 V. G. Landge, G. Jaiswal and E. Balaraman, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 812–815.
429 L. C. Misal Castro, A. Obata, Y. Aihara and N. Chatani,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1362–1367.
430 Z. He and Y. Huang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7814–7823.
431 S. Kathiravan and I. A. Nicholls, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
4758–4761.
432 T. Matsubara, L. Ilies and E. Nakamura, Chem. – Asian J.,
2016, 11, 380–384.
433 K. Takamatsu, K. Hirano and M. Miura, Org. Lett., 2015,
17, 4066–4069.
434 W. Hao, J. Tian, W. Li, R. Shi, Z. Huang and A. Lei,
Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1664–1667.
435 F. Zou, X. Chen and W. Hao, Tetrahedron, 2017, 73,
758–763.
436 D. Kalsi, N. Barsu, P. Dahiya and B. Sundararaju, Synthesis,
2017, 3937–3944.
437 Z.-Y. Gu, C.-G. Liu, S.-Y. Wang and S.-J. Ji, J. Org. Chem.,
2017, 82, 2223–2230.
438 L. Yu, H. Huang, X. Chen, L. Hu, Y. Yu and Z. Tan, Chem.
Commun., 2017, 53, 4597–4600.
439 X. Wu, Y. Zhao and H. Ge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137,
4924–4927.
440 B. Khan, A. Ali Khan, R. Kant and D. Koley, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2016, 358, 3753–3758.
441 J. Ni, J. Li, Z. Fan and A. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
5960–5963.
442 T. T. Nguyen, L. Grigorjeva and O. Daugulis, Chem.
Commun., 2017, 53, 5136–5138.
443 B. Khan, R. Kant and D. Koley, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016,
358, 2352–2358.
444 Q. Yan, Z. Chen, W. Yu, H. Yin, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 2482–2485.
445 J. Roane and O. Daugulis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138,
4601–4607.
446 B. K. Singh, A. Polley and R. Jana, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81,
4295–4303.
447 P. Sadhu and T. Punniyamurthy, Chem. Commun., 2016,
52, 2803–2806.
448 C. Du, P.-X. Li, X. Zhu, J.-N. Han, J.-L. Niu and M.-P. Song,
ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2810–2814.
449 Z. Li, H. Yu and C. Bolm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
9532–9535.
450 J. Liu, S. Zhuang, Q. Gui, X. Chen, Z. Yang and Z. Tan,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 732–738.
451 X.-S. Yin, Y.-C. Li, J. Yuan, W.-J. Gu and B.-F. Shi, Org.
Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 119–123.
452 C. Lin, D. Li, B. Wang, J. Yao and Y. Zhang, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 1328–1331.
453 V. P. Reddy, R. Qiu, T. Iwasaki and N. Kambe, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2015, 13, 6803–6813.
454 J. Liu, L. Yu, S. Zhuang, Q. Gui, X. Chen, W. Wang and
Z. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6418–6421.
455 Q. Zhao, T. Poisson, X. Pannecoucke, J.-P. Bouillon and
T. Besset, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 5106–5109.
456 Y. Liu, M. Huang and L. Wei, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2017, 6,
41–43.
457 A. Mandal, H. Sahoo and M. Baidya, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
3202–3205.
458 M. Iwasaki, N. Miki, Y. Tsuchiya, K. Nakajima and
Y. Nishihara, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 1092–1095.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6730 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
459 J.-L. Pan, C. Chen, Z.-G. Ma, J. Zhou, L.-R. Wang and
S.-Y. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 5216–5219.
460 X. Wu, Y. Zhao and H. Ge, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5978–5983.
461 Q. Gou, Z.-F. Zhang, Z.-C. Liu and J. Qin, J. Org. Chem.,
2015, 80, 3176–3186.
462 K. Chen, X. Li, S.-Q. Zhang and B.-F. Shi, Org. Chem.
Front., 2016, 3, 204–208.
463 S. Mohan, B. Gopalakrishnan and S. A. Babu, Tetrahedron,
2016, 72, 5853–5863.
464 Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Cao and J.-P. Wan, Beilstein J. Org.
Chem., 2016, 12, 1122–1126.
465 M. D. Reddy and E. B. Watkins, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
11447–11459.
466 P. Hu and T. Bach, Synlett, 2015, 2853–2857.
467 X. Wang, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Xu, C.-T. Au and R. Qiu, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 5228–5231.
468 X. Wang, P. Xie, R. Qiu, L. Zhu, T. Liu, Y. Li, T. Iwasaki,
C.-T. Au, X. Xu, Y. Xia, S.-F. Yin and N. Kambe, Chem.
Commun., 2017, 53, 8316–8319.
469 H. M. Omer and P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139,
9909–9920.
470 S. Singh, K. Surya and R. B. Sunoj, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82,
9619–9626.
471 A. Dey, S. Pimparkar, A. Deb, S. Guin and D. Maiti, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 1301–1307.
472 R. Parella and S. A. Babu, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82,
7123–7150.
473 W. A. Nack, B. Wang, X. Wu, R. Jiao, G. He and G. Chen,
Org. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 561–564.
474 N.
Hoshiya,
M.
Kondo,
H.
Fukuda,
M.
Arisawa,
J. I. Uenishi and S. Shuto, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82,
2535–2544.
475 X. Yang, G. Shan, Z. Yang, G. Huang, G. Dong, C. Sheng
and Y. Rao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1534–1537.
476 S.-B. Yan, S. Zhang and W.-L. Duan, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
2458–2461.
477 R. Feng, B. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Eur. J. Org.
Chem., 2015, 142–151.
478 Q.-Y. Yu, H.-M. Zhong, W.-W. Sun, S.-J. Zhang, P. Cao,
X.-P. Dong, H.-B. Qin, J.-K. Liu and B. Wu, Asian J. Org.
Chem., 2016, 5, 608–612.
479 B. Mondal, B. Roy and U. Kazmaier, J. Org. Chem., 2016,
81, 11646–11655.
480 Z.-Z. Zhang, Y.-Q. Han, B.-B. Zhan, S. Wang and B.-F. Shi,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13145–13149.
481 K. Chen, X. Li, S.-Q. Zhang and B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun.,
2016, 52, 1915–1918.
482 N. Hoshiya, K. Takenaka, S. Shuto and J.-I. Uenishi, Org.
Lett., 2016, 18, 48–51.
483 Q. Yang and S.-D. Yang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5220–5224.
484 G. Liao, X.-S. Yin, K. Chen, Q. Zhang, S.-Q. Zhang and
B.-F. Shi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12901.
485 G. Shan, G. Huang and Y. Rao, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015,
13, 697–701.
486 M. Li, Y. Yang, D. Zhou, D. Wan and J. You, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 2546–2549.
487 S. Maity, S. Agasti, A. M. Earsad, A. Hazra and D. Maiti,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 11320–11324.
488 L. Ilies, Y. Itabashi, R. Shang and E. Nakamura, ACS
Catal., 2017, 7, 89–92.
489 J. Zhang, H. Chen, C. Lin, Z. Liu, C. Wang and Y. Zhang,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12990–12996.
490 J. Zhang, D. Li, H. Chen, B. Wang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 792–807.
491 F.-X. Luo, Z.-C. Cao, H.-W. Zhao, D. Wang, Y.-F. Zhang,
X. Xu and Z.-J. Shi, Organometallics, 2017, 36, 18–21.
492 P. Williamson, A. Galvan and M. J. Gaunt, Chem. Sci.,
2017, 8, 2588–2591.
493 N. Barsu, S. K. Bolli and B. Sundararaju, Chem. Sci., 2017,
8, 2431–2435.
494 L. Zeng, S. Tang, D. Wang, Y. Deng, J.-L. Chen, J.-F. Lee
and A. Lei, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 2170–2173.
495 H.-Y. Xiong, D. Cahard, X. Pannecoucke and T. Besset,
Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016, 3625–3630.
496 R.-Y. Zhu, K. Tanaka, G.-C. Li, J. He, H.-Y. Fu, S.-H. Li and
J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7067–7070.
497 Q. Zhang, X.-S. Yin, K. Chen, S.-Q. Zhang and B.-F. Shi,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8219–8226.
498 Q. Zhu, D. Ji, T. Liang, X. Wang and Y. Xu, Org. Lett., 2015,
17, 3798–3801.
499 H. Sun, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, Y.-D. Wu, X. Zhang and
Y. Huang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 1946–1957.
500 J. Hu, T. Lan, Y. Sun, H. Chen, J. Yao and Y. Rao, Chem.
Commun., 2015, 51, 14929–14932.
501 K. Chen, S.-Q. Zhang, H.-Z. Jiang, J.-W. Xu and B.-F. Shi,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 3264–3270.
502 X. Yang, T.-Y. Sun and Y. Rao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22,
3273–3277.
503 C. Wang, L. Zhang and J. You, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
1690–1693.
504 C. Wang, Y. Yang, D. Qin, Z. He and J. You, J. Org. Chem.,
2015, 80, 8424–8429.
505 S.-J. Zhang, W.-W. Sun, P. Cao, X.-P. Dong, J.-K. Liu and
B. Wu, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 956–968.
506 C. Yamamoto, K. Takamatsu, K. Hirano and M. Miura,
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 7675–7684.
507 Q. Gou, Y.-W. Yang, Z.-N. Liu and J. Qin, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2016, 22, 16057–16061.
508 C. Wang and Y. Yang, Tetrahedron Lett., 2017, 58,
935–940.
509 X. Ye, J. L. Petersen and X. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51,
7863–7866.
510 C. Lin, W. Yu, J. Yao, B. Wang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 1340–1343.
511 S.-Y. Yan, Y.-J. Liu, B. Liu, Y.-H. Liu, Z.-Z. Zhang and
B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7341–7344.
512 X. Wang, R. Qiu, C. Yan, V. P. Reddy, L. Zhu, X. Xu and
S.-F. Yin, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1970–1973.
513 W.-H. Rao, B.-B. Zhan, K. Chen, P.-X. Ling, Z.-Z. Zhang
and B.-F. Shi, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3552–3555.
514 J.-L. Pan, Q.-Z. Li, T.-Y. Zhang, S.-H. Hou, J.-C. Kang and
S.-Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13151–13154.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6731
515 Y.-J. Liu, Y.-H. Liu, Z.-Z. Zhang, S.-Y. Yan, K. Chen and
B.-F. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13859–13862.
516 A. Deb, S. Singh, K. Seth, S. Pimparkar, B. Bhaskararao,
S. Guin, R. B. Sunoj and D. Maiti, ACS Catal., 2017, 7,
8171–8175.
517 A. Yokota and N. Chatani, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 902–904.
518 M. L. Czyz, D. W. Lupton and A. Polyzos, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2017, 23, 14450–14453.
519 T. Kubo, Y. Aihara and N. Chatani, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44,
1365–1367.
520 X. Yang, Y. Sun, T.-Y. Sun and Y. Rao, Chem. Commun.,
2016, 52, 6423–6426.
521 Y. Aihara and N. Chatani, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4323–4329.
522 P.-X. Ling, S.-L. Fang, X.-S. Yin, Q. Zhang, K. Chen and
B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6351–6354.
523 H. Gang, Z. Shu-Yu, W. A. Nack, L. Qiong and C. Gong,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11124–11128.
524 O. Planas, C. J. Whiteoak, A. Company and X. Ribas, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 4003–4012.
525 D. Kalsi and B. Sundararaju, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 6118–6121.
526 Y. Ran, Y. Yang and L. Zhang, Tetrahedron Lett., 2016, 57,
3322–3325.
527 M. D. Reddy, A. N. Blanton and E. B. Watkins, J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 82, 5080–5095.
528 F.-J. Chen, S. Zhao, F. Hu, K. Chen, Q. Zhang, S.-Q. Zhang
and B.-F. Shi, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 4187–4192.
529 Q. Zhang, K. Chen, W. Rao, Y. Zhang, F.-J. Chen and
B.-F. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13588–13592.
530 S. Zhao, B. Liu, B.-B. Zhan, W.-D. Zhang and B.-F. Shi,
Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 4586–4589.
531 S. Zhao, Y.-J. Liu, S.-Y. Yan, F.-J. Chen, Z.-Z. Zhang and
B.-F. Shi, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3338–3341.
532 Y.-J. Liu, Y.-H. Liu, X.-S. Yin, W.-J. Gu and B.-F. Shi,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 205–209.
533 Y.-J. Liu, Y.-H. Liu, S.-Y. Yan and B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 6388–6391.
534 W.-H. Rao and B.-F. Shi, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2784–2787.
535 H. Wang, Y. Niu, G. Zhang and X.-S. Ye, Tetrahedron Lett.,
2016, 57, 4544–4548.
536 B.-B. Zhan, Y.-H. Liu, F. Hu and B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun.,
2016, 52, 4934–4937.
537 K. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Chen, A. A. Kadi, H.-K. Fun, H. Sun,
Y.
Zhang
and
H.
Lu,
Chem.
Commun.,
2015,
51,
3582–3585.
538 H.-Y. Bai, Z.-G. Ma, M. Yi, J.-B. Lin and S.-Y. Zhang, ACS
Catal., 2017, 7, 2042–2046.
539 B. Liu, Z.-Z. Zhang, X. Li and B.-F. Shi, Org. Chem. Front.,
2016, 3, 897–900.
540 S. Zhao, J. Yuan, Y.-C. Li and B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 12823–12826.
541 D. Dailler, G. Danoun and O. Baudoin, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2015, 54, 4919–4922.
542 Q. Li, Y. Li, W. Hu, R. Hu, G. Li and H. Lu, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2016, 22, 12286–12289.
543 Q. Li, W. Hu, R. Hu, H. Lu and G. Li, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
4676–4679.
544 Y.-H. Liu, Y.-J. Liu, S.-Y. Yan and B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 11650–11653.
545 S. Zhao, F.-J. Chen, B. Liu and B.-F. Shi, Sci. China: Chem.,
2015, 58, 1302–1309.
546 M. Iwasaki, M. Iyanaga, Y. Tsuchiya, Y. Nishimura, W. Li,
Z. Li and Y. Nishihara, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 2459–2462.
547 Y. Yang, W. Hou, L. Qin, J. Du, H. Feng, B. Zhou and Y. Li,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 416–420.
548 S.-Y. Yan, Y.-J. Liu, B. Liu, Y.-H. Liu and B.-F. Shi, Chem.
Commun., 2015, 51, 4069–4072.
549 Y. Li, Y.-J. Liu and B.-F. Shi, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359,
4117–4121.
550 S.-L. Liu, X.-H. Li, S.-S. Zhang, S.-K. Hou, G.-C. Yang,
J.-F. Gong and M.-P. Song, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359,
2241–2246.
551 B. Liu and B.-F. Shi, Synlett, 2016, 2396–2400.
552 J. Miao, K. Yang, M. Kurek and H. Ge, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
3738–3741.
553 X. Zhang, G. He and G. Chen, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016,
14, 5511–5515.
554 G. He, S.-Y. Zhang, W. A. Nack, R. Pearson, J. Rabb-Lynch
and G. Chen, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 6488–6491.
555 M.
Larrosa,
S.
Heiles,
J.
Becker,
B.
Spengler
and
R. Hrdina, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 2163–2171.
556 S.-Y. Zhang, G. He, W. A. Nack, Y. Zhao, Q. Li and
G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2124–2127.
557 R. Odani, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, J. Org. Chem.,
2013, 78, 11045–11052.
558 L.-S. Zhang, G. Chen, X. Wang, Q.-Y. Guo, X.-S. Zhang,
F. Pan, K. Chen and Z.-J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014,
53, 3899–3903.
559 X. Wang, S. Niu, L. Xu, C. Zhang, L. Meng, X. Zhang and
D. Ma, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 246–249.
560 J. Xu, L. Qiao, J. Shen, K. Chai, C. Shen and P. Zhang, Org.
Lett., 2017, 19, 5661–5664.
561 A. M. Martinez, J. Echavarren, I. Alonso, N. Rodriguez,
R. Gomez Arrayas and J. C. Carretero, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6,
5802–5814.
562 A´. M. Martı´nez, N. Rodrı´guez, R. Go´mez-Arraya´s and
J. C. Carretero, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 11669–11676.
563 Z. Li, S. Sun, H. Qiao, F. Yang, Y. Zhu, J. Kang, Y. Wu and
Y. Wu, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 4594–4597.
564 S. Pradhan, P. B. De and T. Punniyamurthy, J. Org. Chem.,
2017, 82, 4883–4890.
565 B.
F.
Van
Steijvoort,
N.
Kaval,
A.
A.
Kulago
and
B. U. W. Maes, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4486–4490.
566 P.-L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wu, C. Li, Q. Lan and X.-S. Wang,
Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3698–3701.
567 J.-W. Xu, Z.-Z. Zhang, W.-H. Rao and B.-F. Shi, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10750–10753.
568 V. Rajkumar, Naveen and S. A. Babu, ChemistrySelect,
2016, 1, 1207–1219.
569 R. Parella and S. A. Babu, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82,
6550–6567.
570 Z.-L. Zang, S. Karnakanti, S. Zhao, P. Hu, Z. Wang,
P.-L. Shao and Y. He, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 1354–1357.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6732 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
571 V. G. Landge, S. P. Midya, J. Rana, D. R. Shinde and
E. Balaraman, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5252–5255.
572 S. He, L. Xiaochong, W. Chenglong, Q. Jingyi, C. Wenyi
and S. Zhizhong, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2017, 6, 1693–1698.
573 J. Lan, H. Xie, X. Lu, Y. Deng, H. Jiang and W. Zeng, Org.
Lett., 2017, 19, 4279–4282.
574 Naveen, V. Rajkumar, S. A. Babu and B. Gopalakrishnan,
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 12197–12211.
575 H. Sahoo, S. Mukherjee, G. S. Grandhi, J. Selvakumar and
M. Baidya, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 2764–2771.
576 K. Takamatsu, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, J. Org.
Chem., 2015, 80, 3242–3249.
577 C. Yamamoto, K. Takamatsu, K. Hirano and M. Miura,
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 9112–9118.
578 D. Li, M. Yu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 5300–5303.
579 Q. Gu, H. H. Al Mamari, K. Graczyk, E. Diers and
L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3868–3871.
580 K. Graczyk, T. Haven and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2015, 21, 8812–8815.
581 K. Graczyk, T. Haven and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2015, 21, 8812–8815.
582 W.
Liu,
G.
Cera,
J.
C.
A.
Oliveira,
Z.
Shen
and
L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 11524–11528.
583 X. Ye, C. Xu, L. Wojtas, N. G. Akhmedov, H. Chen and
X. Shi, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2970–2973.
584 G. Cera, T. Haven and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2017, 23, 3577–3582.
585 G. Cera, T. Haven and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2016, 55, 1484–1488.
586 G. Cera, T. Haven and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2017, 23, 3577–3582.
587 X. Ye, Y. Zhang, Y. He and X. Shi, Tetrahedron, 2016, 72,
2756–2762.
588 H.-L. Wang, M. Shang, S.-Z. Sun, Z.-L. Zhou, B. N. Laforteza,
H.-X. Dai and J.-Q. Yu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1228–1231.
589 B. Liu, X. Huang, X. Wang, Z. Ge and R. Li, Org. Chem.
Front., 2015, 2, 797–800.
590 S.-Z. Sun, M. Shang, H.-L. Wang, H.-X. Lin, H.-X. Dai and
J.-Q. Yu, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 8843–8848.
591 S. Liang, N.-W. Liu and G. Manolikakes, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2016, 358, 159–163.
592 J. Liu, Z. Xue, Z. Zeng, Y.-X. Chen and G. Chen, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2016, 358, 3694–3699.
593 J. Selvakumar, G. S. Grandhi, H. Sahoo and M. Baidya,
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 79361–79365.
594 C. Reddy, N. Bisht, R. Parella and S. A. Babu, J. Org.
Chem., 2016, 81, 12143–12168.
595 S.-L. Liu, X.-H. Li, T.-H. Shi, G.-C. Yang, H.-L. Wang,
J.-F. Gong and M.-P. Song, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017,
2280–2289.
596 D. Mu, F. Gao, G. Chen and G. He, ACS Catal., 2017, 7,
1880–1885.
597 S.
Jerhaoui,
F.
Chahdoura,
C.
Rose,
J.-P.
Djukic,
J. Wencel-Delord and F. Colobert, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016,
22, 17397–17406.
598 S. Jerhaoui, J. Wencel-Delord, F. Colobert and J.-P. Djukic,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 15594–15600.
599 B. Gopalakrishnan, S. Mohan, R. Parella and S. A. Babu,
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 8988–9005.
600 S.
Jerhaoui,
F.
Chahdoura,
C.
Rose,
J.-P.
Djukic,
J. Wencel-Delord and F. Colobert, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016,
22, 17397–17406.
601 D. Mu, F. Gao, G. Chen and G. He, ACS Catal., 2017, 7,
1880–1885.
602 H. Miura, S. Terajima, K. Tsutsui and T. Shishido, J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 82, 1231–1239.
603 R. Mei, H. Wang, S. Warratz, S. A. Macgregor and
L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 6759–6763.
604 L.-B. Zhang, X.-Q. Hao, S.-K. Zhang, Z.-J. Liu, X.-X. Zheng,
J.-F. Gong, J.-L. Niu and M.-P. Song, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2015, 54, 272–275.
605 L.-B. Zhang, S.-K. Zhang, D. Wei, X. Zhu, X.-Q. Hao,
J.-H. Su, J.-L. Niu and M.-P. Song, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
1318–1321.
606 J. Liu, Y. Xie, W. Zeng, D. Lin, Y. Deng and X. Lu, J. Org.
Chem., 2015, 80, 4618–4626.
607 S.-K. Zhang, X.-Y. Yang, X.-M. Zhao, P.-X. Li, J.-L. Niu and
M.-P. Song, Organometallics, 2015, 34, 4331–4339.
608 G. Tan, L. Zhang, X. Liao, Y. Shi, Y. Wu, Y. Yang and
J. You, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 4830–4833.
609 R. Mei, H. Wang, S. Warratz, S. A. MacGregor and
L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 6759–6763.
610 X.-Q. Hao, C. Du, X. Zhu, P.-X. Li, J.-H. Zhang, J.-L. Niu
and M.-P. Song, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 3610–3613.
611 X.-X. Zheng, C. Du, X.-M. Zhao, X. Zhu, J.-F. Suo,
X.-Q. Hao, J.-L. Niu and M.-P. Song, J. Org. Chem., 2016,
81, 4002–4011.
612 L.-B. Zhang, X.-Q. Hao, Z.-J. Liu, X.-X. Zheng, S.-K. Zhang,
J.-L. Niu and M.-P. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54,
10012–10015.
613 C. Wang, C. Chen, J. Zhang, J. Han, Q. Wang, K. Guo,
P. Liu, M. Guan, Y. Yao and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2014, 53, 9884–9888.
614 J. Hu, G. Li, C. Yuan, Z.-B. Huang, D.-Q. Shi and Y. Zhao,
Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5998–6001.
615 L. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Han, Z.-B. Huang and Y. Zhao,
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 5256–5262.
616 C. Chen, M. Guan, J. Zhang, Z. Wen and Y. Zhao, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 3646–3649.
617 C. Wang, L. Zhang, C. Chen, J. Han, Y. Yao and Y. Zhao,
Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4610–4614.
618 J. Han, N. Wang, Z.-B. Huang, Y. Zhao and D.-Q. Shi,
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 6831–6839.
619 J. Han, L. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zheng, X. Chen, Z.-B. Huang,
D.-Q. Shi and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6903–6906.
620 J. Han, N. Wang, Z.-B. Huang, Y. Zhao and D.-Q. Shi, Org.
Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 5112–5116.
621 P. Liu, J. Han, Q. Wang, Z. Huang, D. Shi, R. Zeng and
Y. S. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60646–60649.
622 J. Han, Y. Zheng, C. Wang, Y. Zhu, D.-Q. Shi, R. Zeng, Z.-B.
Huang and Y. Zhao, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 9297–9306.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6733
623 J. Han, Y. Zheng, C. Wang, Y. Zhu, Z.-B. Huang, D.-Q. Shi,
R. Zeng and Y. Zhao, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 5681–5689.
624 M. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Cheng, W. Zhu and A. Zhang,
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3219–3222.
625 N. Chatani, Y. Ie, F. Kakiuchi and S. Murai, J. Org. Chem.,
1997, 62, 2604–2610.
626 N. Chatani, T. Asaumi, S. Yorimitsu, T. Ikeda, F. Kakiuchi
and S. Murai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 10935–10941.
627 N. Chatani, S. Yorimitsu, T. Asaumi, F. Kakiuchi and
S. Murai, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 7557–7560.
628 L. V. Desai, K. L. Hull and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2004, 126, 9542–9543.
629 A. R. Dick, K. L. Hull and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2004, 126, 2300–2301.
630 D. Shabashov and O. Daugulis, Org. Lett., 2005, 7,
3657–3659.
631 S. Schro¨ter, C. Stock and T. Bach, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61,
2245–2267.
632 L.-C. Campeau and K. Fagnou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36,
1058–1068.
633 J. De Houwer and B. U. W. Maes, Synthesis, 2014, 2533–2550.
634 K. Murakami, S. Yamada, T. Kaneda and K. Itami, Chem.
Rev., 2017, 117, 9302–9332.
635 J. A. Leitch and C. G. Frost, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46,
7145–7153.
636 F. Julia´-Herna´ndez, M. Simonetti and I. Larrosa, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11458–11460.
637 G. Meng and M. Szostak, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7251–7256.
638 G. M. Reddy, N. S. S. Rao, P. Satyanarayana and
H. Maheswaran, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105347–105352.
639 Y. Kita, H. Tohma, K. Hatanaka, T. Takada, S. Fujita,
S. Mitoh, H. Sakurai and S. Oka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994,
116, 3684–3691.
640 R. A. Jagtap, V. Soni and B. Punji, ChemSusChem, 2017,
10, 2242–2248.
641 L. Su, D.-D. Guo, B. Li, S.-H. Guo, G.-F. Pan, Y.-R. Gao and
Y.-Q. Wang, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 2001–2008.
642 P. Nareddy, F. Jordan and M. Szostak, Org. Biomol. Chem.,
2017, 15, 4783–4788.
643 Y.-L.
Zou,
Z.-Y.
Wang,
Y.-M.
Feng,
Y.-G.
Li
and
E. A. B. Kantchev, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017, 6274–6282.
644 S.-S. Zhang, C.-Y. Jiang, J.-Q. Wu, X.-G. Liu, Q. Li, Z.-S.
Huang, D. Li and H. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51,
10240–10243.
645 Z. Li, X. Zhou, P. Lu and Y. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81,
9433–9437.
646 H. Wu, T. Liu, M. Cui, Y. Li, J. Jian, H. Wang and Z. Zeng,
Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 536–540.
647 V. K. Tiwari, N. Kamal and M. Kapur, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
1766–1769.
648 A. Schischko, H. Ren, N. Kaplaneris and L. Ackermann,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1576–1580.
649 R. Odani, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10784–10788.
650 D. Das, P. Poddar, S. Maity and R. Samanta, J. Org. Chem.,
2017, 82, 3612–3621.
651 P. Peng, J. Wang, H. Jiang and H. Liu, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
5376–5379.
652 K. Anil Kumar, P. Kannaboina and P. Das, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2017, 15, 5457–5461.
653 D. Zell, S. Warratz, D. Gelman, S. J. Garden and
L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1248–1252.
654 Y. Ebe and T. Nishimura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137,
5899–5902.
655 Y. Ebe, M. Onoda, T. Nishimura and H. Yorimitsu, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5607–5611.
656 Y. Wu and B. Zhou, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 2213–2217.
657 G.-F. Zhang, Y. Li, X.-Q. Xie and C.-R. Ding, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 1216–1219.
658 B. Zhou, Y. Hu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,
54, 13659–13663.
659 Y. Hara, S. Onodera, T. Kochi and F. Kakiuchi, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 4850–4853.
660 J. A. Boerth and J. A. Ellman, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7,
1474–1479.
661 T. J. Potter and J. A. Ellman, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
3838–3841.
662 J. Kim, S.-W. Park, M.-H. Baik and S. Chang, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2015, 137, 13448–13451.
663 H. Cheng, W. Dong, C. A. Dannenberg, S. Dong, Q. Guo
and C. Bolm, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2770–2773.
664 Y.-F. Liang, L. Massignan, W. Liu and L. Ackermann,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14856–14859.
665 S.-L. Liu, Y. Li, J.-R. Guo, G.-C. Yang, X.-H. Li, J.-F. Gong
and M.-P. Song, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 4042–4045.
666 C. Zhu, J. L. Schwarz, S. Cembellı´n, S. Greßies and
F. Glorius, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 437–441.
667 Q. Lu, S. Cembellı´n, S. Greßies, S. Singha, C. G. Daniliuc
and
F.
Glorius,
Angew.
Chem.,
Int.
Ed.,
2018,
57,
1399–1403.
668 W. Miura, K. Hirano and M. Miura, J. Org. Chem., 2017,
82, 5337–5344.
669 M. Barday, C. Janot, N. R. Halcovitch, J. Muir and C. Aı¨ssa,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13117–13121.
670 A. C. B. Burtoloso, R. M. P. Dias and I. A. Leonarczyk, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 2013, 5005–5016.
671 H. Wang, S. Yu, Z. Qi and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
2812–2815.
672 D. Das, A. Biswas, U. Karmakar, S. Chand and R. Samanta,
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 842–848.
673 V. Soni, R. A. Jagtap, R. G. Gonnade and B. Punji, ACS
Catal., 2016, 6, 5666–5672.
674 T. Yamakawa, Y. W. Seto and N. Yoshikai, Synlett, 2015,
340–344.
675 D. Zhao, J. H. Kim, L. Stegemann, C. A. Strassert and
F. Glorius, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4508–4511.
676 J. H. Kim, T. Gensch, D. Zhao, L. Stegemann, C. A. Strassert
and F. Glorius, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10975–10979.
677 X. Cong, S. Zhai and X. Zeng, Org. Chem. Front., 2016, 3,
673–677.
678 G. S. Kumar and M. Kapur, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
1112–1115.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6734 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
679 Q. Lu, F. J. R. Klauck and F. Glorius, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8,
3379–3383.
680 H. Wang, M. M. Lorion and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6339–6342.
681 T. H. Meyer, W. Liu, M. Feldt, A. Wuttke, R. A. Mata and
L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 5443–5447.
682 D. Zell, Q. Bu, M. Feldt and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7408–7412.
683 D. Zell, U. Dhawa, V. Mu¨ller, M. Bursch, S. Grimme and
L. Ackermann, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4209–4213.
684 D. Zell, V. Mu¨ller, U. Dhawa, M. Bursch, R. R. Presa,
S. Grimme and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23,
12145–12148.
685 J. Ni, H. Zhao and A. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3159–3162.
686 X. Xue, J. Xu, L. Zhang, C. Xu, Y. Pan, L. Xu, H. Li and
W. Zhang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 573–583.
687 R. Qiu, L. Zhang, C. Xu, Y. Pan, H. Pang, L. Xu and H. Li,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 1229–1236.
688 S. Wang, J.-T. Hou, M.-L. Feng, X.-Z. Zhang, S.-Y. Chen
and X.-Q. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2709–2712.
689 H. Wang, F. Pesciaioli, J. C. A. Oliveira, S. Warratz and
L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15063–15067.
690 Q. Lu, S. Gressies, F. J. R. Klauck and F. Glorius, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6660–6664.
691 X.-F. Yang, X.-H. Hu, C. Feng and T.-P. Loh, Chem.
Commun., 2015, 51, 2532–2535.
692 Y. Segawa, T. Maekawa and K. Itami, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2015, 54, 66–81.
693 S. Prakash, K. Muralirajan and C.-H. Cheng, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1844–1848.
694 Y.-X. Lao, S.-S. Zhang, X.-G. Liu, C.-Y. Jiang, J.-Q. Wu,
Q. Li, Z.-S. Huang and H. Wang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016,
358, 2186–2191.
695 Y. Yang, B. Li, W. Liu, R. Zhang, L. Yu, Q.-G. Ma, R. Lv,
D. Du and T. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 11335–11345.
696 J. Sanjose´-Orduna, D. Gallego, A. Garcia-Roca, E. Martin,
J. Benet-Buchholz and M. H. Pe´rez-Temprano, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12137–12141.
697 C.-Z. Luo, P. Gandeepan, Y.-C. Wu, C.-H. Tsai and
C.-H. Cheng, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4837–4841.
698 Y. R. Han, S.-H. Shim, D.-S. Kim and C.-H. Jun, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 2941–2944.
699 N. S. Upadhyay, J. Jayakumar and C.-H. Cheng, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2016, 358, 3381–3386.
700 B. Butschke and H. Schwarz, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 308–326.
701 D. Ghorai, C. Dutta and J. Choudhury, ACS Catal., 2016, 6,
709–713.
702 R. Morioka, K. Nobushige, T. Satoh, K. Hirano and
M. Miura, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3130–3133.
703 T. Li, Z. Wang, W.-B. Qin and T.-B. Wen, ChemCatChem,
2016, 8, 2146–2154.
704 T. Li, Z. Wang, M. Zhang, H.-J. Zhang and T.-B. Wen,
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6777–6780.
705 Y. Li, F. Xie and X. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 715–722.
706 S. M. Khake, V. Soni, R. G. Gonnade and B. Punji,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 2907–2914.
707 A. Funayama, T. Satoh and M. Miura, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2005, 127, 15354–15355.
708 S. B. Wang, Q. Gu and S. L. You, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82,
11829–11835.
709 T. Li, Z. Wang, K. Xu, W. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Mao, Y. Guo,
X. Ge and F. Pan, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 1064–1067.
710 T. Li, C. Fu, Q. Ma, Z. Sang, Y. Yang, H. Yang, R. Lv and
B. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 10263–10270.
711 (a) J. Li and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,
54, 3635–3638; (b) A. B. Pawar and S. Chang, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 660–663.
712 C. Qi, X. Hu and H. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53,
7994–7997.
713 Z.-B. Chen, F.-L. Zhang, Q. Yuan, H.-F. Chen, Y.-M. Zhu
and J.-K. Shen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 64234–64238.
714 W. Liu, S. C. Richter, R. Mei, M. Feldt and L. Ackermann,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 17958–17961.
715 M. Chaitanya and P. Anbarasan, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
3695–3700.
716 M. Chaitanya and P. Anbarasan, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
3766–3769.
717 Y.-F. Liang, X. Li, X. Wang, Y. Yan, P. Feng and N. Jiao,
ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1956–1963.
718 Y.-S. Bao, D. Zhang, M. Jia and B. Zhaorigetu, Green
Chem., 2016, 18, 2072–2077.
719 X. Liu, Z. Yi, J. Wang and G. Liu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5,
10641–10646.
720 F. Xiao, S. Chen, H. Huang and G.-J. Deng, Eur. J. Org.
Chem., 2015, 7919–7925.
721 S. Yu, Y. Li, L. Kong, X. Zhou, G. Tang, Y. Lan and X. Li,
ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7744–7748.
722 S. Maiti, L. Burgula, G. Chakraborti and J. Dash, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 332–340.
723 Z. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhu and X.-F. Wu, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2016, 358, 2855–2859.
724 F. Zhou, D.-S. Wang, X. Guan and T. G. Driver, Angew.
Chem., 2017, 129, 4601–4605.
725 W. Liu, J. Bang, Y. Zhang and L. Ackermann, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14137–14140.
726 J. R. Hummel, J. A. Boerth and J. A. Ellman, Chem. Rev.,
2017, 117, 9163–9227.
727 M. Yoshida, K. Kawai, R. Tanaka, T. Yoshino and
S. Matsunaga, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5974–5977.
728 X.-G. Liu, Q. Li and H. Wang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359,
1942–1946.
729 P. Sharma, S. Rohilla and N. Jain, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
4116–4122.
730 X.-S. Zhang, G. Li, X.-G. Zhang and X.-H. Zhang, Tetra-
hedron, 2015, 71, 5458–5464.
731 F. Wang, X. Yu, Z. Qi and X. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22,
511–516.
732 T. Liu, W. Zhou and J. Wu, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 6638–6641.
733 Q. Wang, F. Xie and X. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
8361–8366.
734 P. Peng, J. Wang, C. Li, W. Zhu, H. Jiang and H. Liu, RSC
Adv., 2016, 6, 57441–57445.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6735
735 C. Cheng and J. F. Hartwig, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8946–8975.
736 A. C. Shaikh, D. S. Ranade, S. Thorat, A. Maity, P. P.
Kulkarni, R. G. Gonnade, P. Munshi and N. T. Patil,
Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16115–16118.
737 V. F. Pais, M. M. Alcaide, R. Lo´pez-Rodrı´guez, D. Collado,
F. Na´jera, E. Pe´rez-Inestrosa, E. A´lvarez, J. M. Lassaletta,
R. Ferna´ndez, A. Ros and U. Pischel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015,
21, 15369–15376.
738 N. Kano, M. Yamamura and T. Kawashima, Dalton Trans.,
2015, 44, 16256–16265.
739 Y. Yoshigoe and Y. Kuninobu, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
3450–3453.
740 S. D. Sarkar, N. Y. P. Kumar and L. Ackermann,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 84–87.
741 W. Miura, K. Hirano and M. Miura, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
3742–3745.
742 S. Okada, T. Namikoshi, S. Watanabe and M. Murata,
ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1531–1534.
743 L.
Rubio-Perez,
M.
Iglesias,
J.
Munarriz,
V.
Polo,
V. Passarelli, J. J. Perez-Torrente and L. A. Oro, Chem.
Sci., 2017, 8, 4811–4822.
744 T. Wakaki, M. Kanai and Y. Kuninobu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
1758–1761.
745 X.-H. Hu, X.-F. Yang and T.-P. Loh, ACS Catal., 2016, 6,
5930–5934.
746 A. A. Kantak, L. Marchetti and B. DeBoef, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 3574–3577.
747 M. A. Ali, X. Yao, H. Sun and H. Lu, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
1513–1516.
748 P. Patel and S. Chang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 853–858.
749 G. Li, C. Jia, Q. Chen, K. Sun, F. Zhao, H. Wu, Z. Wang,
Y. Lv and X. Chen, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357,
1311–1315.
750 Y. Park, K. T. Park, J. G. Kim and S. Chang, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4534–4542.
751 Y. Park, S. Jee, J. G. Kim and S. Chang, Org. Process Res.
Dev., 2015, 19, 1024–1029.
752 J. Park and S. Chang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54,
14103–14107.
753 Y. Liang, Y.-F. Liang, C. Tang, Y. Yuan and N. Jiao, Chem.
– Eur. J., 2015, 21, 16395–16399.
754 R. Mei, J. Loup and L. Ackermann, ACS Catal., 2016, 6,
793–797.
755 S.-B. Wang, Q. Gu and S.-L. You, Organometallics, 2017,
36, 4359–4362.
756 D. Das and R. Samanta, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2018, 360,
379–384.
757 M. A. Ali, X. Yao, G. Li and H. Lu, Org. Lett., 2016, 18,
1386–1389.
758 L. Shi and B. Wang, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2820–2823.
759 S. Yu, Y. Li, X. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Kong and X. Li, Org.
Lett., 2016, 18, 2812–2815.
760 C. S. Azad and A. K. Narula, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 100223–100227.
761 Y. Wu and B. Zhou, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3532–3535.
762 S. K. Santra, A. Banerjee, N. Khatun and B. K. Patel, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 2015, 350–356.
763 S. Korwar, K. Brinkley, A. R. Siamaki, B. F. Gupton and
K. C. Ellis, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1782–1785.
764 Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Luo, L. Xiao, Y. Huang, X. Li,
Q. Peng, Y. Liu, B. Yang, C. Zhu, X. Zhou and J. Zhang,
Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 6470–6473.
765 J. Dong, P. Liu and P. Sun, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
2925–2929.
766 T. Yamaguchi, E. Yamaguchi, N. Tada and A. Itoh, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2017–2021.
767 W. Lu, H. Xu and Z. Shen, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15,
1261–1267.
768 P. Das, D. Saha, D. Saha and J. Guin, ACS Catal., 2016, 6,
6050–6054.
769 N. Khatun, A. Banerjee, S. K. Santra, W. Ali and B. K. Patel,
RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 36461–36466.
770 S. Han, S. Sharma, J. Park, M. Kim, Y. Shin, N. K. Mishra,
J. J. Bae, J. H. Kwak, Y. H. Jung and I. S. Kim, J. Org. Chem.,
2014, 79, 275–284.
771 T. Okada, K. Nobushige, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 1150–1153.
772 P. Zhang, L. Hong, G. Li and R. Wang, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2015, 357, 345–349.
773 V. Pascanu, F. Carson, M. V. Solano, J. Su, X. Zou,
M. J. Johansson and B. Martı´n-Matute, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2016, 22, 3729–3737.
774 H. Fei and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137,
2191–2194.
775 G. Zhang, S. Sun, F. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Kang, Y. Wu and
Y. Wu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 443–450.
776 F. Xie, Z. Zhang, X. Yu, G. Tang and X. Li, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7405–7409.
777 J. C. K. Chu and T. Rovis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57,
62–101.
778 G. Qiu and J. Wu, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 169–178.
779 D. Kalyani, N. R. Deprez, L. V. Desai and M. S. Sanford,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7330–7331.
780 F. Kakiuchi, K. Tsuchiya, M. Matsumoto, E. Mizushima
and N. Chatani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12792–12793.
781 B. Liu, P. Hu, X. Zhou, D. Bai, J. Chang and X. Li, Org.
Lett., 2017, 19, 2086–2089.
782 S. Han, J. Park, S. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. Sharma, N. K. Mishra,
Y. H. Jung and I. S. Kim, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 4666–4669.
783 S. Kim, S. Han, J. Park, S. Sharma, N. K. Mishra, H. Oh,
J. H. Kwak and I. S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53,
3006–3009.
784 W. Hou, Y. Yang, Y. Wu, H. Feng, Y. Li and B. Zhou,
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9672–9675.
785 S.-Y. Yan, P.-X. Ling and B.-F. Shi, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017,
359, 2912–2917.
786 X. Wang, D.-G. Yu and F. Glorius, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2015, 54, 10280–10283.
787 P. Gao, W. Guo, J. Xue, Y. Zhao, Y. Yuan, Y. Xia and Z. Shi,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12231–12240.
788 J. H. Kim, S. Greßies, M. Boultadakis-Arapinis, C. Daniliuc
and F. Glorius, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7652–7656.
789 G. Tan and J. You, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 4782–4785.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6736 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
790 X. Zhou, S. Yu, L. Kong and X. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6,
647–651.
791 S. Han, W. Ma, Z. Zhang, L. Liu, M. Tang and J. Li, Asian
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 6, 1014–1018.
792 M. Sen, B. Emayavaramban, N. Barsu, J. R. Premkumar
and B. Sundararaju, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2792–2796.
793 L. Kong, B. Liu, X. Zhou, F. Wang and X. Li, Chem.
Commun., 2017, 53, 10326–10329.
794 V. G. Landge, M. K. Sahoo, S. P. Midya, G. Jaiswal and
E. Balaraman, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 15382–15386.
795 L. Kong, X. Zhou, Y. Xu and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
3644–3647.
796 B. Liu, B. Li and B. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51,
16334–16337.
797 H. Wang, G. Tang and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,
54, 13049–13052.
798 N. Barsu, M. A. Rahman, M. Sen and B. Sundararaju,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 9135–9138.
799 X. Huang, Y. Wang, J. Lan and J. You, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2015, 54, 9404–9408.
800 T. Jeong, N. K. Mishra, P. Dey, H. Oh, S. Han, S. H. Lee,
H. S. Kim, J. Park and I. S. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53,
11197–11200.
801 X. Zhang, R. Wu, W. Liu, D.-W. Qian, J. Yang, P. Jiang and
Q.-Z. Zheng, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 4789–4793.
802 S. Yu, G. Tang, Y. Li, X. Zhou, Y. Lan and X. Li, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8696–8700.
803 C. Tang, M. Zou, J. Liu, X. Wen, X. Sun, Y. Zhang and
N. Jiao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 11165–11169.
804 W. Zhang, S. Ren, J. Zhang and Y. Liu, J. Org. Chem., 2015,
80, 5973–5978.
805 G. S. Kumar, J. W. Boyle, C. Tejo and P. W. H. Chan,
Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 385–389.
806 J. De Houwer, K. Abbaspour Tehrani and B. U. W. Maes,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2745–2748.
807 H.
Sterckx,
J.
De
Houwer,
C.
Mensch,
I.
Caretti,
K. A. Tehrani, W. A. Herrebout, S. Van Doorslaer and
B. U. W. Maes, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 346–357.
808 G. Wang, L. Liu, H. Wang, Y.-S. Ding, J. Zhou, S. Mao and
P. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 91–94.
809 E. A. Mitchell, A. Peschiulli, N. Lefevre, L. Meerpoel and
B. U. W. Maes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 10092–10142.
810 W. Li, X. Huang and J. You, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 666–668.
811 L. Kong, S. Yu, G. Tang, H. Wang, X. Zhou and X. Li, Org.
Lett., 2016, 18, 3802–3805.
812 K. Muralirajan, S. Prakash and C.-H. Cheng, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2017, 359, 513–518.
813 Y. Unoh, T. Satoh, K. Hirano and M. Miura, ACS Catal.,
2015, 5, 6634–6639.
814 Z. Qi and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8995–9000.
815 C. Sollert, K. Devaraj, A. Orthaber, P. J. Gates and
L. T. Pilarski, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 5380–5386.
816 X. Zhu, J.-H. Su, C. Du, Z.-L. Wang, C.-J. Ren, J.-L. Niu and
M.-P. Song, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 596–599.
817 X. Zhou, Y. Pan and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
8163–8167.
818 M. Gao, Y. Yang, H. Chen and B. Zhou, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2018, 360, 100–105.
819 S.-S. Zhang, J. Xia, J.-Q. Wu, X.-G. Liu, C.-J. Zhou, E. Lin,
Q. Li, S.-L. Huang and H. Wang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
5868–5871.
820 P. Lu, C. Feng and T.-P. Loh, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3210–3213.
821 Y. Xu, X. Zhou, G. Zheng and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
5256–5259.
822 Z. Zhang, S. Han, M. Tang, L. Ackermann and J. Li, Org.
Lett., 2017, 19, 3315–3318.
823 S.-Y. Yan, Z.-Z. Zhang and B.-F. Shi, Chem. Commun.,
2017, 53, 10287–10290.
824 J. Xia, L. Kong, X. Zhou, G. Zheng and X. Li, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 5972–5975.
825 Z. Qi, L. Kong and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 4392–4395.
826 M. Choi, J. Park, S. Sharma, H. Jo, S. Han, M. Jeon,
N. K. Mishra, S. H. Han, J. S. Lee and I. S. Kim, J. Org.
Chem., 2016, 81, 4771–4778.
827 X. Jiang, J. Chen, W. Zhu, K. Cheng, Y. Liu, W.-K. Su and
C. Yu, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 10665–10672.
828 S.-Y. Chen, Q. Li and H. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82,
11173–11181.
829 X. Zhou, Y. Luo, L. Kong, Y. Xu, G. Zheng, Y. Lan and
X. Li, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7296–7304.
830 L. Shi, X. Zhong, H. She, Z. Lei and F. Li, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 7136–7139.
831 C. Wang, A. Wang and M. Rueping, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2017, 56, 9935–9938.
832 S.-Y. Chen, X.-L. Han, J.-Q. Wu, Q. Li, Y. Chen and
H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9939–9943.
833 X. Zhou, Z. Fan, Z. Zhang, P. Lu and Y. Wang, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 4706–4709.
834 M. Moselage, N. Sauermann, S. C. Richter and L. Ackermann,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6352–6355.
835 S.-H. Cai, L. Ye, D.-X. Wang, Y.-Q. Wang, L.-J. Lai, C. Zhu,
C. Feng and T.-P. Loh, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8731–8734.
836 L. Kong, X. Zhou and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 6320–6323.
837 N. Sauermann, M. J. Gonza´lez and L. Ackermann, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 5316–5319.
838 Z. Ruan, N. Sauermann, E. Manoni and L. Ackermann,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3172–3176.
839 Z.-Z. Zhang, B. Liu, C.-Y. Wang and B.-F. Shi, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 4094–4097.
840 Y. Wu, Y. Yang, B. Zhou and Y. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
1946–1951.
841 D. Kang and S. Hong, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1938–1941.
842 N. K. Mishra, T. Jeong, S. Sharma, Y. Shin, S. Han, J. Park,
J. S. Oh, J. H. Kwak, Y. H. Jung and I. S. Kim, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2015, 357, 1293–1298.
843 G. Kumar and G. Sekar, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 28292–28298.
844 C. Li, W. Zhu, S. Shu, X. Wu and H. Liu, Eur. J. Org. Chem.,
2015, 3743–3750.
845 Y. Zhao, U. K. Sharma, F. Schro¨der, N. Sharma, G. Song
and E. V. Van der Eycken, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 32559–32563.
846 U. K. Sharma, H. P. L. Gemoets, F. Schro¨der, T. Noe¨l and
E. V. Van der Eycken, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3818–3823.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6737
847 M. K. Manna, G. Bairy and R. Jana, Org. Biomol. Chem.,
2017, 15, 5899–5903.
848 T. Jeong, S. Han, N. K. Mishra, S. Sharma, S.-Y. Lee,
J. S. Oh, J. H. Kwak, Y. H. Jung and I. S. Kim, J. Org.
Chem., 2015, 80, 7243–7250.
849 J. Xu, N. Sharma, U. K. Sharma, Z. Li, G. Song and
E. V. Van der Eycken, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357,
2615–2621.
850 A. S. Tsai, M. E. Tauchert, R. G. Bergman and J. A. Ellman,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1248–1250.
851 J. Shi, B. Zhou, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Org. Biomol. Chem.,
2012, 10, 8953–8955.
852 B. Sun, T. Yoshino, S. Matsunaga and M. Kanai, Chem.
Commun., 2015, 51, 4659–4661.
853 M. Jeon, N. K. Mishra, U. De, S. Sharma, Y. Oh, M. Choi,
H. Jo, R. Sachan, H. S. Kim and I. S. Kim, J. Org. Chem.,
2016, 81, 9878–9885.
854 N. K. Mishra, M. Jeon, Y. Oh, H. Jo, J. Park, S. Han,
S. Sharma, S. H. Han, Y. H. Jung and I. S. Kim, Org. Chem.
Front., 2017, 4, 241–249.
855 H. Li, J. Jie, S. Wu, X. Yang and H. Xu, Org. Chem. Front.,
2017, 4, 250–254.
856 L. Zhu, X. Cao, R. Qiu, T. Iwasaki, V. P. Reddy, X. Xu,
S.-F. Yin and N. Kambe, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 39358–39365.
857 R. Qiu, V. P. Reddy, T. Iwasaki and N. Kambe, J. Org.
Chem., 2015, 80, 367–374.
858 W. Xie, B. Li and B. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81,
396–403.
859 T. Gensch, F. J. R. Klauck and F. Glorius, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11287–11291.
860 P. Gandeepan, J. Koeller and L. Ackermann, ACS Catal.,
2017, 7, 1030–1034.
861 C. K. Jana, S. Grimme and A. Studer, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009,
15, 9078–9084.
862 V. Smout, A. Peschiulli, S. Verbeeck, E. A. Mitchell,
W. Herrebout, P. Bultinck, C. M. L. Vande Velde,
D. Berthelot, L. Meerpoel and B. U. W. Maes, J. Org.
Chem., 2013, 78, 9803–9814.
863 S. Pan, K. Endo and T. Shibata, Org. Lett., 2011, 13,
4692–4695.
864 S. J. Pastine, D. V. Gribkov and D. Sames, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2006, 128, 14220–14221.
865 J.-H. Chu, P.-S. Lin and M.-J. Wu, Organometallics, 2010,
29, 4058–4065.
866 M. Tobisu, J. Zhao, H. Kinuta, T. Furukawa, T. Igarashi
and N. Chatani, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 2417–2421.
867 H. Kinuta, M. Tobisu and N. Chatani, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2015, 137, 1593–1600.
868 J. Li and Z.-X. Wang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3723–3726.
869 C. Huang, N. Chernyak, A. S. Dudnik and V. Gevorgyan,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 1285–1305.
870 A. Garcı´a-Rubia, M. A´. Ferna´ndez-Iba´n˜ez, R. Go´mez
Arraya´s and J. C. Carretero, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17,
3567–3570.
871 M. Sun, Z. Wang, J. Wang, P. Guo, X. Chen and Y.-M. Li,
Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 10585–10588.
872 H. Richter, S. Beckendorf and O. G. Manchen˜o, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 295–302.
873 N. K. Mishra, M. Choi, H. Jo, Y. Oh, S. Sharma, S. H. Han,
T. Jeong, S. Han, S.-Y. Lee and I. S. Kim, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 17229–17232.
874 H. Jiang, S. Gao, J. Xu, X. Wu, A. Lin and H. Yao, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 188–194.
875 G.-D. Tang, C.-L. Pan and X. Li, Org. Chem. Front., 2016, 3,
87–90.
876 Z. Ruan, S. Lackner and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2016, 55, 3153–3157.
877 Z. Ruan, S. Lackner and L. Ackermann, ACS Catal., 2016,
6, 4690–4693.
878 T. Mu¨ller and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22,
14151–14154.
879 S. Yang, B. Feng and Y. Yang, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82,
12430–12438.
880 L. Wang, Z. Yang, M. Yang, R. Zhang, C. Kuai and X. Cui,
Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 8302–8307.
881 G. G. Pawar, A. Brahmanandan and M. Kapur, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 448–451.
882 D. Nageswar Rao, S. Rasheed, G. Raina, Q. N. Ahmed,
C. K. Jaladanki, P. V. Bharatam and P. Das, J. Org. Chem.,
2017, 82, 7234–7244.
883 M. Spettel, R. Pollice and M. Schnu¨rch, Org. Lett., 2017,
19, 4287–4290.
884 K. Yu, Y. Liang, B. Li and B. Wang, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2016, 358, 661–666.
885 S. Bai, X. Chen, X. Hu, Y. Deng, H. Jiang and W. Zeng, Org.
Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 3638–3647.
886 P. V. Reddy, M. Annapurna, P. Srinivas, P. R. Likhar and
M. Lakshmi Kantam, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 3399–3404.
887 X. Hu, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Deng, H. Zeng, H. Jiang and
W. Zeng, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3474–3477.
888 Z.-J. Wu, K. L. Huang and Z.-Z. Huang, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2017, 15, 4978–4983.
889 J. Xia, X. Yang, Y. Li and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
3243–3246.
890 M. Ravi, S. Allu and K. C. K. Swamy, J. Org. Chem., 2017,
82, 2355–2363.
891 L. Wang, Y. Yu, M. Yang, C. Kuai, D. Cai, J. Yu and X. Cui,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 3818–3825.
892 J.-H. Chu, S.-T. Chen, M.-F. Chiang and M.-J. Wu,
Organometallics, 2015, 34, 953–966.
893 D. C. McAteer, E. Javed, L. Huo and S. Huo, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 1606–1609.
894 L. Wang, Z. Yang, M. Yang, M. Tian, C. Kuai and X. Cui,
Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 2634–2643.
895 L. Wang, L. Pan, Y. Huang, Q. Chen and M. He, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 3113–3118.
896 K. Raghuvanshi, K. Rauch and L. Ackermann, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2015, 21, 1790–1794.
897 Y. Xu, P. Liu, S.-L. Li and P. Sun, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80,
1269–1274.
898 C. Gao, H. Li, M. Liu, J. Ding, X. Huang, H. Wu, W. Gao
and G. Wu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 46636–46643.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6738 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
899 S.-J. Lou, Q. Chen, Y.-F. Wang, D.-Q. Xu, X.-H. Du, J.-Q. He,
Y.-J. Mao and Z.-Y. Xu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2846–2849.
900 D. Sarkar and V. Gevorgyan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22,
11201–11204.
901 Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, D. Chen and Y. Zhang, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2016, 14, 4585–4589.
902 Y. Wang and V. Gevorgyan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017,
56, 3191–3195.
903 D. Sarkar, A. V. Gulevich, F. S. Melkonyan and V. Gevorgyan,
ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6792–6801.
904 J.
Guilbaud,
M.
Labonde,
H.
Cattey,
S.
Contal,
C. Montalbetti, N. Pirio, J. Roger and J.-C. Hierso, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 3792–3804.
905 H. Andersson, R. Olsson and F. Almqvist, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2011, 9, 337–346.
906 G. Yan, A. J. Borah and M. Yang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014,
356, 2375–2394.
907 Y. Wang and L. Zhang, Synthesis, 2015, 289–305.
908 H. Sterckx, C. Sambiagio, V. Me´dran-Navarrete and B. U. W.
Maes, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 3226–3236.
909 H. Hwang, J. Kim, J. Jeong and S. Chang, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2014, 136, 10770–10776.
910 S. Yu, B. Wan and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 58–61.
911 X. Chen, X. Cui and Y. Wu, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2411–2414.
912 X. Chen, X. Cui and Y. Wu, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 3722–3725.
913 D. E. Stephens, J. Lakey-Beitia, A. C. Atesin, T. A. Ates-in,
G. Chavez, H. D. Arman and O. V. Larionov, ACS Catal.,
2015, 5, 167–175.
914 D. E. Stephens, J. Lakey-Beitia, G. Chavez, C. Ilie, H. D. Arman
and O. V. Larionov, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9507–9510.
915 J. Jeong, P. Patel, H. Hwang and S. Chang, Org. Lett., 2014,
16, 4598–4601.
916 R. Sharma, I. Kumar, R. Kumar and U. Sharma, Adv.
Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 3022–3028.
917 X. Zhang, Z. Qi and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53,
10794–10798.
918 U. Sharma, Y. Park and S. Chang, J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79,
9899–9906.
919 N. Barsu, M. Sen, J. R. Premkumar and B. Sundararaju,
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1338–1341.
920 D. Kalsi, R. A. Laskar, N. Barsu, J. R. Premkumar and
B. Sundararaju, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 4198–4201.
921 B. Wang, C. Li and H. Liu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359,
3029–3034.
922 T. Shibata and Y. Matsuo, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356,
1516–1520.
923 R. Sharma, R. Kumar, I. Kumar and U. Sharma, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 2015, 7519–7528.
924 T. Asaumi, N. Chatani, T. Matsuo, F. Kakiuchi and
S. Murai, J. Org. Chem., 2003, 68, 7538–7540.
925 A. Armstrong, L. H. Jones, J. D. Knight and R. D. Kelsey,
Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 713–716.
926 N. Gulia and O. Daugulis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
3630–3634.
927 M. Moselage, J. Li, F. Kramm and L. Ackermann, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5341–5344.
928 C. Yuan, G. Tu and Y. Zhao, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 356–359.
929 C. J. Teskey, S. M. A. Sohel, D. L. Bunting, S. G. Modha
and M. F. Greaney, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
5263–5266.
930 N. Barsu, B. Emayavaramban and B. Sundararaju, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 4370–4374.
931 J. A. Boerth, J. R. Hummel and J. A. Ellman, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12650–12654.
932 A. Wangweerawong, J. R. Hummel, R. G. Bergman and
J. A. Ellman, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 1547–1557.
933 Y. Takahama, Y. Shibata and K. Tanaka, Org. Lett., 2016,
18, 2934–2937.
934 S. Shome and S. P. Singh, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015,
6025–6032.
935 M. Sen, P. Dahiya, J. R. Premkumar and B. Sundararaju,
Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 3699–3702.
936 J. Li and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54,
8551–8554.
937 J. R. Hummel and J. A. Ellman, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2400–2403.
938 S. Shu, Z. Fan, Q. Yao and A. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2016,
81, 5263–5269.
939 C. Testa, J. Roger, S. Scheib, P. Fleurat-Lessard and
J.-C. Hierso, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2913–2923.
940 X.-M. Fan, Y. Guo, Y.-D. Li, K.-K. Yu, H.-W. Liu, D.-H. Liao
and Y.-F. Ji, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2016, 5, 499–505.
941 J. Shi, J. Zhou, Y. Yan, J. Jia, X. Liu, H. Song, H. E. Xu and
W. Yi, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 668–671.
942 N. Umeda, K. Hirano, T. Satoh, N. Shibata, H. Sato and
M. Miura, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 13–24.
943 D. L. Davies, C. E. Ellul, S. A. Macgregor, C. L. McMullin
and K. Singh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9659–9669.
944 J. Jie, H. Li, S. Wu, Q. Chai, H. Wang and X. Yang, RSC
Adv., 2017, 7, 20548–20552.
945 A. G. Algarra, D. L. Davies, Q. Khamker, S. A. Macgregor,
C. L. McMullin, K. Singh and B. Villa-Marcos, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2015, 21, 3087–3096.
946 W. Yang, S. Ye, D. Fanning, T. Coon, Y. Schmidt,
P. Krenitsky, D. Stamos and J.-Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2015, 54, 2501–2504.
947 W. Yang, S. Ye, Y. Schmidt, D. Stamos and J.-Q. Yu, Chem.
– Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7059–7062.
948 F. Zhao, Y. Liu, S. Yang, K. Xie and Y. Jiang, Org. Chem.
Front., 2017, 4, 1112–1115.
949 S. Zhao, F. Wu, Y. Ma, W. Chen, M. Liu and H. Wu, Org.
Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 2550–2555.
950 F. Zhao, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Xie and Y. Jiang, Eur. J. Org.
Chem., 2016, 5971–5979.
951 A. Irastorza, J. M. Aizpurua and A. Correa, Org. Lett., 2016,
18, 1080–1083.
952 A. Goitia, E. Gomez-Bengoa and A. Correa, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 962–965.
953 T. L. Mindt,
H. Struthers,
L. Brans,
T. Anguelov,
C. Schweinsberg, V. Maes, D. Tourwe´ and R. Schibli,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15096–15097.
954 N. Belskaya, J. Subbotina and S. Lesogorova, in Chemistry
of 1,2,3-triazoles, ed. W. Dehaen and V. A. Bakulev,
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6739
Springer
International
Publishing,
Cham,
2015,
pp. 51–116, DOI: 10.1007/7081_2014_125.
955 C. Premi, S. S. Patel and N. Jain, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016,
3788–3795.
956 X. Yu, Q. Ma, S. Lv, J. Li, C. Zhang, L. Hai, Q. Wang and
Y. Wu, Org. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 2184–2190.
957 X. Wang, C. Zhang, J. Li, C. Jiang, F. Su, Z. Zhan, L. Hai,
Z. Chen and Y. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 68929–68933.
958 B. Zhu, X. Cui, C. Pi, D. Chen and Y. Wu, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2016, 358, 326–332.
959 V.
Gayakhe,
Y.
S.
Sanghvi,
I.
J.
S.
Fairlamb
and
A. R. Kapdi, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11944–11960.
960 L. Liang, M.-S. Xie, H.-X. Wang, H.-Y. Niu, G.-R. Qu and
H.-M. Guo, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 5966–5973.
961 Y. Bunno, N. Murakami, Y. Suzuki, M. Kanai, T. Yoshino
and S. Matsunaga, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 2216–2219.
962 A. B. Pawar and D. M. Lade, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14,
3275–3283.
963 M. Yu, Z. Wang, M. Tian, C. Lu, S. Li and H. Du, J. Org.
Chem., 2016, 81, 3435–3442.
964 S.-S. Li, W.-H. Li, G.-T. Zhang, Y.-Q. Xia, C.-F. Liu, F. Su,
X.-M. Zhang and L. Dong, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14,
7859–7863.
965 B. Liu, R. Li, W. Zhan, X. Wang, Z. Ge and R. Li, RSC Adv.,
2016, 6, 48205–48211.
966 W.-H. Li, L. Wu, S.-S. Li, C.-F. Liu, G.-T. Zhang and
L. Dong, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 17926–17929.
967 R. Morioka, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45,
682–684.
968 B. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Ge and R. Li, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016,
14, 2944–2949.
969 A. Mishra, T. K. Vats and I. Deb, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81,
6525–6534.
970 M. Jeon, J. Park, P. Dey, Y. Oh, H. Oh, S. Han, S. H. Um,
H. S. Kim, N. K. Mishra and I. S. Kim, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2017, 359, 3471–3478.
971 A. Mishra, T. K. Vats, M. P. Nair, A. Das and I. Deb, J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 82, 12406–12415.
972 C.-F. Liu, G.-T. Zhang, J.-S. Sun and L. Dong, Org. Biomol.
Chem., 2017, 15, 2902–2905.
973 S.-S. Li, C.-F. Liu, Y.-Q. Xia, W.-H. Li, G.-T. Zhang, X.-M.
Zhang and L. Dong, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 5214–5218.
974 S.-S. Li, C.-Q. Wang, H. Lin, X.-M. Zhang and L. Dong,
Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3018–3021.
975 S.-S. Li, C.-F. Liu, G.-T. Zhang, Y.-Q. Xia, W.-H. Li and
L. Dong, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 415–418.
976 S.-S. Li, H. Lin, C.-F. Liu, Y.-Q. Xia, X.-M. Zhang and
L. Dong, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 1595–1601.
977 F. Yang, J. Yu, Y. Liu and J. Zhu, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
2885–2888.
978 Y. Nishii, A.-K. Bachon, S. Moon, C. Bolm and M. Miura,
Chem. Lett., 2017, 46, 1347–1349.
979 X. Yu, K. Chen, F. Yang, S. Zha and J. Zhu, Org. Lett., 2016,
18, 5412–5415.
980 Y. Xiaolong, C. Kehao, W. Qi, G. Shan, Z. Shanke and
Z. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5222–5226.
981 T. Noguchi, Y. Nishii and M. Miura, Chem. Lett., 2017, 46,
1512–1514.
982 M. Suresh Babu and K. M. Lokanatha Rai, Tetrahedron
Lett., 2004, 45, 7969–7970.
983 T. G. Gant and A. I. Meyers, Tetrahedron, 1994, 50,
2297–2360.
984 T. M. M. Maiden, S. Swanson, P. A. Procopiou and
J. P. A. Harrity, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14342–14346.
985 R. Mei and L. Ackermann, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358,
2443–2448.
986 M. Tobisu, K. Yasui, Y. Aihara and N. Chatani, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1877–1880.
987 Q. Zhou, J.-F. Zhang, H. Cao, R. Zhong and X.-F. Hou,
J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 12169–12180.
988 T. M. M. Maiden, S. Swanson, P. A. Procopiou and
J. P. A. Harrity, J. Org. Chem., 2016, 81, 10641–10650.
989 K.
Seth,
M.
Nautiyal,
P.
Purohit,
N.
Parikh
and
A. K. Chakraborti, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 191–194.
990 K. Kon, H. Suzuki, K. Takada, Y. Kohari, T. Namikoshi,
S. Watanabe and M. Murata, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8,
2202–2205.
991 F. Babudri, G. Bartoli, F. Ciminale, S. Florio and
G. Ingrosso, Tetrahedron Lett., 1984, 25, 2047–2050.
992 J. Yan, Y. Zhou, N. Zhang, H. Chen, X. He, S. Xiao and
K. Zheng, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2017, 43, 5395–5402.
993 S. S. Ramos, L. V. Reis, R. E. F. Boto, P. F. Santos and
P. Almeida, Tetrahedron Lett., 2013, 54, 5441–5444.
994 J. Rashkova, P. Tzvetkova, S. Simova, L. Viteva and
T. Gospodova, Dyes Pigm., 2009, 82, 360–364.
995 L. Viteva, T. Gospodova, J. Rashkova, I. Abrahams,
I. Timtcheva, S. Simova, M. R. Mazieres and J. G. Wolf,
Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2007, 3102–3114.
996 B. V. Pipaliya and A. K. Chakraborti, ChemCatChem, 2017,
9, 4191–4198.
997 B. V. Pipaliya and A. K. Chakraborti, J. Org. Chem., 2017,
82, 3767–3780.
998 P. Ranjan Mohanta, A. Banerjee, S. Kumar Santra, A. Behera
and B. K. Patel, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358, 2047–2052.
999 B. Vinayak, A. Ashok and M. Chandrasekharam, Eur.
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 7127–7132.
1000 M. Yu, Y. Xie, C. Xie and Y. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2012, 14,
2164–2167.
1001 J. Yao, M. Yu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2012, 354,
3205–3210.
1002 X.-S. Zhang, Q.-L. Zhu, Y.-F. Zhang, Y.-B. Li and Z.-J. Shi,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 11898–11903.
1003 X.-S. Zhang, Y.-F. Zhang, K. Chen and Z.-J. Shi, Org. Chem.
Front., 2014, 1, 1096–1100.
1004 P. Villuendas and E. P. Urriolabeitia, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
3178–3181.
1005 B. Wang, C. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Fan, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org.
Chem. Front., 2015, 2, 973–977.
1006 M. Tobisu, Y. Masuya, K. Baba and N. Chatani, Chem. Sci.,
2016, 7, 2587–2591.
1007 R. Che, Z. Wu, Z. Li, H. Xiang and X. Zhou, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2014, 20, 7258–7261.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6740 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
1008 X.-S. Zhang, Y.-F. Zhang, Z.-W. Li, F.-X. Luo and Z.-J. Shi,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5478–5482.
1009 H. L. Li, Y. Kuninobu and M. Kanai, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2017, 56, 1495–1499.
1010 H.-L. Li, M. Kanai and Y. Kuninobu, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
5944–5947.
1011 Y. Unoh, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 704–707.
1012 L. Liu, G. Wang, J. Jiao and P. Li, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
6132–6135.
1013 D. Wang, X. Yu, W. Yao, W. Hu, C. Ge and X. Shi,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 5543–5546.
1014 L. Wang, Y.-B. Xie, N.-Y. Huang, N.-N. Zhang, D.-J. Li,
Y.-L. Hu, M.-G. Liu and D.-S. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017,
359, 779–785.
1015 R. Samanta and A. P. Antonchick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2011, 50, 5217–5220.
1016 B. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Lin, Y. Xu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Org.
Lett., 2014, 16, 4574–4577.
1017 B. Wang, C. Shen, J. Yao, H. Yin and Y. Zhang, Org. Lett.,
2014, 16, 46–49.
1018 K. Nobushige, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Org.
Lett., 2014, 16, 1188–1191.
1019 K. Padala and M. Jeganmohan, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50,
14573–14576.
1020 T. Wesch, F. R. Leroux and F. Colobert, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2013, 355, 2139–2144.
1021 G. Solladie´, J. Hutt and A. Girardin, Synthesis, 1987, 173.
1022 Q. Dherbassy, G. Schwertz, M. Chesse, C. K. Hazra,
J. Wencel-Delord and F. Colobert, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016,
22, 1735–1743.
1023 C. K. Hazra, Q. Dherbassy, J. Wencel-Delord and F. Colobert,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13871–13875.
1024 Q. Dherbassy, J. Wencel-Delord and F. Colobert, Tetrahe-
dron, 2016, 72, 5238–5245.
1025 Q.
Dherbassy,
J.
P.
Djukic,
J.
Wencel-Delord
and
F. Colobert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4668–4672.
1026 T.
Wesch,
A.
Berthelot-Bre´hier,
F.
R.
Leroux
and
F. Colobert, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 2490–2493.
1027 Q. Huang, S. Fu, S. Ke, H. Xiao, X. Zhang and S. Lin,
Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 6602–6605.
1028 B. Li, D. D. Guo, S. H. Guo, G. F. Pan, Y. R. Gao and
Y. Q. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 130–144.
1029 K. Nobushige, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura,
Tetrahedron, 2015, 71, 6506–6512.
1030 D. Chen, G. Xing and H. Zhou, Org. Chem. Front., 2015, 2,
947–950.
1031 H.-X. Dai, A. F. Stepan, M. S. Plummer, Y.-H. Zhang and
J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7222–7228.
1032 R. Vanjari, T. Guntreddi and K. N. Singh, Chem. – Asian J.,
2016, 11, 696–699.
1033 W. J. Kerr, M. Reid and T. Tuttle, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 402–410.
1034 A. Burhop, R. Weck, J. Atzrodt and V. Derdau, Eur. J. Org.
Chem., 2017, 1418–1424.
1035 G. Cheng, P. Wang and J.-Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2017, 56, 8183–8186.
1036 W. Dong, L. Wang, K. Parthasarathy, F. Pan and C. Bolm,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11573–11576.
1037 Y. Cheng and C. Bolm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54,
12349–12352.
1038 W. H. Jeon, J.-Y. Son, J. E. Kim and P. H. Lee, Org. Lett.,
2016, 18, 3498–3501.
1039 G. H. Ko, J.-Y. Son, H. Kim, C. Maeng, Y. Baek, B. Seo,
K. Um and P. H. Lee, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359,
3362–3370.
1040 J. Huang, Y. Huang, T. Wang, Q. Huang, Z. Wang and
Z. Chen, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 1128–1131.
1041 Y. Li and L. Dong, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15,
9983–9986.
1042 J. Wen, H. Cheng, G. Raabe and C. Bolm, Org. Lett., 2017,
19, 6020–6023.
1043 J. Wen, D. P. Tiwari and C. Bolm, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
1706–1709.
1044 G. Zheng, M. Tian, Y. Xu, X. Chen and X. Li, Org. Chem.
Front., 2018, 5, 998–1002.
1045 Y. Cheng, W. Dong, H. Wang and C. Bolm, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2016, 22, 10821–10824.
1046 Y. Cheng, W. Dong, K. Parthasarathy and C. Bolm, Org.
Lett., 2017, 19, 726–729.
1047 M. R. Yadav, R. K. Rit and A. K. Sahoo, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2012, 18, 5541–5545.
1048 R. K. Rit, M. R. Yadav and A. K. Sahoo, Org. Lett., 2014, 16,
968–971.
1049 M. R. Yadav, R. K. Rit and A. K. Sahoo, Org. Lett., 2013, 15,
1638–1641.
1050 M. R. Yadav, R. K. Rit, M. Shankar and A. K. Sahoo, J. Org.
Chem., 2014, 79, 6123–6134.
1051 M. R. Yadav, M. Shankar, E. Ramesh, K. Ghosh and
A. K. Sahoo, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 1886–1889.
1052 K. Ghosh, R. K. Rit, E. Ramesh and A. K. Sahoo, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7821–7825.
1053 M. Shankar, T. Guntreddi, E. Ramesh and A. K. Sahoo,
Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 5665–5668.
1054 M. Shankar, K. Ghosh, K. Mukherjee, R. K. Rit and
A. K. Sahoo, Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 6416–6419.
1055 K. Raghuvanshi, D. Zell and L. Ackermann, Org. Lett.,
2017, 19, 1278–1281.
1056 Y. Yokoyama, Y. Unoh, R. A. Bohmann, T. Satoh,
K. Hirano, C. Bolm and M. Miura, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44,
1104–1106.
1057 J. E. Spangler, Y. Kobayashi, P. Verma, D.-H. Wang and
J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11876–11879.
1058 P. Jain, P. Verma, G. Xia and J.-Q. Yu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 9,
140–144.
1059 C. Zhong-Jian, L. Chen-Xu, G. Qing and Y. Shu-Li, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1296–1299.
1060 A. T. Tran and J.-Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
10530–10534.
1061 Y. Zhao, F. Han, L. Yang and C. Xia, Org. Lett., 2015, 17,
1477–1480.
1062 Y.-N. Ma, S.-X. Li and S.-D. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50,
1480–1492.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6741
1063 (a) Y.-N. Ma, H.-Y. Zhang and S.-D. Yang, Org. Lett., 2015,
17, 2034–2037; (b) Z. S. Han, L. Zhang, Y. Xu, J. D. Sieber,
M. A. Marsini, Z. Li, J. T. Reeves, K. R. Fandrick, N. D.
Patel, J.-N. Desrosiers, B. Qu, A. Chen, D. M. Rudzinski,
L. P. Samankumara, S. Ma, N. Grinberg, F. Roschangar,
N. K. Yee, G. Wang, J. J. Song and C. H. Senanayake,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5474–5477; (c) S.-B. Yan,
S. Zhang and W.-L. Duan, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 2458–2461.
1064 S.-X. Li, Y.-N. Ma and S.-D. Yang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
1842–1845.
1065 C.-S. Wang, P. H. Dixneuf and J.-F. Soule´, ChemCatChem,
2017, 9, 3117–3120.
1066 Y. Unoh, T. Satoh, K. Hirano and M. Miura, ACS Catal.,
2015, 5, 6634–6639.
1067 Z. Liu, J.-Q. Wu and S.-D. Yang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
5434–5437.
1068 Y. Yang, X. Qiu, Y. Zhao, Y. Mu and Z. Shi, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2016, 138, 495–498.
1069 R. J. Phipps, N. P. Grimster and M. J. Gaunt, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2008, 130, 8172–8174.
1070 Y. Yang, R. Li, Y. Zhao, D. Zhao and Z. Shi, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2016, 138, 8734–8737.
1071 Y. Yokoyama, Y. Unoh, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura,
J. Org. Chem., 2014, 79, 7649–7655.
1072 Y. Unoh, Y. Yokoyama, T. Satoh, K. Hirano and M. Miura,
Org. Lett., 2016, 18, 5436–5439.
1073 W. H. Jeon, J.-Y. Son, S.-E. Kim and P. H. Lee, Adv. Synth.
Catal., 2015, 357, 811–817.
1074 J.-Y. Son, H. Kim, W. H. Jeon, Y. Baek, B. Seo, K. Um,
K. Lee and P. H. Lee, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359,
3194–3206.
1075 L. Y. Chan, X. Meng and S. Kim, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78,
8826–8832.
1076 B. C. Chary, S. Kim, Y. Park, J. Kim and P. H. Lee, Org.
Lett., 2013, 15, 2692–2695.
1077 L. Y. Chan, S. Kim, T. Ryu and P. H. Lee, Chem. Commun.,
2013, 49, 4682.
1078 L. Y. Chan, L. Cheong and S. Kim, Org. Lett., 2013, 15,
2186–2189.
1079 X.-H. Hu, X.-F. Yang and T.-P. Loh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2015, 54, 15535–15539.
1080 L.-Y. Jiao, A. V. Ferreira and M. Oestreich, Chem. – Asian J.,
2016, 11, 367–370.
1081 Z.-J. Du, J. Guan, G.-J. Wu, P. Xu, L.-X. Gao and F.-S. Han,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 632–635.
1082 Y. Sun and N. Cramer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
364–367.
1083 Y. Sun and N. Cramer, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2981–2985.
1084 K. M. Crawford, T. R. Ramseyer, C. J. A. Daley and
T. B. Clark, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7589–7593.
1085 X. Qiu, M. Wang, Y. Zhao and Z. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2017, 56, 7233–7237.
1086 Q. Ge, J. Zong, B. Li and B. Wang, Org. Lett., 2017, 19,
6670–6673.
1087 F. Zhang and D. R. Spring, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43,
6906–6919.
1088 G. R. Jones and Y. Landais, Tetrahedron, 1996, 52,
7599–7662.
1089 S. E. Denmark and C. S. Regens, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41,
1486–1499.
1090 M. Parasram and V. Gevorgyan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50,
2038–2053.
1091 J. F. Hartwig, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 864–873.
1092 P. I. Djurovich, A. R. Dolich and D. H. Berry, J. Chem. Soc.,
Chem. Commun., 1994, 1897–1898.
1093 E. M. Simmons and J. F. Hartwig, Nature, 2012, 483,
70–73.
1094 Y. Kuninobu, T. Nakahara, H. Takeshima and K. Takai,
Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 426–428.
1095 M. Murai, H. Takeshima, H. Morita, Y. Kuninobu and
K. Takai, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 5407–5414.
1096 B. Su and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139,
12137–12140.
1097 Y. Kuninobu, K. Yamauchi, N. Tamura, T. Seiki and
K. Takai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1520–1522.
1098 Q.-W. Zhang, K. An, L.-C. Liu, Q. Zhang, H. Guo and
W. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1125–1129.
1099 T. Shibata, T. Shizuno and T. Sasaki, Chem. Commun.,
2015, 51, 7802–7804.
1100 M. Murai, K. Matsumoto, Y. Takeuchi and K. Takai, Org.
Lett., 2015, 17, 3102–3105.
1101 Q.-W. Zhang, K. An, L.-C. Liu, Y. Yue and W. He, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6918–6921.
1102 E. M. Simmons and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010,
132, 17092–17095.
1103 T. Lee, T. W. Wilson, R. Berg, P. Ryberg and J. F. Hartwig,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6742–6745.
1104 T. Lee and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139,
4879–4886.
1105 B. Su, T.-G. Zhou, X.-W. Li, X.-R. Shao, P.-L. Xu, W.-L. Wu,
J. F. Hartwig and Z.-J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
1092–1096.
1106 B. Li, M. Driess and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014,
136, 6586–6589.
1107 C. Karmel, B. Li and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018,
140, 1460–1470.
1108 A. Bunescu, T. W. Butcher and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2018, 140, 1502–1507.
1109 T. Lee and J. F. Hartwig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55,
8723–8727.
1110 T. A. Boebel and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008,
130, 7534–7535.
1111 S. H. Cho and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135,
8157–8160.
1112 D. W. Robbins, T. A. Boebel and J. F. Hartwig, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4068–4069.
1113 M. A. Larsen, S. H. Cho and J. Hartwig, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2016, 138, 762–765.
1114 B. Su, T.-G. Zhou, P.-L. Xu, Z.-J. Shi and J. F. Hartwig,
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7205–7208.
1115 C. Huang and V. Gevorgyan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131,
10844–10845.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

6742 | Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743
This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
1116 C. Huang and V. Gevorgyan, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 2442–2445.
1117 M. Mewald, J. A. Schiﬀner and M. Oestreich, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1763–1765.
1118 C. Huang, B. Chattopadhyay and V. Gevorgyan, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12406–12409.
1119 C.
Huang,
N.
Ghavtadze,
B.
Chattopadhyay
and
V. Gevorgyan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17630–17633.
1120 C. Wang and H. Ge, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14371–14374.
1121 Y. Wang and V. Gevorgyan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015,
54, 2255–2259.
1122 Y. Lin, K.-Z. Jiang, J. Cao, Z.-J. Zheng, Z. Xu, Y.-M. Cui and
L.-W. Xu, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2017, 359, 2247–2252.
1123 S. De Sarkar, W. Liu, S. I. Kozhushkov and L. Ackermann,
Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 1461–1479.
1124 D.-G. Yu, F. de Azambuja and F. Glorius, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7710–7712.
1125 R. Kuppusamy, K. Muralirajan and C.-H. Cheng, ACS
Catal., 2016, 6, 3909–3913.
1126 B. Chattopadhyay, J. E. Dannatt, I. L. Andujar-De Sanctis,
K. A. Gore,
R.
E. Maleczka, D.
A. Singleton
and
M. R. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7864–7871.
1127 G. Li, D. Leow, L. Wan and J.-Q. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2013, 52, 1245–1247.
1128 S. Kawamorita, H. Ohmiya, K. Hara, A. Fukuoka and
M. Sawamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5058–5059.
1129 E.
Tan,
O.
Quinonero,
M.
E.
de
Orbe
and
A. M. Echavarren, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2166–2172.
1130 S. Xiaochao, N. Masayoshi and H. Zhaomin, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14812–14817.
1131 X. Shi, M. Nishiura and Z. Hou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016,
138, 6147–6150.
1132 Y.-F. Han and G.-X. Jin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43,
2799–2823.
1133 D.-W. Gao, Q. Gu, C. Zheng and S.-L. You, Acc. Chem. Res.,
2017, 50, 351–365.
1134 L. A. Lo´pez and E. Lo´pez, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44,
10128–10135.
1135 D.-Y. Zhu, P. Chen and J.-B. Xia, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8,
68–73.
1136 W. C. P. Tsang, N. Zheng and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2005, 127, 14560–14561.
1137 W. C. P. Tsang, R. H. Munday, G. Brasche, N. Zheng and
S. L. Buchwald, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 7603–7610.
1138 B.-J. Li, S.-L. Tian, Z. Fang and Z.-J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int.
Ed., 2008, 47, 1115–1118.
1139 J. A. Jordan-Hore, C. C. C. Johansson, M. Gulias,
E. M. Beck and M. J. Gaunt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008,
130, 16184–16186.
1140 M. Miura, T. Tsuda, T. Satoh, S. Pivsa-Art and M. Nomura,
J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 5211–5215.
1141 Z. Liang, L. Ju, Y. Xie, L. Huang and Y. Zhang,
Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15816–15821.
1142 V. Rajeshkumar, T.-H. Lee and S.-C. Chuang, Org. Lett.,
2013, 15, 1468–1471.
1143 Z. Liang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, K. Wang and Y. Zhang, Tetra-
hedron, 2013, 69, 6519–6526.
1144 Z. Liang, R. Feng, H. Yin and Y. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2013,
15, 4544–4547.
1145 Z. Liang, J. Yao, K. Wang, H. Li and Y. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J.,
2013, 19, 16825–16831.
1146 Z.-J. Cai, C. Yang, S.-Y. Wang and S.-J. Ji, J. Org. Chem.,
2015, 80, 7928–7936.
1147 K. Takamatsu, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Org.
Lett., 2014, 16, 2892–2895.
1148 S. H. Cho, J. Yoon and S. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011,
133, 5996–6005.
1149 C. Jean-Ho, L. Pi-Shan, L. Ya-Ming, S. Wei-Ting and
W. Ming-Jung, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 13613–13620.
1150 C. Suzuki, K. Hirano, T. Satoh and M. Miura, Org. Lett.,
2015, 17, 1597–1600.
1151 A. McNally, B. Haﬀemayer, B. S. L. Collins and M. J. Gaunt,
Nature, 2014, 510, 129–133.
1152 A. P. Smalley, J. D. Cuthbertson and M. J. Gaunt, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1412–1415.
1153 M. Nappi, C. He, W. G. Whitehurst, B. G. N. Chappell and
M. J. Gaunt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3178–3182.
1154 D. Willcox, B. G. N. Chappell, K. F. Hogg, J. Calleja,
A. P. Smalley and M. J. Gaunt, Science, 2016, 354, 851–857.
1155 J. R. Cabrera-Pardo, A. Trowbridge, M. Nappi, K. Ozaki and
M. J. Gaunt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11958–11962.
1156 K. F. Hogg, A. Trowbridge, A. Alvarez-Pe´rez and M. J. Gaunt,
Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 8198–8203.
1157 C. He and M. J. Gaunt, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3586–3592.
1158 C. He and M. J. Gaunt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54,
15840–15844.
1159 J. C. Fox, R. E. Gilligan, A. K. Pitts, H. R. Bennett and
M. J. Gaunt, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 2706–2710.
1160 M. Catellani, F. Frignani and A. Rangoni, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed. Engl., 1997, 36, 119–122.
1161 Q. Ding, S. Ye, G. Cheng, P. Wang, M. E. Farmer and
J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 417–425.
1162 H. J. Davis, M. T. Mihai and R. J. Phipps, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2016, 138, 12759–12762.
1163 H. J. Davis, G. R. Genov and R. J. Phipps, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13351–13355.
1164 G. Olivo, G. Farinelli, A. Barbieri, O. Lanzalunga, S. Di
Stefano and M. Costas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56,
16347–16351.
1165 T. Nakamura, K. Suzuki and M. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2017, 139, 17763–17766.
1166 Z.
Qi,
M.
Wang
and
X.
Li,
Org.
Lett.,
2013,
15,
5440–5443.
1167 Z. Zhou, G. Liu, Y. Chen and X. Lu, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2015, 357, 2944–2950.
1168 H. Wang, M. Moselage, M. J. Gonza´lez and L. Ackermann,
ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2705–2709.
1169 X. Guo, J. Han, Y. Liu, M. Qin, X. Zhang and B. Chen,
J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 11505–11511.
1170 Y. Li, F. Xie, Y. Liu, X. Yang and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2018, 20,
437–440.
1171 F. Xie, S. Yu, Z. Qi and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016,
55, 15351–15355.
Review Article
Chem Soc Rev
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online

This journal is ©The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6603--6743 | 6743
1172 Q. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Yang, Y. Li and X. Li, Chem. Commun.,
2017, 53, 9640–9643.
1173 D. Bai, Q. Jia, T. Xu, Q. Zhang, F. Wu, C. Ma, B. Liu,
J. Chang and X. Li, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 9877–9884.
1174 H. Deng, H. Li, W. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem. Commun.,
2017, 53, 10322–10325.
1175 C. Jimenez-Gonzalez, C. S. Ponder, Q. B. Broxterman and
J. B. Manley, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2011, 15, 912–917.
1176 D. Prat, J. Hayler and A. Wells, Green Chem., 2014, 16,
4546–4551.
1177 D. Prat, A. Wells, J. Hayler, H. Sneddon, C. R. McElroy,
S. Abou-Shehada and P. J. Dunn, Green Chem., 2016, 18,
288–296.
1178 C. Sambiagio, R. H. Munday, A. John Blacker, S. P. Marsden
and P. C. McGowan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 70025–70032.
1179 C. J. Pink, H.-T. Wong, F. C. Ferreira and A. G. Livingston,
Org. Process Res. Dev., 2008, 12, 589–595.
1180 Akanksha and D. Maiti, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2314–2320.
1181 A. Mouret, L. Leclercq, A. Muhlbauer and V. Nardello-Rataj,
Green Chem., 2014, 16, 269–278.
1182 R. Savela, J. Warna, D. Y. Murzin and R. Leino, Catal. Sci.
Technol., 2015, 5, 2406–2417.
1183 http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_li
brary/Scientific_guideline/2015/01/WC500180284.pdf.
1184 S. Santoro, S. I. Kozhushkov, L. Ackermann and L. Vaccaro,
Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3471–3493.
1185 A. J. Hunt, Green and Sustainable Medicinal Chemistry:
Methods, Tools and Strategies for the 21st Century Pharma-
ceutical Industry, The Royal Society of Chemistry, 2016,
pp. 54–62, , DOI: 10.1039/9781782625940-00054.
1186 C. A. Hone, D. M. Roberge and C. O. Kappe, ChemSusChem,
2017, 10, 32–41.
1187 L. V. Desai, K. J. Stowers and M. S. Sanford, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13285–13293.
1188 H. Wang, M. M. Lorion and L. Ackermann, Angew. Chem.,
Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10386–10390.
1189 D. Lapointe, T. Markiewicz, C. J. Whipp, A. Toderian and
K. Fagnou, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 76, 749–759.
1190 Y. J. Liu, H. Xu, W. J. Kong, M. Shang, H. X. Dai and
J. Q. Yu, Nature, 2014, 515, 389–393.
Chem Soc Rev
Review Article
Open Access Article. Published on 23 July 2018. Downloaded on 1/5/2026 5:30:20 PM. 
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.
View Article Online
