Molecular interactions underlying liquid-liquid phase separation 
of the FUS low complexity domain
Anastasia C. Murthy1, Gregory L. Dignon2, Yelena Kan4,5, Gül H. Zerze2,3, Sapun H. 
Parekh5,6, Jeetain Mittal2,*, and Nicolas L. Fawzi7,*
1Graduate Program in Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown University, 
Providence, Rhode Island, USA 2Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Lehigh 
University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA 3Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, 
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, USA 4LUT School of Engineering Science, LUT 
University, Lappeenranta, Finland 5Department of Molecular Spectroscopy, Max Planck Institute 
for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany 6Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of 
Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA 7Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Physiology, and 
Biotechnology, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA
Abstract
The low complexity domain of the RNA-binding protein FUS (FUS LC) mediates liquid-liquid 
phase separation (LLPS), but interactions between the repetitive SYGQ-rich sequence of FUS LC 
that stabilize the liquid phase are not known in detail. By combining NMR and Raman 
spectroscopy, mutagenesis, and molecular simulation, we demonstrate that heterogeneous 
interactions involving all residue types underlie LLPS of human FUS LC. We find no evidence 
that FUS LC adopts conformations with traditional secondary structure elements in the condensed 
phase, rather it maintains conformational heterogeneity. We show that hydrogen bonding, π/sp2 
and hydrophobic interactions all contribute to stabilizing LLPS of FUS LC. In addition to 
contributions from tyrosine residues, we find that glutamine residues participate in contacts 
leading to LLPS of FUS LC. These results support a model in which FUS LC forms dynamic, 
multivalent interactions via multiple residue types and remains disordered in the densely packed 
liquid phase.
Introduction
Macromolecules are organized into organellar compartments that allow the cell to 
simultaneously carry out tightly-regulated, complex reactions. Besides organelles enclosed 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use:http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence: jeetain@lehigh.edu and nicolas_fawzi@brown.edu.
Author contributions
A.C.M and N.L.F designed, performed, and analyzed data for NMR spectroscopy, phase separation assays, and microscopy. Y.K. and 
S.H.P. designed, performed, and analyzed data for CARS. G.L.D, G.H.Z, and J.M. designed and performed simulation experiments 
and analyzed the resulting data. A.C.M and N.L.F. wrote the manuscript with comments from all authors.
Competing Interests Statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2019 July ; 26(7): 637–648. doi:10.1038/s41594-019-0250-x.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

by lipid bilayers, proteins and nucleic acids can phase separate into membraneless liquid-
like puncta such as the nucleolus, processing-bodies, and stress granules1–3. Given their 
roles in RNA processing, many membraneless organelles are enriched in proteins that 
contain both RNA-binding domains and phase-separation prone intrinsically disordered 
regions4.
The RNA-binding protein FUS (Fused in Sarcoma) is involved in RNA transcription, 
splicing, and transport. FUS undergoes in vitro and in cell liquid-liquid phase separation 
(LLPS) mediated by the low complexity domain (FUS LC) and RGG-rich domains5–7. FUS 
LC is enriched in serine, tyrosine, glycine, and glutamine residues and is sufficient for 
partitioning into liquid and gel phases in vitro and in cells5–8. Furthermore, self-association 
into aggregates has been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia9,10. FUS LC is required for cytoplasmic aggregation 
and works in concert with the RNA-binding and RGG domains to promote cytotoxicity11–15. 
In addition, chromosomal translocations fusing FUS LC to several DNA-binding domains 
cause several sarcomas and leukemias via aberrant transcriptional activation possibly by 
recruiting the C-terminal tail of RNA pol II into a phase separated body5,16–18. As a model 
protein for LLPS, the importance of FUS LC in FUS function and disease motivates 
investigation into the molecular interactions that govern its self-assembly.
Efforts have been made to structurally characterize FUS LC in the solid and liquid phases. In 
solid phases, portions of FUS LC have been shown to form amyloid fibrils (i.e. polymerizing 
into linear structures with ordered “cross-β” structure) that may be associated with protein 
function and disease19–21. Conversely, macroscopic condensed phase of FUS LC formed by 
LLPS remain predominantly disordered5. However, it remains unclear whether secondary 
structure found in FUS LC fibrils also contributes to stabilizing the liquid states of FUS LC. 
Similarly, other proteins such as Ddx4, FMRP and elastin-like polypeptides are 
predominantly disordered in their respective condensed phases22–24. Unlike FUS LC, the 
Ddx4 condensed phase is stabilized by electrostatic interactions between oppositely charged 
patches and π-interactions formed by sp2-hydridized groups, which we refer to here as π/
sp223,25,26. Conversely, the interactions that drive phase separation of a model elastin-like 
polypeptide are likely primarily hydrophobic24. Because FUS LC and its paralogs have 
distinct polar and aromatic-rich sequences (i.e. yeast “prion-like”)4, it remains unclear which 
interactions – hydrophobic, electrostatic, and/or π/sp2 interactions – are the driving forces 
for phase separation of this class of domains.
Here, we probe the structural details of the condensed phase of FUS LC using a combination 
of NMR and Raman spectroscopy to characterize the interactions within the liquid phase. 
We demonstrate that the condensed phase is devoid of detectable static structures and that 
amorphous aggregates of FUS LC are structurally different from the liquid phase. We find 
that the condensed phase is densely packed with dynamic interactions involving all of the 
major residue types represented in the sequence. Using all-atom molecular simulations, we 
provide evidence that the interaction network that we observe by NMR is produced by a 
conformationally heterogeneous ensemble and that hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic and 
π/sp2 interactions are important for FUS LC LLPS.
Murthy et al.
Page 2
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Results
Identical structural features in FUS LC droplets and macroscopic condensed phases
We previously developed a method for collapsing spontaneously formed, protein-dense 
droplets formed through LLPS into a single macroscopic phase5. To test if this macroscopic 
phase is comparable to microscopic droplets, we conducted two-dimensional 1H-15N 
heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) experiments on a biphasic sample of 15N 
labeled FUS LC. This sample contains FUS LC droplets suspended in a dispersed phase of 
FUS LC. As shown for biphasic samples of an elastin-like polypeptide, the spectrum of 
biphasic FUS LC showed two sets of resonances of differing intensities24, corresponding to 
the dispersed (strong resonances) and condensed (weak, broad resonances) phases (Fig. 1A). 
The broader set of resonances were most apparent for certain residues (i.e. G80, Q153, 
S163) that have different chemical shifts in the dispersed and condensed phases5 (Fig. 1A, 
Supplementary Fig. 1A). Importantly, these broad resonances overlay with resonances from 
the macroscopic condensed phase of FUS LC, suggesting that they arise from the condensed 
phase. Hence, FUS LC in spontaneously formed droplets experiences a similar chemical 
environment to that in the macroscopic phase. To confirm that these broad resonances are 
not due to an artifact, the biphasic sample was centrifuged to separate dispersed and 
condensed phases and the spectrum of the supernatant was acquired. Since this spectrum did 
not contain the second, broad set of resonances present in the biphasic sample (Fig. 1A), we 
conclude that samples of a single macroscopic phase are a viable proxy for micron-sized 
droplets.
Condensed FUS LC has slow diffusion and high protein density
Previous studies on liquid-like condensates suggest that motions within the condensed phase 
are slowed due to high protein concentration resulting in a densely packed network of 
interactions23. To characterize the diffusivity of FUS LC within the dispersed and 
macroscopic condensed phases, we used pulsed field gradient (PFG) NMR27,28. Diffusion of 
dispersed FUS LC is comparable to globular reference protein lysozyme in solution (Fig. 
1B). Using the same diffusion time and gradient pulse length, FUS LC in the condensed 
phase does not significantly diffuse (red line, Fig. 1B). However, repeating the experiment 
with a longer diffusion time and gradient length, we observe that condensed FUS LC 
diffuses about 500 times slower than in the dispersed phase (Fig. 1C). The diffusion 
coefficient for condensed FUS LC (0.17 ± 0.02 μm2/s) is similar to the value we estimated 
for in vitro droplets using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments, 
further suggesting that the macroscopic phase examined here retains the features of the 
spontaneous droplets extensively characterized by microscopy5. Interestingly, molecules 
corresponding to the buffer diffuse six times slower in the condensed phase compared to the 
dispersed phase, suggesting that diffusion is slowed due to the solvent volume excluded by 
the high protein density29.
To estimate the concentration in the condensed phase, we compared the 1H NMR signal 
intensity of dispersed FUS LC of known concentration to the signal intensity of the 
macroscopic condensed phase (Fig. 1D, E, F). To ensure that the signal intensity was not 
affected by water resonance pre-saturation and differences in the longitudinal spin relaxation 
Murthy et al.
Page 3
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

times between the samples, experiments were conducted such that several fold changes in 
the values of pre-saturation power and repetition rates had no measurable effect on signal 
intensities. The minimal concentration inside of the macroscopic condensed phase was 477 
mg/mL (27.8 mM) with an estimated water content of ~65% by volume, based on both 
integrated water signal intensity and calculation of the expected partial specific volume of 
protein using the measured protein concentration24. The FUS LC condensed phase 
concentration is similar to what has been reported for other RNA-binding proteins that 
undergo LLPS23,28. Furthermore, the observed concentration is greater than the overlap 
concentration, where random coil polymers come into contact, calculated to be 285 mg/mL 
(16.6 mM) based on the radius of hydration measured for dispersed FUS LC30. Taken 
together, the higher concentration in the condensed phase suggests that FUS LC forms a 
dynamic network of contacts, as expected for a polymer forming multivalent interactions at 
many sites along the chain.
No evidence for FUS LC structure in equilibrium with the disordered LLPS state
The NMR-visible conformations in condensed FUS LC are predominantly disordered based 
on backbone chemical shifts. However, it is possible that phase separated FUS LC takes on 
minor populations of structured states that are invisible to the previous NMR approach5. To 
directly probe for the interaction of the disordered state with amyloid-like fibrils or other 
large assemblies within the macroscopic condensed phase, we used dark-state exchange 
saturation transfer (DEST)31,32. This technique detects millisecond-second exchange 
timescale interactions between a low molecular weight major species (here, the disordered, 
NMR-visible major species) and large protofibrillar and fibrillar assemblies based on large 
differences in NMR transverse relaxation rates. Unlike the prominent DEST effects observed 
for the interaction of the disordered C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II with TAF15 
fibrils18, the width of the DEST profiles for all residues in condensed FUS LC can be 
explained by the measured transverse relaxation rate of the disordered state (Fig. 2A; 
Supplementary Fig. 1B). Therefore, the profiles show no evidence for transient interactions 
between the disordered, major state and potential fibril assemblies.
To probe for the transient formation of structured, intermediate-sized species within the 
macroscopic condensed phase, we conducted 15N Carr Purcell Meiboom Gill (CPMG) 
relaxation dispersion experiments. These experiments probe exchange on the microsecond-
millisecond timescale between states with different NMR chemical shifts (i.e. different 
structures). Residues undergoing conformational exchange on this timescale would produce 
sloping CPMG profiles, showing differences in the effective transverse relaxation rates, 
R2eff, as a function of the CPMG field, νCPMG. However, relaxation dispersion profiles for 
individual residues and over the amide envelope do not show evidence of apparent 
conformational exchange with structured states within the condensed phase (Fig. 2B, 
Supplementary Fig. 1C). To probe for exchange with structured states that exists on a faster 
timescale, we performed spectral density analysis. These data indicate that the overall 
contribution of exchange to the transverse relaxation rate (Rex) observed for the major state 
itself is minimal (Fig. 2C; Supplementary Fig. 1D). In other words, we do not find evidence 
for transient populations of structured states in the condensed phase with exchange rates 
faster than can be probed by CPMG experiments. The lack of evidence for structured states 
Murthy et al.
Page 4
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

within the condensed phase of FUS LC is consistent with the disordered nature of the 
polypeptide and the liquid-like nature of the assemblies.
Evidence for order in amorphous aggregates but not in liquid condensed FUS LC
We find no NMR evidence for significant conformational exchange occurring between the 
NMR-visible disordered state and structurally-ordered states within the condensed phase. 
However, it is possible that minor structured states exist but are not in exchange with the 
major state, making them potentially invisible to direct visualization by NMR due to slow 
molecular tumbling. To probe for oligomeric or fibrillar states that are present in the 
condensed phase using an orthogonal technique unaffected by molecular motion, we 
conducted coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (CARS33). We probed the structural 
features across several material states – a dispersed FUS LC control, condensed FUS LC, 
aggregated FUS LC, and fibrillar hen egg white lysozyme (HEWL). As a dispersed, high 
concentration reference, we used a FUS LC variant containing 12 serine or threonine to 
glutamate mutations, FUS LC 12E, which is disordered but does not undergo LLPS or 
aggregation due to electrostatic repulsion between negatively-charged glutamate residues34. 
Representing solid states, we used amorphous aggregates formed by FUS LC after 
incubation (Fig. 2D). The CARS spectra of all three states showed prominent features at 
several regions corresponding to molecular vibrations of the side chain of tyrosine residues 
(830, 850 and 1603, 1616 cm−1) that we used for further analysis. We find that the intensity 
ratios of the tyrosine side chain peaks are similar for the dispersed and condensed phases but 
different from aggregated FUS LC (Fig. 2D). The intensity ratio of the tyrosine doublet 
located at 830 and 850 Raman shifts has been shown to be correlated with tyrosine ring 
interactions (Table 1)35. The intensity ratio (850 cm−1/830 cm−1) is nearly identical in the 
dispersed (FUS LC 12E) and condensed phases (1.32±0.08 and 1.25±0.07, respectively), but 
decreases to 0.96±0.09 for the aggregate, consistent with enhanced hydrophobic/π-π 
stacking and increased conformational restriction of the tyrosine rings36. Another tyrosine 
markers, two overlapping side chain peaks (1603 and 1616 cm−1), also follow the trend of 
becoming conformationally restricted in the aggregate form. Further, the width of the amide 
I peak, which reports on the carbonyl stretch of the peptide backbone, is narrower for FUS 
LC aggregates and HEWL fibrils, suggesting a narrower distribution of backbone vibrational 
modes. Conversely, the amide I peak is broadened for dispersed and condensed FUS LC, 
suggesting a broad distribution of vibrational modes and hence structural conformations, 
further suggesting that condensed FUS LC is predominantly disordered. Interestingly, the 
amide I peak for FUS LC aggregates is not as sharp as for HEWL fibrils which are almost 
crystalline, supporting the view that FUS LC aggregates contain regions that are 
disordered19. Overall, the CARS data demonstrate that the condensed phase is structurally 
similar to the disordered, dispersed phase but different from amorphous aggregates.
Interactions within the liquid phase are promiscuous
Finding no evidence for structured conformations, we focused on characterizing the 
intermolecular contacts between disordered FUS LC molecules that stabilize the condensed 
phase. We performed doubly-edited nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) experiments to 
directly probe interactions between amide hydrogens (HN) on one molecule and hydrogens 
attached to carbon atoms on another molecule. To this end, we made a macroscopic 
Murthy et al.
Page 5
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

condensed FUS LC containing equimolar amounts of 15N12C-enriched and 13C14N enriched 
protein (Fig. 3A). A NOE mixing time of 250 ms was used; shorter or longer mixing times 
did not impact the number and relative intensity of the NOE cross peaks observed for tests 
of 2D planes (data not shown). Though spin diffusion may contribute to the observed NOE 
cross peaks and limit quantitative interpretation, the fast reorientational motions preserved 
within the condensed phase should limit its effect5. Due to the overlap of resonances within 
the 1H-13C-HSQC, interactions between different residue types but not specific residues are 
resolved. Two dimensional strips that correspond to serine 1H13Cα, tyrosine 1H13Cδ, 
glycine 1H13Cα, and glutamine 1H13Cγ are shown as examples (Fig. 3B). The NOEs arising 
from glutamine 1H15Nε side chain positions and glutamine 1H13Cγ are the strongest, likely 
due to favorable relaxation properties and high glutamine content. Aside from these intensity 
differences, the strips are all similar except glycine 1H13Cα which shows a slightly different 
NOE pattern and weakest signal intensity (Fig 3C–F). Further quantitative analysis of the 
relative intensities of the NOEs is precluded due to other factors contributing to the NOE 
cross peak intensity such as differential relaxation. Importantly, signals observed here do not 
arise from intramolecular NOEs due to natural isotopic abundance artifacts (i.e. ~1% 13C in 
the 15N12C protein fraction), as a control sample lacking 13C FUS LC showed minimal NOE 
signals (Supplementary Fig. 2A). To probe for interactions at other side-chain positions, we 
conducted 12C-filtered, 13C edited NOESY-HSQC experiments. Strips for serine 1H13Cβ, 
tyrosine 1H13Cδ, glycine 1H13Cα, and glutamine 1H13Cγ showed NOEs with a similar 
interaction network (Supplementary Fig. 2B). As opposed to a model where only particular 
residue types mediate contacts and generate specific NOEs, the data suggest that all the 
major residue types present within the sequence participate in interactions.
To provide a molecular picture for the interactions that give rise to these NOE profiles, we 
performed molecular simulations using modern forcefields tested for intrinsically disordered 
proteins and established advanced sampling approaches. We determined the equilibrium 
interaction configurations for a system of two chains of FUS120-163, a representative 
segment of the LC domain that enables effective sampling (Supplementary Fig. 3)28,34. 
These simulations demonstrate close approach of different residue types engaging in high 
probability interactions (Fig. 3C–F insets). Glutamine and tyrosine make large contributions 
to the intermolecular interactions in the simulations, consistent with the observed NOEs 
(Fig. 3G–H). To demonstrate that disordered contacts could give rise to the observed NOEs, 
we calculated the intermolecular NOE profile based on r−6 averaged distances and summed 
over residue type and found that profiles are qualitatively similar to the experimental NOEs 
(Supplementary Fig. 2C). The higher relative magnitude predicted for tyrosine may be due 
to enhanced interaction in simulation or the absence of dynamical information in the 
calculation. To test if the observed NOE profile could arise from a structured state, we 
predicted NOEs from the fibril structure of FUS 37-9719. We find that the overall predicted 
NOE profile and ΔCα-Cβ chemical shifts calculated from the fibril structure are different 
from condensed FUS LC, further suggesting that the primary contacts formed in the 
condensed phase are between disordered regions (Supplementary Fig. 2D,E). Taken 
together, these data suggest that the intermolecular interactions that stabilize the liquid phase 
are promiscuous.
Murthy et al.
Page 6
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Condensed phase interactions are not confined to a particular sequence region
Previously, we used paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) NMR experiments to show 
that transient intra- and intermolecular interactions of dispersed FUS LC are distributed 
throughout the entire domain34. To visualize the positional distribution of intermolecular 
interactions within the condensed phase, we prepared natural isotopic abundance FUS LC 
with paramagnetic spin-label (MTSL) or diamagnetic analog conjugated at single 
engineered cysteine sites (A16C, S86C, and S142C), added these in a 1:100 molar ratio to 
15N-labeled FUS LC, and condensed the mixtures into macroscopic phases (Fig. 4A). Close 
approach of the paramagnetic labeled region to any 1H nuclei results in enhanced spin 
relaxation and resonance intensity attenuation (Supplementary Fig. 4). Enhancements in 1H 
relaxation rates, calculated by R2para- R2dia = Γ2, across all residues indicate that the 
interactions underlying LLPS are distributed along the polypeptide and not localized to a 
specific region (Fig. 4B). This is consistent with the repetitive sequence and disordered 
nature of FUS LC in both the dispersed and condensed phases.
While PRE experiments were useful in determining the distribution of the interactions in the 
condensed phase, we are not able to determine if the spin label alters the extent of 
partitioning into the liquid phase of each labeled cysteine variant or has non-specific 
interactions with the protein, which may explain differences in the 1H transverse relaxation 
rates observed for the diamagnetic samples labeled at different positions (Supplementary 
Fig. 4A). To further test if the intermolecular interactions are distributed across the 
sequence, we performed (1H)13C HSQC-NOESY-1H15N HSQC experiments, which give 
sequence-specific information. We observe NOEs to each resolved backbone amide position 
arising from each carbon-attached 1H position (e.g. glutamine Cγ, glycine Cα, tyrosine Cδ) 
(Fig. 4C). To the limit of the resolution of the spectra, these data indicate that all positions 
within the FUS LC sequence are interacting with all residue types.
To help determine if the local variations in the observed PREs arise due to slight regional 
interaction preferences, we performed coarse grained molecular dynamics simulations of 
condensed FUS LC. Simulated PRE profiles, generated by calculating the r−6 averaged 
distance of each residue from the spin-labeled positions at A16, S86, and S142, show small 
local fluctuations (Fig. 4D). The magnitude of interaction is higher for A16C position in 
both the experimental and simulated datasets, indicating that the N-terminus of FUS LC may 
interact with other positions with higher probability than the C-terminus. However, the 
simulated PRE profiles are more uniform than the experimental data, suggesting that the true 
system may favor interactions between certain regions more than others due to specific 
atomic interactions not captured by the coarse-grained model. In the future, it will be useful 
to simulate a condensed phase with an all-atom model to further understand the role of 
specific atomistic interactions governing the observed experimental behavior, but such 
simulations are currently infeasible with available hardware resources. Altogether, the 
intermolecular interactions that contribute to LLPS do not appear uniquely registered nor 
position specific.
Murthy et al.
Page 7
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Transient hydrogen bonding interactions and glutamines play a role in LLPS
Because our data directly suggest a network of interactions that involves all residue types, 
we sought to understand the molecular forces stabilizing these interactions. FUS LC is 
particularly enriched in polar amino acids containing hydrogen bonding acceptors and 
donors (Supplementary Fig. 5A). Because glutamine, tyrosine, and serine sidechain 
resonances showed the largest NOEs, we reasoned that these residues may be important for 
stabilizing the liquid phase separated state of FUS LC through transient hydrogen bonding 
interactions. To test this hypothesis, we calculated the average number of hydrogen bonds 
from an all-atom two-chain simulation of FUS120-163 and found that glutamine residues are 
more prone to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds than tyrosine or serine (Fig. 5A, B; 
Supplementary Fig. 5B). Intramolecular hydrogen bonds were observed in single chain 
simulations, displaying a similar hydrogen bonding pattern (Supplementary Fig. 5C). 
Interestingly, regions that contain glycine are more prone to forming backbone hydrogen 
bonds because of the exposed backbone (Fig. 5A). On average, glutamine-glutamine 
interchain hydrogen bonds were abundant, suggesting that glutamine-glutamine interactions 
contribute to FUS LC LLPS (Fig. 5C; Supplementary Fig. 5B, E, F), consistent with large 
experimental NOEs observed from glutamine side-chain positions (Figure 3B).
To experimentally evaluate the importance of glutamine to FUS LC LLPS, we mutated FUS 
LC to increase or decrease glutamine content (SITable 1). We created two variants where 
eight glutamine residues were mutated to serine, which lacks side chain hydrogen bonding 
acceptor sites and contains fewer hydrogen bond donor sites than glutamine (QQ4×SS1, 
QQ4×SS2; Fig. 5D). As a comparison, we created a variant in which twelve serine residues 
(not adjacent to tyrosine) were mutated to glutamine (S12×Q). To test the hypothesis that 
glutamines contribute to stabilizing FUS LC LLPS, we assayed the extent of phase 
separation of the variants by measuring the remaining FUS LC concentration in the 
dispersed phase. Reduced glutamine content (QQ4×SS1, QQ4×SS2) resulted in higher 
concentration of protein remaining in the supernatant compared to WT, suggesting that 
removal of glutamine reduced phase separation (Fig. 5D, E, F). Increased glutamine content 
(S12×Q) decreased protein concentration in the supernatant compared to the WT, suggesting 
that increasing glutamine content promotes phase separation. To quantify differences in 
partition coefficients for the variants, we induced phase separation at similar conditions 
resulting in larger volumes of condensed phase: 300 μM FUS LC in the presence of 1 M 
NaCl and at 4°C. Relative to that of WT, the partition coefficient of S12×Q variant showed 
increased partitioning into the condensed phase, while the QQ4×SS variants showed 
decreased partitioning (Fig. 5F). Thus, glutamine contributes to FUS LC LLPS potentially 
through hydrogen bonding interactions via its side chain and backbone.
Hydrophobic interactions and π/sp2 contacts play a role in phase separation
Hydrophobic interactions play a role in stabilizing the liquid phase of elastin-like peptides 
and yeast polyA-binding protein Pab124,37. The contribution of hydrophobic interactions is 
also invoked to explain the ability of hexanediols, aliphatic alcohols, to dissolve the FG-
repeats of the nuclear pore, stress granules and in vitro phase separated protein 
assemblies38,39. Like other phase separating domains from TDP-43, hnRNPA2 and elastin, 
FUS LC LLPS is enhanced by increased sodium chloride concentration24,28,40, suggesting 
Murthy et al.
Page 8
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

that FUS LC “salts out” of solution, consistent with hydrophobic contribution to the 
interactions5. To further characterize the contribution of hydrophobic interactions, we 
quantified the number and location of intermolecular hydrophobic contacts formed in the all-
atom two-chain simulation of FUS120-163. Tyrosine, making up 15% of FUS LC, is the most 
hydrophobic residue within the sequence and is important for LLPS of FUS17,41,42. From 
simulations, we find that the majority of inter- and intramolecular hydrophobic contacts 
within the sequence involve tyrosine (Fig. 6A–C; Supplementary Fig. 5D–F). Interestingly, 
we find that tyrosine residues have the tendency to form intermolecular hydrophobic 
contacts both with other tyrosines and with glutamine (Fig. 6C; Supplementary Fig. 5D–F), 
consistent with total contact analysis where tyrosine and glutamine have a high propensity 
for participating in contacts (Fig. 3G, H).
We note that both tyrosine and glutamine side chains also include sp2-hybridized groups. 
Several studies have suggested that π-interactions involving sp2 groups, including but not 
limited to aromatic π-π stacking, play a role in LLPS of various protein systems25,43. Thus, 
π-interactions between the tyrosine side chain and other sp2-hybridized groups may be 
included in the calculation of hydrophobic contacts. To study the contribution of such π/sp2 
contacts to FUS phase separation, we analyzed the two-chain simulation of FUS120-163 to 
determine which residues are involved in planar π/sp2 interactions using the definition 
presented by Forman-Kay and colleagues 43. Indeed, both tyrosine and glutamine residues 
participate in π/sp2 interactions with contributions from backbone peptide bonds and side 
chains (Fig 6D,E; Supplementary Fig. 5E,F). Following closer examination of the sp2-
hybridized atoms of each amino acid, we include the caveat that hydrogen bonds and 
hydrophobic contacts may be formed by the same atoms involved in π/sp2 interactions43. 
Furthermore, there may be some degree of cooperativity between the different interaction 
modes, since both glutamine and tyrosine side chains are capable of all three interaction 
modes. We also note that the fraction of each amino acid forming intermolecular π/sp2 
contacts is in qualitative agreement with results from Vernon et al. (Fig 6E). Our calculations 
produce quantitatively smaller values because we analyzed intermolecular contacts only and 
used a disordered domain as opposed to the folded proteins analyzed in the previous 
bioinformatics study.
To experimentally evaluate the contribution of hydrophobic interactions to FUS LC LLPS, 
we utilized salts from the Hofmeister series which have been shown to stabilize or 
destabilize hydrophobic interactions based on their differential ability to remove water from 
protein surfaces44–46. We measured the extent of phase separation of FUS LC in varying 
concentrations of monovalent Hofmeister cations and anions. The Hofmeister cations had 
little effect on LLPS of FUS LC, likely due to their similar interactions with water (Fig. 
6F)47; however, phase separation of FUS LC in the presence of the monovalent anions of the 
same ionic strength follows the expected Hofmeister trend. Relative to sodium chloride, 
phase separation was nearly completely abrogated in the chaotropic salts sodium iodide and 
bromide, while phase separation in the kosmotropic salt sodium fluoride was enhanced. The 
effect on phase separation was not due to a change in FUS LC secondary structure of the 
dispersed phase (Supplementary Fig. 6). Interestingly, the extent of phase separation of full 
length FUS once liberated from a maltose binding protein tag by TEV protease also follows 
the Hofmeister trend, suggesting that the hydrophobic contributions to phase separation are 
Murthy et al.
Page 9
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

also important in full-length FUS, which contains the RNA- binding and RGG sequence 
motif domains in addition to the LC (Fig. 6G). Therefore, hydrophobic interactions, 
particularly from tyrosine residues, contribute to and help stabilize FUS LLPS. We wanted 
to further test which residues contribute to hydrophobic interactions; however, it is difficult 
to use mutagenesis to alter only the hydrophobic interactions without disrupting the other 
contributions to phase separation. We did attempt to evaluate the effect of increasing 
hydrophobicity by changing all twenty-four FUS LC tyrosines to phenylalanine. However, 
this resulted in a dramatically more aggregation-prone FUS LC and full-length FUS, 
consistent with enhanced self-assembly, whose phase separation could not be quantified 
(Supplementary Fig. 7).
Discussion
Together, these data demonstrate that FUS LC LLPS is governed by non-specific hydrogen 
bonding, hydrophobic and π/sp2 interactions that involve all of the residue types within the 
sequence. To illustrate the interactions that stabilize the liquid phase of FUS LC, we used 
all-atom molecular simulations to generate configurational ensembles for intermolecular 
contacts between a subregion of FUS LC. The heterogeneity of interactions is highlighted by 
the array of conformations that each residue type can adopt while interacting with its partner 
(Fig. 7). The combination of spectroscopy and molecular simulation approaches provides 
fuller atomic details of the contacts contributing to FUS LC LLPS than previously available.
Though several studies have solved the structure of FUS LC in β-sheet structures19–21, our 
multiple spectroscopic approaches do not find evidence that structured states are present in 
significant quantities within the liquid phase separated state. These data are consistent with 
our previous findings that FUS LC in the liquid phase appears predominantly disordered5. 
As in studies probing structural details of other proteins within liquid phases, retention of 
disorder and non-specific intermolecular interactions are a common theme22–24. However, 
the conformations of FUS LC within in vivo granules remain to be visualized directly and 
could contain β-sheet structure. Future work elucidating the conversion of the “fuzzy” 
interactions that govern the liquid phase to more persistent interactions that stabilize more 
static aggregate states is needed6,7,48.
Several different types of interactions including electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions 
are hypothesized to be important for FUS LLPS. Studies have previously shown that 
removal of tyrosine disrupts LLPS of FUS, which was attributed to disruption of π-
interactions41. Our study suggests that hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic, and π/sp2 contacts 
from many residue types contribute to stabilizing the FUS LC LLPS (Fig. 5,6). Using all-
atom simulations and mutagenesis, we found that glutamine and tyrosine significantly 
contribute to the transient hydrogen bonds formed in the condensed phase. By analyzing 
contacts formed in simulations and testing salts that alter the hydrophobic effect, we provide 
evidence that hydrophobicity contributes to FUS LC LLPS. Finally, substitution of all 
twenty-four tyrosines in FUS LC to phenylalanine produces a protein that is more 
aggregation-prone, suggesting that increased hydrophobicity and π-interactions and removal 
of side chain hydrogen bonds pushes the protein further towards forming a solid 
Murthy et al.
Page 10
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

(Supplementary Fig. 7). Thus, we hypothesize that the protein sequence composition must 
be balanced to produce liquid-like behavior.
In addition to tyrosine, we find that other residue types contribute to LLPS. Previously, 
glutamine has been shown to promote hardening of FUS droplets, suggesting that 
aggregation may stem from strengthening interactions between glutamine residues42. 
Indeed, many proteins that are associated with LLPS and aggregation contain an abundance 
of glutamine residues such as Sup35, huntingtin, and Whi349–51. We find that glutamine 
residues are major contributors to FUS LC intermolecular contacts, have a high propensity 
for forming hydrogen bond interactions, and modulate partitioning. Interestingly, increased 
glutamine content in huntingtin promotes phase separation and aggregation, suggesting that 
glutamine may be an important residue for LLPS due to its propensity for self-association 
50,52.
While this study was limited to investigating phase separation of the low complexity domain 
of FUS, future biophysical studies probing the structural details of interactions outside of the 
low complexity domain and in a cellular context are needed to fully understand how FUS-
containing membraneless organelles function.
Methods
Protein Expression and Purification
Expression and insoluble purification of untagged human FUS LC and his-tagged human 
FUS LC was carried out as previously reported 5,34. Expression plasmids used in this study 
are available from AddGene (https://www.addgene.org/Nicolas_Fawzi/). FUS LC variants 
were purified similarly to wild-type. Isotopically labeled protein was generated by growing 
E. coli in M9 media (27 mM NaCl, 22 mM KH2PO4, 51 mM Na2HPO4·7H2O, 1 mM 
MgSO4, 112 μM CaCl2·2H2O, 40 μM Biotin, 38 μM Thiamine) supplemented with 15N-
ammonium chloride or 13C-glucose as the sole nitrogen and carbon sources, respectively.
For PRE measurements, FUS LC containing engineered cysteine mutations at A16, S86, and 
S142 were conjugated to either paramagnetic (1-Oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-∆3-pyrroline-3-
methyl) or diamagnetic (control) (1-Acetoxy-2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-δ−3-pyrroline-3-methyl) 
MTSL compounds (Toronto Research Chemicals).
NMR Sample Preparation and NMR Spectroscopy
NMR experiments were recorded on a Bruker Avance 850 MHz 1H Larmor frequency 
spectrometer with HCN TCl z-gradient cryoprobes. All experiments were carried out at 
25°C in 50 mM MES, 150 mM NaCl pH 5.5. All experiments were processed using 
NMRPipe software package 53 and then visualized using NMRFAM-Sparky 54.
The condensed FUS LC sample was generated as previously described (i.e. with untagged 
FUS LC purified via anion exchange and size exclusion chromatography) except the sample 
was centrifuged into a 3 mm NMR tube at 3310 rpm for 10 min at a time at 0-2°C5.
Murthy et al.
Page 11
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

A biphasic sample was generated by diluting FUS LC to 1 mM in 50 mM MES 150 mM 
NaCl pH 3.6 in a 3mm NMR tube. After the experiment, the sample was then removed from 
tube, centrifuged at 13000g for 10 min, and the supernatant placed back into the NMR tube 
to acquire data on dispersed FUS LC.
1H-15N HSQCs for the biphasic and dispersed sample were acquired with 600 and 3072 total 
points in the indirect 15N and direct 1H dimensions with acquisition times of 174 and 172 
ms, and sweep widths of 20 ppm and 10.5 ppm centered at 4.695 ppm and 117 ppm, 
respectively.
Pulsed field gradient NMR diffusion experiments on condensed FUS LC, 100 μM FUS LC 
(dispersed), and 60 μM lysozyme (reference) were performed as 2D experiments using the 
standard Bruker ledbpgppr2s pulse sequence with a gradient strength from 5-98%. The 
experiment was conducted optimized for dispersed and viscous condensed phases, with 
diffusion time and gradient time of 300 ms and 1.2 ms or 1500 ms and 7 ms, respectively. 
Data were analyzed by integrating resonances corresponding to regions including 
asparagine/glutamine and tyrosine side chains in FUS LC (regions from 6.945-7.065 ppm 
for dispersed FUS LC and 6.673-6.786 for condensed FUS LC) and the aliphatic region 
(1.547-1.602 ppm) for lysozyme. Data was analyzed for buffer signals from dispersed and 
condensed FUS LC for regions 1.959-2.085 and 3.22-3.30 ppm, respectively.
The concentration in the condensed phase was estimated using 1D spectra (zgpr) with 2048 
total points, ultra-weak presaturation power of 69 dB weaker than the calibrated hard pulse, 
and relaxation delay of 12 s. The signal intensity of the asparagine/glutamine and tyrosine 
side chains of 100 μM FUS LC was compared with condensed FUS LC. The water content 
of the condensed phase was calculated using a partial specific volume of 0.73 cm3/g for FUS 
LC or by comparing the integrated intensity of the water peak between the 100 μM FUS LC 
and condensed FUS LC samples.
Dark-state exchange saturation transfer (DEST) experiments were used to interrogate ms-s 
conformational exchange of FUS LC in the condensed phase and were acquired with 200 
and 4096 total points for each interleaved experiment in the indirect 15N and direct 1H 
dimensions with sweep widths of 20 and 10.5 ppm centered at 117 and 4.693 ppm, 
respectively. 900 ms 15N radiofrequency (RF) continuous wave pulses were applied at 
powers of either 151 or 301 Hz and 15N carrier frequency offsets between 15 and −15 kHz 
(for 301 Hz: 15, 10, 7, 5, 3, 1.5, −1.5, −3, −5, −7, −10, −15 kHz offsets, and for 151 Hz: 5, 3, 
1.5, −3 kHz offsets) and reference experiments which had no applied RF field. To test the 
hypothesis that observed DEST profiles could be explained by the single state, the DEST 
data were analyzed using DESTfit31 using the values of the transverse relaxation rate R2 at 
each position and a two-state model assuming ΔR2 equal to zero (i.e. no exchange to second 
state) for all residues.
15N Carr Purcell Meiboom Gill (CPMG) relaxation dispersion experiments55 were used to 
interrogate μs-ms timescale conformational exchange of FUS LC in the condensed phase 
and were acquired with 128 and 3072 total points in the indirect 15N and direct 1H 
dimensions with acquisition times of 22.5 and 157 ms, and sweep widths of 33 ppm and 
Murthy et al.
Page 12
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

11.5 ppm centered at 4.7 ppm and 117 ppm, respectively. Each 15N CPMG relaxation 
dispersion experiment comprises of 10 interleaved 15N B1 fields: 0, 67, 133, 200, 267, 400, 
533, 733, 866, and 1000 Hz, with a total CPMG relaxation delay of 60 ms.
Motions of the backbone of condensed FUS LC were measured at both 850 MHz and 500 
MHz 1H frequencies using standard pulse sequences (hsqct1etf3gpsitc3d, 
hsqct2etf3gpsitc3d, hsqcnoef3gpsi). Experiments were recorded where the sample was 
placed within a 5mm tube containing 100% D2O due to trouble with locking on 10% D2O. 
15N R2 experiments at 850 MHz were recorded with 256 and 2048 total points with 
acquisition times of 74 ms and 115 ms and a sweep width of 20 and 10.5 ppm centered at 
117 and 4.7 ppm in the indirect 15N and direct 1H dimensions, respectively. 15N R2 
experiments at 500 MHz were recorded with 256 and 2048 total points with acquisition 
times of 126 ms and 263 ms with a sweep width of 20 and 10.5 ppm centered at 117 and 4.7 
ppm in the indirect 15N and direct 1H dimensions, respectively. Each 15N R2 is made up of 
six interleaved relaxation delays with an interscan delay of 2.5 s, a CPMG field of 556 Hz, 
and total R2 relaxation CPMG loop-lengths of 16.5, 264.4, 33.1, 132.2, 66.1, 198.3 ms at 1H 
850 MHz frequency and 16.5, 264.4, 33.1, 132.2, 66.1, and 231.4 ms at 1H 500 MHz 
frequency.15N R1 experiments at 850 MHz were recorded with 256 and 3072 total points 
with acquisition times of 74 ms and 115 ms and a sweep width of 20 and 10.5 ppm centered 
at 117 and 4.7 ppm in the indirect 15N and direct 1H dimensions, respectively. 15N R1 
experiments at 500 MHz were recorded with 256 and 3072 total points with acquisition 
times of 126 ms and 178 ms and a sweep width of 20 and 10.5 ppm centered at 117 and 4.7 
ppm. Each 15N R1 experiment is made up of six interleaved 15N R1 relaxation delays of 5, 
1000, 100, 800, 500, and 300 ms. (1H) 15N heteronuclear NOE experiments are made up of 
interleaved sequences with and without proton saturation with a recycle delay of 5 s. (1H) 
15N hetNOE experiments were recorded with 256 and 4096 total points with a sweep width 
of 20 and 10.5 ppm centered at 117 and 4.7 ppm in the indirect 15N and direct 1H 
dimensions, respectively.
Intermolecular NOE-based experiments were recorded on condensed FUS LC containing a 
1:1 mixture of 15N/12C and 14N/13C FUS LC or a 1:1 mixture of 15N/12C and 14N/12C FUS 
LC as a control. 3D 13C/15N edited 1H-15N-HSQC-NOESY-1H-13C-HSQC (based on 4D 
hsqcnoesyhsqcncgp4d but omitting incrementing the indirect 1H dimension) experiments 
were recorded with a mixing time of 250 ms and with 58, 2, 58 and 2048 total points with 
sweep widths of 20, 10.5, 56, and 10.5 ppm centered at 117, 4.7, 42, and 4.7 ppm for 
aliphatic regions in the F3 dimension or sweep widths of 20, 10.5, 26, and 10.5 ppm 
centered at 17, 4.7, 123, and 4.7 ppm for aromatic regions in the F3 dimension, for indirect 
15N, indirect 1H, indirect 13C, and direct 1H dimensions, respectively. 3D 13C/15N edited 
1H-13C-HSQC-NOESY-1H-15N-HSQC (based on hsqcnoesyhsqccngp4d but omitting 
incrementing the indirect 1H dimension) experiments were recorded with a mixing time of 
250 ms and with 58, 2, 58 and 2048 total points with sweep widths of 56, 10.5, 20, and 10.5 
ppm centered at 42, 4.7, 117, and 4.7 ppm for aliphatic regions in the F1 dimension or 
sweep widths of 150, 10.5, 20, and 10.5 ppm centered at 75, 4.7, 117, and 4.7 ppm for 
aromatic regions in the F1 dimension, for indirect 13C, indirect 1H, indirect 15N, and direct 
1H dimensions, respectively. 3D 13C,15N-filtered/edited NOESY-1H-13C-HSQC 
(noesyhsqcgpwgx13d) experiments were recorded with a mixing time of 100 ms and with 
Murthy et al.
Page 13
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

128, 60, and 3072 total points with sweep widths of 9, 56, and 10.5 ppm centered at 4.7, 42, 
and 4.7 ppm for aliphatic regions in the F2 dimension or sweep widths of 9, 56, and 10.5 
ppm centered at 4.7, 110, and 4.7 ppm for aromatic regions in the F2 dimension, for the 
indirect 1H, indirect 13C, and direct 1H dimensions, respectively.
Intermolecular PREs were recorded on condensates containing 100:1 15N FUS LC and 
natural abundance MTSL or Ac-MTSL labeled FUS LC. Values of the backbone amide 
proton transverse relaxation rate constant, 1HN R2, were measured as described56 at 850 
MHz for paramagnetic and diamagnetic samples, with 256 and 3072 total points and sweep 
widths of 20 and 10.5 ppm centered at 117 and 4.7 ppm, for the indirect 15N and direct 1H 
dimensions, respectively. Each 1HN R2 experiment is made up of six 1HN R2 relaxation 
delays of 0.2, 40.2, 10.2, 16.2, 20.2, and 4.2 ms. PREs (Γ2) were obtained from the 
difference in 1H R2 values for the paramagnetic and diamagnetic samples.
Coherent anti-Stoke Raman microspectroscopy
Phase separated FUS LC samples were created by diluting 1.2 mM FUS LC stored in 20 
mM CAPS pH 11 to 250 μM in 20 mM MES 150 mM NaCl pH 5.5. For the B-CARS 
measurement 2 μL samples were sandwiched between two glass cover slips in a narrow 
channel (~2 mm wide) between two double-sided tape strips. Aggregated FUS LC sample 
was created by dialyzing 1.2 mM FUS LC (20 mM CAPS pH 11) with 8 M guanidine 
hydrochloride solution (Sigma Aldrich) and exchanging to 20 mM MES 150 mM NaCl 
buffer, For the measurements for amorphous aggregates only, ~1 μL samples were spread on 
glass coverslips and left to dry over 1 hour.
For BCARS measurements an analogous home-built system was described in detail 
previously33. Light from a Millenia green cw laser (Spectra-Physics, Newport Corporation) 
pumps Tsunami Ti:Sapphire oscillator (Spectra-Physics, Newport Corporation) that 
generates picosecond pulse train at 800nm (19 nJ/pulse, 80 MHz). This oscillator pulse is 
then split into two paths by a polarization beam splitter (Thorlabs): one for generating a 
broadband continuum in a photonic crystal fiber (FemtoWHITE, NKT Photonics) for the 
Stokes pulse (850-1200 nm), and the other to pass through an acousto-optical modulator 
connected to CCD camera to produce 1st order beam of a narrowband probe pulse (λc = 800 
nm) during the measurement. The continuum pulse is collimated with a parabolic mirror 
(MPD00M9; ThorLabs) and the two beams are combined by a long-pass filter 
(FF01-834/LP; Semrock) before injection into the inverted microscope (Eclipse Ti, Nicon). 
The excitation objective (60×, 1.2 NA, UplanApo; Olympus) tightly focuses both beams into 
the sample plane and the sample is raster scanned with a computerized x,y,z positioning 
system (Nano-View Series, Mad City ). The BCARS signal is collected in forward direction 
and collimated with another objective (10×, 0.25 NA, Newport), spectrally isolated from the 
excitation light beams by a short-pass filter (FES775, Thorlabs). Timing between the Stokes 
and probe pulses is controlled by a delay stage in the Stokes beam path such that BCARS 
intensity is maximized. The B-CARS signal is directed into a spectrograph (Shamrock 
SR303i; 600 lines mm−1, 300 nm blaze, Andor) that dispersed the light onto a cooled 
(−70°C) deep depletion CCD (iVac 316, Andor). The spectral resolution of the B-CARS 
instrument, as determined from HeNe spectrum measurement is 13 cm−1 ± 1 cm−1 and the 
Murthy et al.
Page 14
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

calibration uncertainty is 11.8 cm−1 ± 1 cm−1. Measurement acquisition and synchronization 
control is performed by custom software in LabView 2013 (National Instruments).
Hyperspectral data from B-CARS measurements were analyzed with custom routines in 
IgorPro (v.6.37, WaveMetrics) and MATLAB (R2016a, MathWorks). Since CARS spectrum 
represents the sum of a resonant and a nonresonant components, a time-domain Kramers-
Kronig transform algorithm57 was used to retrieve the resonant imaginary component which 
represents the underlying Raman-like lineshapes and is usable for further quantitative 
analysis. The error phase correction was performed by Savitzky-Golay filter of second 
polynomial order over 151 spectral points (~424 cm-1).
Diffusion coefficient calculation
The data were fit using the equation I
Io
= Ae−dx2
, were I/I0 is the ratio of the integrated peak 
intensity, A is a constant, d is the diffusion decay rate, and x is the gradient strength 
percentage. The diffusion decay rate was used to obtain the radius of hydration using the 
equation Rh =
dlysozyme
d
2.05 nm , where dlysozyme is the observed diffusion decay rate of 
lysozyme and 2.05 nm is the radius of hydration of lysozyme27. The diffusion coefficient, D, 
was calculated from the Stokes-Einstein equation D =
kBT
6πηRH
 where kB is Boltzmann’s 
constant, T is equal to 298 K, η is equal to 8.9E-4 Pa·s (the viscosity of water at 298 K)58, 
and RH is the radius of hydration of that molecule. The diffusion coefficient of lysozyme 
was calculated using the reported RH which was obtained at 293 K.
Reduced spectral density mapping
Discrete spectral density function values at frequencies 0, ωN, and 0.87ωH were evaluated 
for 15N relaxation data acquired at 850 MHz and 500 MHz 1H Larmor frequencies using 
reduced spectral density mapping with the assumption that J(0.870ωH)= J(0.921ωH)= 
J(0.955ωH)59.
Phase separation quantification
The extent of phase separation of FUS LC was assessed by diluting the protein to a 
concentration of 200 μM from 20 mM CAPS pH 11.0 into 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 
the appropriate salt concentration. Samples were spun down at 14,000 × g for ten minutes at 
room temperature. All samples were done in triplicate. The protein concentration of the 
remaining supernatant was determined with a NanoDrop spectrophotometer.
The partition coefficient for the FUS LC variants was quantified by diluting the protein to a 
concentration of 300 μΜ from 20 mM CAPS pH 11.0 into 50 mM Tris 1M NaCl pH 7.4 at 
4οC. Samples were spun down at 14,000 × g for twenty minutes at 4°C. The dilute phase 
was transferred to a separate tube and the protein concentration remaining in the supernatant 
was determined. 5 μL of the condensed phase was diluted 250× or 500× in 8M urea 50 mM 
Tris pH 7.4, and the concentration in the condensed phase was determined. The partition 
Murthy et al.
Page 15
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

coefficient was calculated by dividing the concentration in the condensed phase by the 
concentration in the dispersed phase.
Turbidity Measurements
Turbidity was used to evaluate phase separation of 5 μΜ MBP-FUS FL in the presence of 
TEV protease in 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 with the appropriate salt concentration. Turbidity 
experiments were performed in a 96 well clear plate (Costar) with 100 μL samples sealed 
with clear optical adhesive film to prevent evaporation (MicroAmp, ThermoFisher). The 
absorbance at 600 nm was monitored over time using a Cytation 3 Cell Imaging Multi-Mode 
Reader (BioTek) at 5 min time intervals for up to 12 hr with mixing. To normalize the data, 
the turbidity of a no TEV control for each condition was subtracted from the turbidity of the 
experimental conditions. Experiments were conducted in triplicate and averaged.
Simulation Details
All atom simulations were conducted using the GROMACS software package60 and the 
Amber03ws force field61. Single chain simulations were conducted using parallel tempering 
in the well-tempered ensemble (PT-WTE) with 16 replicas at a range of temperatures 
spanning 300-514K. Two chain simulations were conducted using a similar PT-WTE setup 
coupled with a well-tempered metadynamics (WT-MetaD) bias on the intermolecular 
contacts in order to aid in sampling binding and unbinding events62–64. Initial configurations 
were generated by conducting 5 ns serial simulations at each temperature used in the parallel 
tempering. For the two-chain simulation, starting configurations include both bound and 
unbound states (Supplementary Fig. 2C). Production simulations were carried out for 200 ns 
(single-chain) or 300 ns (two-chain), with the first 50 ns discarded as equilibration time. For 
the two-chain simulation, we ascertained convergence of the intermolecular contacts by 
calculating the free energy surface from the WT-MetaD bias and show that there is little 
change within the last 20 ns. An additional serial simulation of FUS120-163 was shown to 
reproduce NMR secondary shifts and relaxation parameters in excellent agreement with 
experiment (Supplementary Fig. 2A,B ). Convergence of simulations were ascertained by 
calculating the free energy profile along the collective variables used for well-tempered 
metadynamics at different time points and determining after which time it no longer 
develops significantly.
Coarse-grained simulations were conducted using HOOMD-blue65 with a system of 100 
full-length FUS chains using our recently developed HPS model which treats amino acid 
interactions based on a common hydrophobicity scale66 at 300K using the slab geometry as 
we have previously to sample phase coexistence66,67.
Simulation Analysis
All-atom simulations were analyzed at 300K to match temperatures of experiment. For 
dimer simulations, all analyses are reweighted based on the converged free energy profile 
generated from WT-MetaD. Contacts are considered as two groups having at least one heavy 
atom from each group within 6 Å of each other. Similarly, hydrophobic contacts are 
considered as having two nonpolar atoms (those with less than an absolute net charge less 
than 0.25) within 6Å of each other. Hydrogen bonds are considered using the donor-acceptor 
Murthy et al.
Page 16
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

convention implemented in GROMACS. π/sp2 contacts, calculated for intermolecular 
contacts, were computed as described previously43. Effective NOEs were calculated from 
simulation by determining the distance between hydrogen atoms from each location on 
residues of interest. The combined pseudo-amplitude, ANOE was calculated for each pairing 
of hydrogen atoms as:
ANOE X, Y = ∑
i
X
∑
j
Y
1
rij
6
+ ∑
i
Y
∑
j
X
1
rij
6
where,
X ∈GHN, SHN, THN , QHN, YHN ,
NHδ, QHε
Y ∈AHβ, GHα, QHα, QHβ2, QHβ3, QHγ, SHα, SHβ, THα, THβ, THγ, YHα, YHβ2, YHβ3, YHδ, YHε
From coarse-grained simulations, we compare with the PRE shifts calculated from 
experiment by calculating the ensemble averaged distance from the different probes used 
(A16, S86 and S142) from all amino acids in neighboring chains as:
Γ2
calc i =
1
N N −1 ∑
j
N
∑
k ≠j
N
1
ri, probe
6
j, k
where,
probe ∈16,86,142
to loop over all chain pairs in the coarse-grained simulation box.
Data Availability
Chemical shift assignments and relaxation parameters for the condensed phase can be 
accessed using the BMRB accession 27887. All other data are available from the 
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Code Availability
Simulation software described in Methods section are publicly available and can be found at 
http://www.gromacs.org/ for the atomistic resolution simulations and (http://
glotzerlab.engin.umich.edu/hoomd-blue/) for coarse-grained simulations HOOMD.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Murthy et al.
Page 17
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Acknowledgements
We thank Mandar Naik for helpful advice and assistance with NMR spectroscopy and Wai Shing Tang for 
assistance with NOE calculations from simulated ensembles. Research was supported in part by NIGMS 
R01GM118530 (to N.L.F.) and Human Frontier Science Program RGP0045/2018 (to S.H.P and N.L.F), and NSF 
1845734 (to N.L.F.). A.C.M. was supported in part by NIGMS training grant to the MCB graduate program at 
Brown University (T32GM007601) and NSF graduate fellowship (1644760, to A.C.M.). G.L.D., G.H.Z., and J.M. 
are supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES), Division 
of Material Sciences and Engineering under Award DESC0013979 (to J.M.). Y.K. and S.H.P are supported by the 
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) PA-252611-1 and Marie Curie Foundation CIG322284 (to S.H.P.). Use 
of the high-performance computing capabilities of the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment 
(XSEDE), which is supported by the NSF grant TG-MCB-120014, is gratefully acknowledged in addition to 
resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility 
supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-AC02-05CH11231. The 
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the funding 
agencies.
References
1. Brangwynne CP, Mitchison TJ & Hyman AA Active liquid-like behavior of nucleoli determines 
their size and shape in Xenopus laevis oocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 108, 4334–4339 (2011). 
[PubMed: 21368180] 
2. Brangwynne CP et al. Germline P granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled 
dissolution/condensation. Science (80-. ). 324, 1729–1732 (2009).
3. Mitrea DM & Kriwacki RW Phase separation in biology; functional organization of a higher order. 
Cell Commun. Signal. 14, 1 (2016). [PubMed: 26727894] 
4. King OD, Gitler AD & Shorter J The tip of the iceberg: RNA-binding proteins with prion-like 
domains in neurodegenerative disease. Brain Research 1462, 61–80 (2012). [PubMed: 22445064] 
5. Burke KA, Janke AM, Rhine CL & Fawzi NL Residue-by-Residue View of In Vitro FUS Granules 
that Bind the C-Terminal Domain of RNA Polymerase II. Mol. Cell 60, 231–241 (2015). [PubMed: 
26455390] 
6. Patel A et al. A Liquid-to-Solid Phase Transition of the ALS Protein FUS Accelerated by Disease 
Mutation. Cell 162, 1066–1077 (2015). [PubMed: 26317470] 
7. Murakami T et al. ALS/FTD Mutation-Induced Phase Transition of FUS Liquid Droplets and 
Reversible Hydrogels into Irreversible Hydrogels Impairs RNP Granule Function. Neuron 88, 678–
690 (2015). [PubMed: 26526393] 
8. Kato M et al. Cell-free formation of RNA granules: Low complexity sequence domains form 
dynamic fibers within hydrogels. Cell 149, 753–767 (2012). [PubMed: 22579281] 
9. Sun Z et al. Molecular determinants and genetic modifiers of aggregation and toxicity for the als 
disease protein fus/tls. PLoS Biol 9, e1000614 (2011). [PubMed: 21541367] 
10. Couthouis J et al. A yeast functional screen predicts new candidate ALS disease genes. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci 108, 20881–20890 (2011). [PubMed: 22065782] 
11. Fushimi K et al. Expression of human FUS/TLS in yeast leads to protein aggregation and 
cytotoxicity, recapitulating key features of FUS proteinopathy. Protein Cell 2, 141–149 (2011). 
[PubMed: 21327870] 
12. Kryndushkin D, Wickner RB & Shewmaker F FUS/TLS forms cytoplasmic aggregates, inhibits 
cell growth and interacts with TDP-43 in a yeast model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Protein 
Cell 2, 223–236 (2011). [PubMed: 21452073] 
13. Sun Z et al. Molecular determinants and genetic modifiers of aggregation and toxicity for the als 
disease protein fus/tls. PLoS Biol 9, e1000614 (2011). [PubMed: 21541367] 
14. Bogaert E et al. Molecular Dissection of FUS Points at Synergistic Effect of Low-Complexity 
Domains in Toxicity. Cell Rep 24, 529–537.e4 (2018). [PubMed: 30021151] 
15. Hofweber M et al. Phase Separation of FUS Is Suppressed by Its Nuclear Import Receptor and 
Arginine Methylation. Cell 173, 706–719.e13 (2018). [PubMed: 29677514] 
16. Riggi N, Cironi L, Suvà M-L & Stamenkovic I Sarcomas: genetics, signalling, and cellular origins. 
Part 1: The fellowship of TET. J. Pathol 213, 4–20 (2007). [PubMed: 17691072] 
Murthy et al.
Page 18
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

17. Kwon I et al. Phosphorylation-Regulated Binding of RNA Polymerase II to Fibrous Polymers of 
Low-Complexity Domains. Cell 155, 1049–1060 (2013). [PubMed: 24267890] 
18. Janke AM et al. Lysines in the RNA Polymerase II C-Terminal Domain Contribute to TAF15 Fibril 
Recruitment. Biochemistry 57, 2549–2563 (2018). [PubMed: 28945358] 
19. Murray DT et al. Structure of FUS Protein Fibrils and Its Relevance to Self-Assembly and Phase 
Separation of Low-Complexity Domains. Cell 171, 615–627.e16 (2017). [PubMed: 28942918] 
20. Luo F et al. Atomic structures of FUS LC domain segments reveal bases for reversible amyloid 
fibril formation. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol 25, 341–346 (2018). [PubMed: 29610493] 
21. Hughes MP et al. Atomic structures of low-complexity protein segments reveal kinked b sheets that 
assemble networks. Science (80-. ). 359, 698–701 (2018).
22. Tsang B et al. Phosphoregulated FMRP phase separation models activity-dependent translation 
through bidirectional control of mRNA granule formation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 116, 4218–4227 
(2019).
23. Brady JP et al. Structural and hydrodynamic properties of an intrinsically disordered region of a 
germ cell-specific protein on phase separation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A 114, E8194–E8203 
(2017). [PubMed: 28894006] 
24. Reichheld SE, Muiznieks LD, Keeley FW & Sharpe S Direct observation of structure and 
dynamics during phase separation of an elastomeric protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 114, E4408–
E4415 (2017). [PubMed: 28507126] 
25. Nott TJ et al. Phase Transition of a Disordered Nuage Protein Generates Environmentally 
Responsive Membraneless Organelles. Mol. Cell 57, 936–947 (2015). [PubMed: 25747659] 
26. Vernon RM et al. Pi-Pi contacts are an overlooked protein feature relevant to phase separation. 
Elife 7, (2018).
27. Wilkins DK et al. Hydrodynamic radii of native and denatured proteins measured by pulse field 
gradient NMR techniques. Biochemistry 38, 16424–16431 (1999). [PubMed: 10600103] 
28. Ryan VH et al. Mechanistic View of hnRNPA2 Low-Complexity Domain Structure, Interactions, 
and Phase Separation Altered by Mutation and Arginine Methylation. Mol. Cell 69, 465–479.e7 
(2018). [PubMed: 29358076] 
29. Wei MT et al. Phase behaviour of disordered proteins underlying low density and high 
permeability of liquid organelles. Nat. Chem 9, 1118–1125 (2017). [PubMed: 29064502] 
30. Ying Q & Chu B Overlap Concentration of Macromolecules in Solution. Macromolecules 20, 362–
366 (1987).
31. Fawzi NL, Ying J, Torchia DA & Clore GM Probing exchange kinetics and atomic resolution 
dynamics in high-molecular-weight complexes using dark-state exchange saturation transfer NMR 
spectroscopy. Nat. Protoc 7, 1523–1533 (2012). [PubMed: 22814391] 
32. Fawzi NL, Ying J, Ghirlando R, Torchia DA & Clore GM Atomic-resolution dynamics on the 
surface of amyloid-β protofibrils probed by solution NMR. Nature 480, 268–72 (2011). [PubMed: 
22037310] 
33. Parekh SH, Lee YJ, Aamer KA & Cicerone MT Label-free cellular imaging by Broadband 
coherent anti-stokes raman scattering microscopy. Biophys. J 99, 2695–2704 (2010). [PubMed: 
20959111] 
34. Monahan Z et al. Phosphorylation of the FUS low-complexity domain disrupts phase separation, 
aggregation, and toxicity. EMBO J 36, 2951–2967 (2017). [PubMed: 28790177] 
35. Hernández B, Coïc YM, Pflüger F, Kruglik SG & Ghomi M All characteristic Raman markers of 
tyrosine and tyrosinate originate from phenol ring fundamental vibrations. J. Raman Spectrosc 47, 
210–220 (2016).
36. Siamwiza MN et al. Interpretation of the Doublet at 850 and 830 cm−1 in the Raman Spectra of 
Tyrosyl Residues in Proteins and Certain Model Compounds. Biochemistry 14, 4870–4876 (1975). 
[PubMed: 241390] 
37. Riback JA et al. Stress-Triggered Phase Separation Is an Adaptive, Evolutionarily Tuned Response. 
Cell 168, 1028–1040.e19 (2017). [PubMed: 28283059] 
38. Ribbeck K & Görlich D The permeability barrier of nuclear pore complexes appears to operate via 
hydrophobic exclusion. EMBO J 21, 2664–2671 (2002). [PubMed: 12032079] 
Murthy et al.
Page 19
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

39. Kroschwald S, Maharana S & Simon A Hexanediol: a chemical probe to investigate the material 
properties of membrane-less compartments. Matters 3, e201702000010 (2017).
40. Conicella AE, Zerze GH, Mittal J & Fawzi NL ALS Mutations Disrupt Phase Separation Mediated 
by α-Helical Structure in the TDP-43 Low-Complexity C-Terminal Domain. Structure 24, 1537–
1549 (2016). [PubMed: 27545621] 
41. Lin Y, Currie SL & Rosen MK Intrinsically disordered sequences enable modulation of protein 
phase separation through distributed tyrosine motifs. J. Biol. Chem 292, 19110–19120 (2017). 
[PubMed: 28924037] 
42. Wang J et al. A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation of Prion-
like RNA Binding Proteins. Cell 174, 688–699.e16 (2018). [PubMed: 29961577] 
43. Vernon RM et al. Pi-Pi contacts are an overlooked protein feature relevant to phase separation. 
Elife (2018). doi:10.7554/elife.31486
44. Hofmeister F Zur Lehre von der Wirkung der Salze. Arch. für Exp. Pathol. und Pharmakologie 24, 
247–260 (1888).
45. Cho Y et al. Effects of Hofmeister Anions on the Phase Transition Temperature of Elastin-like 
Polypeptides. J. Phys. Chem. B 112, 13765–13771 (2008). [PubMed: 18842018] 
46. Wegmann S et al. Tau protein liquid–liquid phase separation can initiate tau aggregation. EMBO J 
e98049 (2018). doi:10.15252/embj.201798049 [PubMed: 29472250] 
47. Chaplin M Hofmeister series. (2001). Available at: http://www1.lsbu.ac.uk/water/
hofmeister_series.html. (Accessed: 12th November 2018)
48. Lin Y, Protter DSW, Rosen MK & Parker R Formation and Maturation of Phase-Separated Liquid 
Droplets by RNA-Binding Proteins. Mol. Cell 60, 208–219 (2015). [PubMed: 26412307] 
49. Franzmann TM et al. Phase separation of a yeast prion protein promotes cellular fitness. Science 
(80-. ). 359, (2018).
50. Peskett TR et al. A Liquid to Solid Phase Transition Underlying Pathological Huntingtin Exon1 
Aggregation. Mol. Cell 70, 588–601.e6 (2018). [PubMed: 29754822] 
51. Langdon EM et al. mRNA structure determines specificity of a polyQ-driven phase separation. 
Science (80-. ). 360, 922–927 (2018).
52. Rhys NH, Soper AK & Dougan L The hydrogen-bonding ability of the amino acid glutamine 
revealed by neutron diffraction experiments. J. Phys. Chem. B 116, 13308–13319 (2012). 
[PubMed: 23083424] 
Methods-only References
53. Delaglio F et al. NMRPipe: A multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX pipes. 
J. Biomol. NMR 6, 277–293 (1995). [PubMed: 8520220] 
54. Lee W, Tonelli M & Markley JL NMRFAM-SPARKY: Enhanced software for biomolecular NMR 
spectroscopy. Bioinformatics 31, 1325–1327 (2015). [PubMed: 25505092] 
55. Wang C, Grey MJ & Palmer AG CPMG sequences with enhanced sensitivity to chemical 
exchange. J. Biomol. NMR 21, 361–366 (2001). [PubMed: 11824755] 
56. Fawzi NL, Ying J, Torchia DA & Clore GM Kinetics of amyloid β monomer-to-oligomer exchange 
by NMR relaxation. J. Am. Chem. Soc 132, 9948–9951 (2010). [PubMed: 20604554] 
57. Liu Y, Lee YJ & Cicerone MT Broadband CARS spectral phase retrieval using a time-domain 
Kramers – Kronig transform. Opt. Lett 34, 1363–1365 (2009). [PubMed: 19412273] 
58. Korson L, Drost-hansen W & Millero FJ Viscosity of Water Various Temperatures. J. Phys. Chem 
73, 34–39 (1969).
59. Farrow NA, Zhang O, Szabo A, Torchia DA & Kay LE Spectral density function mapping using 
15N relaxation data exclusively. J. Biomol. NMR 6, 153–162 (1995). [PubMed: 8589604] 
60. Hess B, Kutzner C, Van Der Spoel D & Lindahl E GRGMACS 4: Algorithms for highly efficient, 
load-balanced, and scalable molecular simulation. J. Chem. Theory Comput 4, 435–447 (2008). 
[PubMed: 26620784] 
Murthy et al.
Page 20
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

61. Best RB, Zheng W & Mittal J Balanced protein-water interactions improve properties of 
disordered proteins and non-specific protein association. J. Chem. Theory Comput 10, 5113–5124 
(2014). [PubMed: 25400522] 
62. Sugita Y & Okamoto Y Replica-exchange molecular dynamics method for protein folding. Chem. 
Phys. Lett 314, 141–151 (1999).
63. Bonomi M & Parrinello M Enhanced sampling in the well-tempered ensemble. Phys. Rev. Lett 
104, (2010).
64. Barducci A, Bussi G & Parrinello M Well-tempered metadynamics: A smoothly converging and 
tunable free-energy method. Phys. Rev. Lett 100, (2008).
65. Anderson JA, Lorenz CD & Travesset A General purpose molecular dynamics simulations fully 
implemented on graphics processing units. J. Comput. Phys 227, 5342–5359 (2008).
66. Dignon GL, Zheng W, Kim YC, Best RB & Mittal J Sequence determinants of protein phase 
behavior from a coarse-grained model. PLoS Comput. Biol 14, e1005941 (2018). [PubMed: 
29364893] 
67. Dignon GL, Zheng W, Best RB, Kim YC & Mittal J Relation between single-molecule properties 
and phase behavior of intrinsically disordered proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 115, 9929–9934 
(2018). [PubMed: 30217894] 
68. Tompa P Intrinsically unstructured proteins. Trends in Biochemical Sciences 27, 527–533 (2002). 
[PubMed: 12368089] 
Murthy et al.
Page 21
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 1. NMR characterization of condensed FUS LC.
A) 1H-15N heteronuclear quantum coherence spectrum of FUS LC in the phase separated 
state. A 1 mM biphasic sample (red), containing both dilute and condensed phases, 
generates two sets of peaks corresponding to the dilute phase (blue) and to a condensed 
macroscopic phase (green). B,C) PFG diffusion of the dispersed and condensed phase 
relative to lysozyme. B) was recorded with a diffusion time of 300 ms and gradient length of 
1.2 ms, while C) was recorded with a diffusion time of 1.5 s and gradient length of 7 ms. 
Solid lines are best-fit solution to I/I0 = Aedx2 , where d is proportional to the diffusion 
coefficient, and the x axis is the gradient ratio. Mean and uncertainty in diffusion coefficient 
represents confidence interval equal to 1 s.d. in the one dataset shown. (D, E, F) Estimation 
Murthy et al.
Page 22
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of the concentration inside of the condensed phase using 1D 1H NMR spectroscopy. 
Unscaled intensities of condensed FUS LC were compared with 100 μM FUS LC (D,E). The 
relative intensity of the glutamine side chain residue NMR resonances in the condensed 
phase compared to a standard concentration (100 μM) dispersed phase FUS LC suggests a 
concentration of 27.8 mM = 477 mg/mL in the condensed phase (F).
Murthy et al.
Page 23
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 2. Lack of evidence for structured conformations in condensed phase FUS LC.
A) Experimental dark-state exchange saturation transfer profiles (points) for condensed FUS 
LC as a function of the offset from the 15N carrier frequency and applied saturation field 
show no deviations from the profiles calculated for a single state (lines) with R2 values 
measured directly on the major, disordered state. Data are plotted as mean ± s.d. 
(approximately the size of the circles) propagated from best-fit parameter confidence 
interval equal to 1 s.d. in one representative data set out of two independent experiments. B) 
15N CPMG profiles of condensed FUS LC are flat, providing no evidence for significant 
minor populations of structured states in μs-ms timescale conformational exchange with the 
primary, disordered state. The blue line is the average R2eff at each residue position. C) The 
fitted Rex component, derived from reduced spectral density mapping at two fields. Data are 
plotted as mean ± propagated best-fit parameter confidence interval equal to 1 s.d. in one 
representative data set of two independent experiments. D) The Raman spectral features of 
FUS LC 12E (dispersed control) and condensed droplets of FUS LC. Hen egg white 
lysozyme fibrils (dashed blue line) serve as a fibril control. The spectra are stacked for 
clarity. The amide I region and tyrosine side chain region are indicated by boxes A and B, 
respectively, while the tyrosine doublet modes are indicated by boxes C and D. Insets are 
brightfield micrographs of the samples used for vibrational spectroscopy. FUS LC 12E does 
not assemble into condensates as previously characterized and was used as a high 
concentration solution control 34. Scale bars are 10 μm.
Murthy et al.
Page 24
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3. Non-specific intermolecular contacts between all residue types underlie FUS LC LLPS.
A) Equimolar amounts of 15N-labeled and 13C-label FUS LC were used to create a 
condensed macroscopic phase in order to conduct HSQC-NOESY-HSQC experiments. B) 
NOE strips (left) from SCα, YCδ, GCα, and QCγ show NOEs from 15N regions (right) 
corresponding to the dashed lines. C, D, E, F) Quantification of NOEs from 15N labeled 
residues to 13C labeled residues from the serine and threonine backbone regions (C), 
glutamine/tyrosine backbone regions (D), glutamine/asparagine side-chain regions (E), and 
glycine backbone regions (F) with corresponding NOE snapshots from a two-chain 
Murthy et al.
Page 25
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

simulation of FUS LC. The simulated structures were not calculated from the experimental 
data but are provided to show examples of the types of contacts that would generate the 
observed NOE profiles. Small contributions from intramolecular interactions were 
eliminated by subtracting the peak intensity from a control experiment on an equimolar 15N-
labeled and natural abundance sample. Gray lines indicate the noise level of the two-
dimensional plane. Data are plotted as peak height mean ± uncertainty equal to r.m.s.d. of 
baseline noise in one representative data set out of two experiments. G) Intermolecular 
interaction profiles calculated from a two-chain simulation of FUS120-163 binned by residue 
type. H) Intermolecular interaction profiles calculated from a two-chain simulation of 
FUS120-163 binned by residue position.
Murthy et al.
Page 26
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4. Interactions in the condensed phase are dispersed throughout the entire sequence.
A) Schematic of the experimental design for the paramagnetic relaxation enhancement 
experiments. B) Intermolecular paramagnetic relaxation enhancements of condensed 15N 
FUS LC in the presence of minor amounts of FUS LC labeled at positions A16C, S86C, and 
S142C. Gray bars correspond to all tyrosines residues. Data are plotted as mean ± best-fit 
parameter confidence interval equal to 1 s.d. in one data set. C) Observation of NOEs to all 
observable backbone positions (15N) from all sidechain 13C positions TCγ, QCγ, SCβ, 
GCα, YCε, and YCδ in 13C-HSQC-NOESY-15N-HSQC planes. Spectral intensity in all 
planes contoured to the same level. Asterisks indicate incomplete filtering of unlabeled 
(14N) positions in 13C14N component of sample. D) Predicted intermolecular PRE profiles 
calculated from FUS LC slab simulations at 300K.
Murthy et al.
Page 27
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5. Hydrogen bonding interactions and glutamines contribute to stabilizing FUS LC 
LLPS.
A) Average number of hydrogen bonds from the backbone and side chain for each residue 
calculated from a two-chain simulation of FUS120-163. Hydrogen bonds between backbone/
side chain and all atoms of the other molecules are considered. Data are plotted as mean ± 
s.e.m of n=5 equal divisions of the total data set. Tyrosine and glutamine residues are 
highlighted with gray and red bars, respectively. B) Average number of intermolecular 
hydrogen bonds formed by each residue type. Data are plotted as mean ± s.e.m of n=5 equal 
divisions of the total data set. C) Example of hydrogen-bonding interactions from the two-
chain simulation of FUS120-163. D) Schematic of different FUS LC variants used. QQ4SS #1 
and QQ4SS #2 are variants in which eight glutamine residues have been mutated to serine. 
S12xQ is a variant in which twelve serines have been mutated to glutamine. E) Phase 
separation assay and F) quantification of the partition coefficient of the glutamine and serine 
variants in 1M NaCl at 4°C. Data are plotted as mean ± s.d. of n=3 technical replicates.
Murthy et al.
Page 28
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6. Hydrophobic and π/sp2 contacts contribute to FUS LC LLPS.
A) Average number of hydrophobic contacts for any two heavy hydrophobic atoms within 6 
Å of each other from a two-chain simulation of FUS120-163. Data are plotted as mean ± s.e.m 
of n=5 equal divisions of the total data set. B) Average number of intermolecular 
hydrophobic contacts formed by each residue type. Data are plotted as mean ± s.e.m of n=5 
equal divisions of the total data set. C) Example of hydrophobic interactions from the two-
chain simulation of FUS120-163. D) Average number of π/sp2 contacts from the backbone 
and side chain for each residue calculated from a two-chain simulation of FUS120-163 Data 
are plotted as mean ± s.e.m of n=5 equal divisions of the total data set. Tyrosine and 
glutamine residues are highlighted with gray and red bars, respectively. E) Average number 
of π/sp2 contacts formed by each residue type. Data are plotted as mean ± s.e.m of n=5 
equal divisions of the total data set. F,G) The Hofmeister salt series changes the amount of 
Murthy et al.
Page 29
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

protein left in the dispersed phase according to their chaotropic or kosmotropic qualities for 
both FUS LC (F) and full-length FUS (G). Data are plotted as mean ± s.d. of n=3 technical 
replicates.
Murthy et al.
Page 30
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 7. Interactions between FUS LC molecules that stabilize LLPS are structurally 
heterogeneous.
FUS LC is predominately disordered in the condensed phase. The interactions that stabilize 
the condensed phase involve all of the residue types that are represented in the sequence. 
Due to the disordered nature of FUS LC, there is not one structural ensemble that fully 
represents the interactions that stabilize the condensed phase. Here we provide a model for 
the dynamic and structurally heterogeneous intermolecular contacts that may stabilize FUS 
LC phase separation, based on snapshots of intermolecular contacts from two-chain 
simulations. Example configurations derived from the structural ensemble are aligned to the 
residue named along the vertical axis (yellow) and the diversity of contact poses with the 
residue named along the horizontal axis (cyan) are displayed.
Murthy et al.
Page 31
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Murthy et al.
Page 32
Table 1.
Raman intensity ratios for the amide I region and tyrosine doublet region.
Sample (mean ± s.d. derived from baseline noise 
rmsd in representative samples of at least 2 
samples tested.)
Tyrosine doublet ratio 
(850 cm−1/830 cm−1)
Tyrosine side chain and 
amide I (1603 cm−1/1663 cm
−1) ratio
Amide I peak width
(FWHM cm−1)
FUS LC 12E (dispersed control)
1.32 ± 0.08
0.52 ± 0.04
59.1 ± 1.7
FUS LCCondensed
1.25 ± 0.07
0.50 ± 0.03
54.2 ± 2.1
FUS LCAggregated
0.96 ± 0.09
0.36 ± 0.03
39.4 ± 0.5
HEWL amyloid fibril (crystalline control)
NA
NA
23.4 ± 0.8
Nat Struct Mol Biol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 January 01.
