P•re .t AppL Clrml., Vol. 48, pp. 127-132. Perpmon Press, 1976. Printed in Great Britain. 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF 
PURE AND APPLIED CHEMISTRY 
ANAL YTICAL CHEMISTRY DIVISION 
COMMISSION ON ANALYTICAL NOMENCLATURE 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR 
NOMENCLATURE OF ION-SELECTIVE 
ELECTRODES 
(RECOMMENDATIONS 1975) 
PERGAMON PRESS 
OXFORD · NEW YORK · PARIS · FRANKFURT 

ANAL YTICAL CHEMISTRY. DIVISION 
COMMISSION ON ANALYTICAL NOMENCLATUREt 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NOMENCLATURE 
OF ION-SELECTIVE ELECTRODES 
(Recommendations 1975) 
INTRODUCTION 
The rapid expansion of activity in the field of ion-selective 
electrodes makes it · highly desirable to achieve some 
sfimdardization of nomenclature in this area. 
The report has been widely circulated by the Commis-
sion :to other Commissions of the Analytical Chemistry 
Division and to experts in many countries in first, second, 
and third draft forms. It has been modified many times in 
the lightof comments received over a period of two years. 
This final report incorporates most · of the suggestions 
made on previous drafts, and was prepared by a subcom-
mittee consisting of G. G. Guilbault (Chairman), R. A. 
Durst, M. S. Frant, H. Freiser, E. H. Hansen, T. S. Light, 
E. Pungor, G. Rechnitz, N. M. Rice, T. J. Rohm, W. 
Simon, arid J. D. R. Thomas. 
I. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
(a) Definition of terms 
1. Activity, 
activity 
coefficient 
and 
concen-
tration. Refer to the Manual of Symbolsand Terminology 
for Physicochemical Quantities and Units (Butterworths, 
London, 1973 edition). 
2. Calibration curoe. This is a plot of the potential 
(emf) of a given ion-selective electrode cell assembly 
(ion-selective electrode combined with an identified refer-
ence electrode) vs the logarithm of the ionic activity 
(concentration) of a given species. For uniformity, it is 
recommended that the potential be plotted on the ordinate 
(vertical axis) with the more positive potentials at the top 
of the graph and that paA (-log activity of the species 
measured, A) or pcA be plotted on the abscissa (horizontal 
axis) with · increasing activity to the right. 
· 
J. Limit of detection. A calibration curve ordinarily 
has the shape shown in Fig. 1. 
By analogy with definitions adopted in other fields, the 
Iimit of detection should be defined as the concentration 
for which, under the specified conditions, the potential E 
deviates from the average potential in region I by·some 
arbitrary multiple of the standard error of a single meas-
urement of the potential in region I. 
fChainnan: H. M. N. H. lrving (UK); Secretary: H. Zettler 
(FRG); Members: G. Baudin (France), H. Freiser (USA), G. G. 
Guilbault (USA), 0. Menis (USA), N. M. Rice (UK), A. J. B. 
Robertson (UK); Associate Members: A. C. Docherty (UK), W. 
FIScher (FRG), H. Kaiser (FRG), G. F. Kirkbright (UK), 0. 
Samuelson (Sweden), G. Svehla (UK), G. Tölg (FRG), T. S. West 
(lJK); National Representative: H. A. Tawfik (Egypt). 
PAC. Vol. 48. No. 1-J 
129 
Fig. L 
In the present state of the art, and for the sake of 
practicill convenience, a simpler (and · more convenient) 
definition is recommended at this time. The practicallimit 
of detection may be taken as the activity (or concentra-
tion) of A at the point of intersection of the extrapolated 
linear segments of the calibration curve, as shown by the 
following illustration: 
E 
f-------==-·i-
11 
I 
I 
I 
vlimit of detec'tion 
poA 
Fig.2. 
Since many factors affect the detection Iimit, the ex-
perimental conditions used should be reported, te. com-
position of the solution, the history and preconditioning of 
the electrode, stirring rate, etc. 
4. Drift. This is the slow non-random change with time 
in the potential (emf) of an ion-selective electrode cell 
assembly maintained in a solution of constant · composi-
tion and temperature. 

130 
COMMISSION ON ANALYTICAL NOMENCLATURE 
5. Hysteresis (electrode memory). Hysteresis is said to 
have occurred if, after the concentration has been 
changed and restored to its original value, there is a 
different potential observed. The reproducibility of the 
electrode will consequently be poor. The systematic error 
is generally in the direction of th~: concentration of the 
solution in which the electrode was previously immersed. 
6. Membrane. This refers to a continuous layer cover-
ing a structure or separating two electrolytic solutions. 
The membrane of an ion-selective electrode is responsible 
for the potential response and selectivity of the electrode 
(see II for listing of membranes). 
7. Ion-selective electrodes. These are electrochemical 
sensors, the potentials of which are linearly dependent on 
the logarithm of the activity of a given ion in solution. 
Such devices are distinct from systems which involve 
redox reactions (Class I and II electrodes). 
Comment: The term "ion-specific electrode" is not 
recomme1;1ded. The term "specific" implies that the elec-
trode does not respond to additional ions. Since no 
electrode is truly specific for one ion, the term "ion-
selective" is recommended as more appropriate. "Selec-
tive ion-sensitive electrode" is a little used term to 
describe an ion-selective electrode. 
The potential response has as its principal component 
the free-energy change associated with mass transfer (by 
ion-exchange, adsorption, solvent extraction or some 
other mechanism) across a phase boundary. 
8. Interfering substance. This is any species, other than 
the ion being measured, whose presence in the sample 
solution affects the measured potential of a cell. 
Interfering substances fall into two classes: "electrode" 
interferences and "method" interferences. Examples of 
the first class would be those substances which give a 
similar response to the ion being measured and whose 
presence generally results in an apparent increase in the 
activity (or concentration) of the ion to be determined 
(e.g. Na+ for the Ca2+ electrode), those species which 
interact with the membrane so as to change its chemical 
composition (i.e. organic solvents for · the liquid or 
polyvinylchloride (PVC) membrane electrodes) or elec-
trolytes present at a high concentration giving rise to 
appreciable liquid-junction potentials. The second class of 
interfering substance is that which interacts with the ion 
being measured so as to decrease its activity or apparent 
concentration, but where the electrode continues to report 
the true activity (i.e. CN- present in the measurement of 
Ag+). 
9. Reference electrode. An electrode which maintains a 
virtually invariant potential under the conditions prevail-
ing in an electrochemical measurement, and which serves 
to permit the observation, measurement or control of the 
potential of the indicator (ortest) or working electrode. 
( Comment: Practical reference electrodes are generally 
constructed so that their electrolyte solutions serve as salt 
bridges to the solutions under investigation). 
10. Internat reference electrode. This is a reference 
electrode which is contained inside an ion-selective elec-
trode assembly. Comment: The system frequently con-
sists of a silver-silver chloride electrode in contact with an 
appropriate solution containing chloride and a fixed con-
centration of the ion for which the membrane is selective. 
11. Ionic-strength adjustment buffer. A pH buffered 
solution of high ionic strength added to samples and 
calibration solutions before measurement in order to 
achieve identical ionic strengthandhydrogen ion activity. 
In addition, complexing agents and other components are 
often added to minimize the effects of certain interfer-
ences. 
12. Nemstian response. An ion-selective electrode is 
said to have a Nernstian response over a given range of 
activity (or concentration) in which a plot of the potential 
of such electrode in conjunction with a reference elec-
trode vs the logarithm of the ionic activity of a given 
species (a.J is linear with a slope of 2.303 x HJl RT/zAF 
mV/decade (59.16/zA mV per unit of paA at 25°C). 
13. Practical response time. The length of time which 
elapses between the instant at which an ion-selective 
electrode and a reference electrode are brought into 
contact with a sample solution (or at which the concentra-
tion of the ion of interest in a solution in contact with an 
ion-selective electrode and a reference electrode is 
changed) and the first instant at which the potential of the 
cell becomes equal to its steady-state value within 1 mV. 
The experimental conditions used should be stated, i.e. 
the stirring rate, the composition of solution of which the 
response time is measured, the composition of the solu-
tion to which the electrode was exposed prior to this 
measurement, the history and preconditioning of the 
electrode, and the temperature. 
14. Combination electrode. An electrochemical ap-
paratus which incorporates an ion-selective electrode and 
a reference electrode in a single assembly, thereby avoid-
ing the need for a separate reference electrode. 
15. Potentiometrie selectivity coefficient. kr,~ defines 
the ability of an ion-selective electrode to distinguish 
between different ions in the same solution. It is not 
identical to the similar term used in separation processes. 
The selectivity coefficient is .evaluated by means of the 
ion-selective electrode emf response, in mixed solutions 
of the primary ion, A, and interfering ion, B, (or less 
desirably, in separate solutions). The activities of the 
primary ion, A, and the interfering ion, B, at which k~~~ is 
determined should always be specified, as the value of 
kr.~ is defined by the modified Nernst equation. The 
smaller the value of k~~~. the greater the electrode's 
preference for the principal ion, A, as described later. 
Comment: The terms selectivity constant and selectiv-
ity factor are frequently used instead of selectivity coeffi-
cient. However, in order to standardize the terminology 
associated with ion-selective electrodes, use of the term 
selectivity coefficient is recommended, as is the fixed 
interference method for its evaluation (see III. D .. 2). 
16. Standardaddition or known addition method. This 
is·a procedure for the determination of the concentration 
of a particular species in a sample by adding known 
amounts of · that species to the sample solution and 
recording the change in potential of an ion-selective 
electrode vs a suitable reference electrode. 
17. Standard subtraction or known subtraction. This is 
a variation of the standard addition method. In this 
procedure changes in the potential resulting from the 
addition of a known amount of a species which reacts 
stoichiometrically with the ion of interest (e.g. a complex-
ing agent) are employed to determine the original activity 
or concentration of the ion. 
18. Isopotential point. For a cell containing an ion-
selective electrode and a reference electrode there is often 
a particular activity of the ion concerned for which the 
potential of the cell is independ~;~tt of temperature. That 
activity, and the corresponding potential, define the isopo-
tential point. The identity of the reference electrode, and 
the composition of the filling solution of the measuring 
electrode, must be specified. 

Recommendations for nomenclature of ion-selective electrodes 
l31 
ll. CLASSD'ICATION OF ION-SELECTIVE ELECTRODI!'S 
A. Primary electrodes 
1. Crystalline electrodes. May be homogeneaus or 
heterogeneous. 
-
a. Homogeneaus Membrane Electrodes are ion-
selective electrodes in which.the membrane is a crystal-
line material prepared from either a single compound or a 
homogeneaus mixture of compounds (i.e., Ag2S, 
Agi/AgzS). 
b. Heterogeneaus Membrane Electrodes are formed 
when an active substance, or mixture of active sub-
stances, is mixed with an inert matrix, such as silicone 
rubber or PVC, or placed on hydrophobized graphite, to 
form the sensing membrane which is heterogeneaus in 
nature. 
2. Non-crystalline electrodes. In these electrodes a 
support, containing an ionic (either cationic or anionic) 
species or an uncharged species, forms the ion-selective 
membrane which is usually interposed between two 
aqueous solutions. The support used can be either porous 
(e.g. Millipore filter, glass frit, etc.) or non-porous (e.g. 
glass or inert polymeric material such as PVC, yielding 
witli-the ion-exchanger and the solvent a "solidified" 
homogeneaus mixture). These electrodes exhibit a re-
sponse due to the presence of the ion-exchange material 
in the membrane. 
a. Rigid matrix electrodes (e.g. glass electrodes) are 
ion-selective electrodes in which the sensing membrane is 
a thin piece of glass. The chemical composition of the 
glass determines the selectivity of the membrane. In this 
group are: 
hydrogen ion-selective electrodes 
monovalent cation-selective electrodes 
b. Electrodes with a mobile carrier: 
(1) Positively charged-bulky cations (e.g. those of 
quatemary ammonium salts or salts of transition metal 
complexes such as derivatives of 1, 10-phenanthroline) 
which, when dissolved in a suitable organic solvent and 
held on an inert support (e.g. Millipore filter or PVC), 
provide membranes which are sensitive to changes in the 
activities of anions. 
(2) Negatively charged-Complexing agents (e.g. of 
type (RO)zPOn or bulky anions 
(e.g. 
tetra-p-
chlorophenylborate anions) which, when dissolved in a 
suitable organic solvent and heldinan inert support (e.g. 
Millipore filter or PVC), provide membranes which are 
sensitive to changes in the activities of cations. 
(3) Uncharged Carrier-Electrodes based on solutions 
of molecular carriers of cations (e.g. antibiotics, mac-
rocyclic compounds or other sequestering agents) which 
can be used in membrane preparations which show 
sensitivity and selectivity to certain cations. 
B. Sensitized ion-selective electrodes 
1. Gas sensing electrodes are sensors composed of an 
indicating and a reference electrode which use a 
gas-permeable membrane or an air-gap to separate the 
sample solution from a thin film of an intermediate 
solution, which is either held between the gas membrane 
and the ion-sensing membrane of the electrode, or placed 
on the surface of the electrode using a wetting agent (e.g. 
air-gap electrode). This intermediate solution interacts 
with the gaseous species in such a way as to produce a 
change in a measure value (e.g. pH) of the intermediate 
solution. This change is then sensed by the ion-selective 
electrode and is proportional to the partial pressure of the 
gaseous species in the sample. (Note: An exception to this 
classification is the hydrogen gas electrode which 
responds both to the partial pressure of hydrogen and to 
pH. The oxygen electrode fits under this classification 
although, in contrast to all other sensors, it is an 
amperometric and not a potentiometric device). 
2. Enzyme $Ubstrate electrodes are sensors in which an 
ion-selective electrode is covered with a coating contain-
ing an enzyme which causes the reaction of an organic or 
inorganic substance (substrate) to produce a species to 
which the electrode responds. Alternatively, the sensor 
could be covered with a layer of substrate which reacts 
with the enzyme to be assayed. 
lll. CONSTANTS AND SYMBOLS 
A. The modified Nemst equation for ion-selective elec-
trodes and definition of kr,~ 
2 303RT 
E = constant + 'zAF log [aA + kX~MaB)'A1'B 
+ k~~HacYA''c--- -] 
E is the experimentally observed potential of a 
cell (in millivolts) 
R is the gas constant and is equal to 8.31441 
JK-1 mol-1 
T is the thermodynamic temperature (in °K) 
F is the Faraday constant and is equal to 
(9.648670 ± 0.000054) x W C mol-1 
zBand Zc 
is the activity of the ion, A 
are the activities of the interfering ions, B and 
C, respectively 
is the potentiometric selectivity coefficient 
is an integer with sign and magnitude corres-
ponding to the charge of the principal ion, A 
~e integers with sign and magnitude corres-
ponding to the charge of interfering ions, B 
and C, respectively 
The "constant" term includes the standard or zero 
potential of the indicator electrode, E~88 , the reference 
electrode potential, ERof, and the junction potential, E1 (all 
in millivolts). 
B. Ionic strength of a solution is defined by I= 1/2 Ic,z? 
I is the ionic strength; c; is the concentration in mole 
per Iiter of an ion, i, Z; is the charge of the ion, i. 
C. Other symbols 
Sign conventions should be in accord with IUPAC 
recommendations (Manual of Symbols and Terminology 
for Physicochemical Quantities and Units, Butterworths, 
London, 1973 edition, p. 27). 
D. Methods for determining k~1 
1. Fixed interference method. The potential of a cell 
comprising an ion-selective electrode and a reference 
electrode is measured with solutions of constant Ievel of 
interference, a8 , and varying activity of the primary ion, 
aA. The potential values obtained are plotted vs the 
activity of the primary ion. The intersection of the 
extrapolation of the linear portions of this curve will 
indicate the values of aA which aretobe used to calculate 
k~~~ from the equation: 
2. Separate solution method. The potential of a cell 

132 
COMMISSION ON ANALYTICAL NOMENCUTURE 
comprisiilg an ion-selective electrode and a reference 
electrode is measured with each of two separate solutions, 
one containing the ion A at the activity a_. (but no B), the 
other containiilg the ion B at the sarile activity ·as = aA 
(but no A). lf the· measured values are E1 and Ez, 
respectively, the value of k~ may be calculated from the 
equation: 
.This method is recommended only if the electrode 
exhibits a Nemstian response. It is less desirable because 
it does not represent as weil the actual conditions under 
which the electrodes are used.