http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v71i3.2848
Page 1 of 6
Original Research
Author:
Mirjam Zimmermann1
Affiliations:
1Fakultät Philosophische, 
Evangelische Theologie 
Seminar, Universität Siegen, 
Germany
2Faculty of Theology, 
North-West University, 
Potchefstroom Campus, 
South Africa
Note:
Mirjam Zimmermann is an 
extraordinary professor at 
the North-West University, 
Potchefstroom, South Africa.
Correspondence to:
Mirjam Zimmermann
Email: 
zimmermann@evantheo.
uni-siegen.de
Postal address:
Universität Siegen, 
Evangelische Theologie 
Seminar, Adolf Reichwein Str., 
57068 Siegen, Germany
Dates:
Received: 27 Oct. 2014
Accepted: 23 Mar. 2015
Published: 21 Aug. 2015
How to cite this article:
Zimmermann, M., 2015, 
‘What is Children’s Theology? 
Children’s Theology as 
theological competence: 
Development, differentiation, 
methods’, HTS Teologiese 
Studies/Theological Studies 
71(3), Art. #2848, 6 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
hts.v71i3.2848
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
What is Children’s Theology? Children’s Theology 
as theological competence: Development, 
differentiation, methods
Children’s Theology, theologising with children, or Child Theology has become an established 
concept in the discipline of religious education in Germany. The discipline departs from the 
point of view that children have a right to their religion, which makes the process of religious 
education the focal point. It is, however, important to understand the theology generated by 
children and also to create interaction with their religious views. This requires dialogue in 
which relevant questions are to be considered and discussed. The challenges for religious 
educators are subsequently treated.
Read online: 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
What is Children’s Theology? Children’s Theology as 
theological competence
The background for the concept is secularism and religious plurality in Europe and that leads to 
the question: How can we pass on our religious tradition to our children? Over the past 20 years, 
Children’s Theology has become an established concept in Europe within the academic field of 
religious education (Kraft, Roose & Büttner 2011b). Based on the point of view that children 
in institutions of public education have a right to their religion (Schweitzer 2000, 2011:10) and, 
particularly in religion classes, have a right to religious education and to information that is new 
to them, pioneers of Children’s Theology such as Anton A. Bucher, Gerhard Büttner, Friedhelm 
Kraft, Petra Freudenberger-Lötz, Hartmut Rupp, Elisabeth Schwarz and Mirjam Zimmermann 
advocate ‘a hermeneutics of active acquisition rather than transmittal’ (Bucher 2002:23). They are 
convinced that children can be regarded as people:
[W]ho can think about theological topics in their specific way. Just as children are sensitive to philosophical 
questions, they are sensitive to theological questions. … Children are not only encouraged to say what 
they think, they [are] also encouraged to specify why they think, what they think and in which respect 
what they think might differ from what other children (or adults) think. (Kraft et al. 2011b:5)
Is seems that theologising with children is a concept that is primarily related to religious education 
at school, but there are also descriptions of possibilities with children in families.
The goal is to understand the theology generated by children, to interpret the ‘pattern 
(hypothetically) detected in this way’ (e.g. on prayer see Roose 2006:137–146) and finally to give 
new theological ideas, identify the nuances and make it more flexible.
Using the concept of the advancement of theological competency (Zimmermann 2012:131–
164) allows the more open notion of ‘religious competency’, which is used extensively in the 
competency debate, to be expanded into an area so far neglected and to be brought back into 
the theological tradition of thought. The intention is to thoughtfully investigate a historical, 
contemporary or personal faith practice, while moving away from a spirituality of the child that 
is practiced but not reflected. Therefore, in order to advance theological competency, a process of 
confrontation, examination and reflection must take place in classroom situations.
Additionally, theologising gains connectivity in the religious-didactic field through its integration 
into the competency debate (Kraft, Freudenberger-Lötz & Schwarz 2011a:9–16). Competency 
in Children’s Theology is defined as the empirically measurable ability of children ‘not only to 
articulate but also to reflectively penetrate and refine their own thoughts and ideas on theological 
questions’ (Reiß & Freudenberger-Lötz 2012:133). It is thus a cognitive ability that reveals itself 
in the posing and processing of theological questions as well as in narrative and metaphorical 
modes of thought and which enables one to deal with paradoxes and hermeneutical questions. It 
assists in the solving of theological problems, the points of origin which lie between the child and 
the theological issues. Its specificity to a field or domain is revealed through specific theological 

http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v71i3.2848
Page 2 of 6
Original Research
subject matters (e.g. the question of God, Christology, the Holy 
Ghost). This competency can be learned, tested, expanded 
and improved and it can be called up as a competency for 
communicating and acting in appropriate situations. It can 
be analysed in form and content, for example with regard 
to consistency, abstraction, dependence on language, the use 
of fundamental categories, the generation of causal systems 
and connectivity to interpretations and systems, and it can 
be evaluated and promoted according to didactic goals (for 
more detail see Zimmerman 2013:163).
Drawing on established definitions within the systematic-
theological tradition, Children’s Theology is defined as:
•	 theology of revelation and answers
•	 lay theology
•	 existential and personal theology
•	 concrete, creative and contextual
•	 but also temporary, critical and dialogical theology.
In every case it is closely tied to language as the medium for 
reflection (for more detail see Zimmermann 2012:88–92).
Many aspects concerning the goal and the road to be used 
still needs further definition and research. The central 
concern of researchers is to remain respectful of children 
and not to functionalise or romanticise their voices in 
order to come to a new vitality in theology. Certainly, 
the awareness of the position of children in theology is 
part of the actual hermeneutical turn in theology (Dillen 
2007) and can also be seen as a ‘postmodern modus’ of 
doing theology (Roebben 2011:15), in which the difference 
between a child, an ordinary theologian and an academic 
professional theologian is not substantial, but graded 
(Bucher 2002:11).
The development of Children’s 
Theology
Although the term ‘Children’s Theology’ is quite new, the 
concept behind it has a long history. Individual aspects 
reveal analogies to insights and postulations from various 
phases of theology and religious education, such as:
[T]he perception of the otherness of the child in ancient times, 
the attempt to improve its social status in the New Testament, 
a recognition and appreciation of its own value during the 
Enlightenment, the change of perspective in an education 
‘originating with the child’ in progressive education, the 
exploration of the religious development of children through 
developmental-psychological or religious-sociological studies 
within empirical theology since the 1970’s and the insight, 
supported by new child research, into the independent 
interaction of children with their environment … (Zimmermann 
2012:400)
Through child research in the social sciences the deficient 
image of the child, postulated by developmental and 
socialisation theories and measured against the norm of 
adults, has been replaced by the concept of the child who 
acts, thinks and speaks independently. Thus, the insight that 
children actively construct their own worlds and are capable 
of complex thinking, for example, of forming analogies, at 
a much earlier age than formerly assumed, has grown. This 
change of perspective has taken place over the past 30 years 
through sociological, psychological and pedagogical issues 
and has been taken up in theology and in the church especially 
through developments such as Children’s Theology. In 
Religious Pedagogy, ‘Children’s Theology, Child Theology 
or theologising with Children’ is explicitly spoken about 
within the religious-pedagogical discourse since 1992 and 
the discussion has become more intense since the appearance 
of the ’Jahrbuch für Kindertheologie’ (Yearbook of Children’s 
Theology) in 2002.
Since then, several monographs, for example on the 
interpretation of Jesus’ death (Albrecht 2007; Zimmermann 
2012), the resurrection (Butt 2009), prayer (Kammeyer 2009) 
et cetera, have been published and a bibliography up until 
2010 is available (Zimmermann 2012:51–54). Since 2010, an 
additional focus on youth theology has been established 
(Dieterich 
2012; 
Freudenberger-Lötz 
2012; 
Schlag 
&
Schweitzer 2011) and the ‘Jahrbuch für Jugendtheologie’ 
(Yearbook of Youth Theology) has been published alongside 
the Yearbook of Children’s Theology since 2013.
Philosophy has provided a decisive motivating factor 
for the interest in conversing with children and for the 
appreciation of children’s thoughts. Both through transfers 
and differentiation from the ‘philosophising with Children’ 
(Camhy; Matthews; Freese; Horster 1992; Lipman 1980 etc.), 
we have been able to learn essential aspects about establishing 
and structuring Children’s Theology. The following can be 
considered to be common core beliefs:
•	 interest in the questioning attitude of children and trust 
in children’s competency, even in explicitly philosophical 
questions (Lipman 1980)
•	 the partial criticism of the cognitive stage theory based on 
Piaget (Matthews 1991) for the evaluation of statements 
in Children’s Theology
•	 the appreciation of the particularity of individual 
children’s thought processes (Matthews 1984, 1993)
•	 individual interview methods (particularly the dialogue 
method of Martens 2009:97–115; Socratic discourse in 
Horster 1992).
However, in addition to these analogies, it is possible and 
necessary to make a clear distinction between the object of 
Children’s Theology and that of the philosophy of children. 
In defining the object of theology more specifically, we gain 
a clearer separation between Children’s Theology and the 
philosophy of children (Rupp 2009:170–181). Children’s 
Theology develops clear contours through an orientation 
toward the established term of theology in the systematic-
theological tradition. In the same way that theology must 
refer here to Christian faith, Children’s Theology must also 
in some way be able to be referred to the history of God 
with people and people with God, which is transmitted 
through biblical tradition, proclaimed by the church and is 

http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v71i3.2848
Page 3 of 6
Original Research
experienced in the present day. Finally, theologising with 
children and philosophising with children differ in their 
claims to truth and validity. As philosophers in this field 
emphasise, philosophical thought cannot lead to normative 
security in the sense of life certitude. However, for Children’s 
Theology, the essential aspects are a connection back to a 
faith which is externally authenticated – in theological terms: 
‘extra no’s’ – providing a claim to one’s own self-discovery 
and the possibility of successfully managing one’s life as well 
as the hope for a goal.
In an interesting book, which presents the essays of an 
international discussion in Danish Loggum-Abbey, the 
participants sorted out the two interesting positions:
KT ([Kindertheologie] means Children [sic] Theology) can be divided 
in two streams: it is about philosophizing (or wondering 
philosophically and reflecting systematically) with children on 
religious subjects or it is about philosophizing with children in the 
form of religion. (Roebben 2011:13)
Petermann, who adheres to the first position, wants to 
invite children ‘to make faith (also in the sense of its 
communications) reflective as an elementary dimension of 
human experience’ (Petermann 2009:144).
Apart from the idea of philosophising with children, there 
are two more concepts which have influenced Children’s 
Theology.
Piaget and the psychology of children´s development claims 
that children are not deficient in their way of thinking; they 
are just different. These differences might be promising, 
firstly for the understanding of how young children think, 
and secondly that their thinking provides a valuable and 
sometimes very creative and surprising contribution to the 
theological discourse itself in bringing up new questions and 
also new answers.
The other concept that formed the idea is that of ‘Children’s 
Spirituality’. Especially in the United Kingdom, the concept 
of spirituality is also part of the pedagogical debate, which 
understands spirituality as part of the condition humaine. 
This concept reminds of Maria Montessori’s concept, but 
it was developed in an interreligious, pluralistic context 
(Freudenreich 2009:131–144). Roebben asks (2011): How do 
this term and the underlying movement relate and respond 
to the Anglo-Saxon development in children’s spirituality? 
Is it a more academic approach (therefore theology) to a 
more educational praxis (therefore spirituality) in the life of 
children? Are the German religious education specialists 
building on the ‘lived theology’ that comes out of the Anglo-
Saxon empirical and hermeneutical research of children’s 
spirituality?
Internal differentiation: Children’s 
Theology as theology by, for and 
with children
Early on in the framework of theoretical reflection on 
Children’s Theology, Anton Bucher (2002:9) differentiated 
between Theology of Children (Genetivus subjektivus) and 
Theology for Children (Genetivus objektivus). At the same 
time, we also find the term Theologizing with Children 
(Büttner & Rupp 2002, in the book title). In his leading 
article in the Jahrbuch der Kindertheologie (2003), Friedrich 
Schweitzer (2003:11) effectively differentiated among 
theology by, for and with children. The following table 
(Zimmermann 2012:123) gives a brief overview, which will 
be discussed below.
This system was also adopted in Youth Theology and was 
differentiated with regard to the various forms of youth 
theology: Implicit theology, personal theology, explicit 
theology, theological interpretation with the help of 
theological dogmatic, the specific theological argumentation 
of youth (Schlag & Schweitzer 2011; explained by Schlag 
at the conference for Children’s Theology 2011). When 
considering Table 1, it is important to remember – due both 
to epistemological considerations as well as with regard to 
TABLE 1: What is Children Theology?
Variable
Theology by children, the theology of children
Theologising with children 
Theology for children
Theological concept
Theology as human discourse about faith 
Function of faith (Härle)
Dialogical act of the search for truth 
Function of the church (Tillich)
Theology of revelation (people as listeners)
Function of revelation (Barth & Bultmann)
Role of the child
Active, independent, fully-fledged subject. 
Autonomy of the child
Relationship-oriented, dialogical-
communicative
 
Active and independent but also capable of 
development and learning; deficit in knowledge and 
experience
Role of the teacher
actor
Passive listener at the most providing stimulus 
Enrichment/questioning of the position of the 
teacher
partner
(Dialogue)partner
Respectful correction and intervention; 
questioning 
addressee
Orienting, leading, transmitting
Co-responsible for the validity and security of the 
subject matter
Method(s)
Basic attitude:
amazement, questioning
Socio-scientific empirical: descriptive
Basic attitude:
searching, talking
From communication science
Basic attitude:
inviting, offering
Hermeneutic prescriptive
Religious-pedagogical goal
To foster the creativity and independence of 
children’s theological activities
Symmetrical and open communication; 
common search for theological truths
Assistance in the development and expansion of the 
domain-specific religious knowledge of the child; 
from biblical-theological tradition 
Limits/ problem
Oriented toward identity;
goal: mature Christian 
Cannot be reached methodologically/
epistemologically not a corrective
Oriented toward dialogue; goal: 
community of the searchers/church 
Symmetrical communication is an ideal but 
cannot actually be reached
Oriented toward education; goal:
acquiring and understanding of tradition
Perception/appreciation of children only with regard 
to certain religious-pedagogical goals 
Source: Zimmermann, M., 2012, Kindertheologie als theologische Kompetenz: Grundlagen, Methodik und Ziel kindertheologischer Forschung am Beispiel der Deutung des Todes Jesu, 2. Aufl., 
Neukirchener-Verlag, Neukirchen-Vluyn.

http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v71i3.2848
Page 4 of 6
Original Research
the integration of Children’s Theology in practical religious-
pedagogical contexts – that the various dimensions of 
Children’s Theology have been differentiated with heuristic 
intention. Ultimately, there are three facets to Children’s 
Theology. 
Theology by children
Early on, Anton Bucher called for ‘sensitivity toward 
children’s theological capabilities’ and valued children as 
theologians and thus as independent and active constructors 
of theological artefacts (Bucher 1992:20). At the beginning, a 
focus on the theology of children was necessary in order to 
differentiate between classical religious education and the 
movement of Children’s Theology. It also led to a change in 
the role of adults, who at best should stimulate children’s 
thoughts or provide space for their development. This 
image, however, does not appear consistently throughout 
the ‘Yearbooks of Children’s Theology’. There should actually be 
no correction of unfortunate or incorrect statements, as these 
enrich the position of the teacher or even call it into question.
Methodologically, such approaches are used to exert the 
least influence on the thoughts and statements of children 
because these should be registered only descriptively. At this 
point we come up against the limits of such a perception, 
because ultimately, it is adults who structure and focus the 
interpretations through the theological setting, the materials 
and the questions asked and it is adults who are active as 
interpreters when they evaluate and present the children’s 
statements (Roebben 2011:19).
Theology with children
‘Theology with children’ or the more commonly used 
‘theologising with children’ is a middle position that feeds 
out of the ‘theology of children’ where it originates, but 
also introduces aspects into the discourse and thus recurs 
as a ‘theology for children’. As the name itself reveals, 
children are partners in the action. The term is based on 
‘philosophising with children’ and can be construed as a 
practically implemented integrative approach. However, the 
role of the teacher, who needs the key skill of so-called flexible 
role modulation, holds a central position (Freudenberger-
Lötz 2007:351).
Theology for children
Although the term ‘theology for children’ was used early on in 
publications as a contrast to differentiate from the ‘theology of 
children’ (Bucher 2002:9), it later became clear in many contexts 
that the ‘theology of children’ is dependent on the stimulus 
and supplementation arising from ‘theology for children’. 
In 2012, one of the yearbooks was devoted explicitly to this 
topic. The astonishment at children’s theological capabilities 
was no longer sufficient to prevent work being done on the 
shortcomings that had come to light in the framework of 
Children’s Theology. Thus, empirically acquired data often 
refers to an exceptional selection of children’s statements that 
do not represent the entire spectrum of children’s theological 
competencies. ‘Theology for children’ is also necessary 
because many children have too little basic knowledge and 
their statements are often random, selective and problematic 
(explained in Zimmermann 2012:43–47). Therefore ‘theology 
for children’ must conceptualise meaningful situations that 
challenge children theologically but also support them in the 
development of their abilities to question. It must convey a 
basis of knowledge that enables more complex and creative 
theological thought during the process of theologising and 
must attempt to establish in the long-term the development 
of these competencies in order to minimise randomness.
Methods of Children’s Theology
Drawing on a working paper by Hartmut Rupp, Heinz 
Schmidt identified seven basic didactical forms:
•	 Socratic discourse, which aims at self-recognition and exists 
in a ‘clarifying dialogue’ between child and ‘master’
•	 basic teaching, which identifies mistakes and what is 
correct
•	 mythological 
narration, 
which 
suggests 
elementary 
narrative images and stories and thus addresses and 
connects deep-seated emotions
•	 literary narrative also with pictures (picture books), which 
stimulate and process questions using dramatic stories 
and vivid images
•	 question-oriented lessons, which are based on children’s 
questions and refer to these questions to unlock biblical 
narratives, images, words, songs and music
•	 use of dilemma stories to activate and call into question 
children’s fundamental ideas and motivate children to 
reconstruct their theological concepts
•	 free work, in which children develop their own questions, 
process them independently using various resources and 
solve them as much as possible on their own (Schmidt 
2002:18–19).
Both this list and the contributions in the ‘Yearbook of 
Children’s Theology’ on teaching methods reveal that the 
above basic forms do not fundamentally differ from those of 
classical religion or confirmation classes. The difference lies 
not in the method but in the goal of the pedagogical process. 
Here, the primary central interest is not on transmittal; 
instead, the children are regarded as equal discourse 
partners even on the factual level and are taken seriously 
if they express their theological positions on a topic or 
problem. Only by drawing on the theology of the children 
do the adults introduce other positions not mentioned in 
the group or by the child. The openness of the outcome is 
decisive and this must not be confused with arbitrariness. 
As an example of such a theological conversation we can 
use the image of a playing field upon which no entirely new 
areas are developed but rather limits are drawn and rules 
are outlined. The way in which the game develops within 
the limits, however, depends on the players.

http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v71i3.2848
Page 5 of 6
Original Research
Methods oriented toward perception
Researchers have a variety of empirical methods available to 
them which help to perceive the theology of children with 
as little bias as possible (Zimmermann 2012:167–188). In 
reference to data gathering and evaluation we can identify 
the following criteria:
•	 intersubjective conformability
•	 indication and coherence of the research process
•	 empirically established according to the common 
standards of the social sciences, for example, the 
justification of the selection of the test group, the relation 
to the comparison group, the criteria of theoretical 
saturation et cetera
•	 limitation and relevance, which help to determine the 
validity of the research results
•	 reflected in subjectivity that is conscious of the fact 
that the Children’s Theology is always meta-theology 
because the researcher himself or herself is extensively 
involved in the topic being researched as Children’s 
Theology (for methodological problems see also 
Roebben 2011:17–18).
Methods oriented toward mediation
If theologising is understood as the common search for 
answers to theological questions during which children 
introduce and develop their own ideas and thus strengthen 
their own competencies, an important basis for this 
activity is a dialogue in which all partners are equal. All 
interpretations must be honoured and contributions to 
the dialogue that are not serious or ‘comments from the 
students that are alarming or that contradict basic human 
rights must be dealt with critically in the conversation’ 
(Reiß & Freudenberger-Lötz 2012:124). True interest in 
the student’s thoughts on the topic at hand is a basic 
requirement. This assumes a trust that the thoughts offered 
will enrich the conversation and will motivate the teachers 
to reflect on them. Nevertheless, the teacher remains the 
official representative of theology. He or she must have 
very good factual knowledge of the subject matter in order 
to be able to integrate the student’s theological searches, 
to systematise their interpretations and to offer further or 
alternative interpretations. It is important that the teacher 
is conscious of his or her own approach and can justify it 
plausibly. Additionally, this approach should be offered 
only as food for thought.
The moments of reflection will be all the more successful 
the more they are (1) made elementary, (2) interesting, 
which also and especially means rooted in the concrete 
experience of the children, (3) intuitive and immediately 
accessible, (4) challenging and didactically designed to 
be open to a deeper and a wider exploration of the initial 
problem, and (5) condensed and to the point (Petermann 
2009:143).
The most interesting situations in theologising tend to occur 
unexpectedly because a student poses an interesting question, 
a position expressed in the class stimulates objection or an 
event or stimulus in their lives calls theological topics into 
question. Of course, it is difficult to adequately prepare for 
such a situation. However, particularly in such situations, 
the adult discourse partner is on an equal footing as seeker 
and questioner, bringing greater depth to exactly such 
conversations (see Figure 1).
A planned conversation poses the following difficulties for 
the teacher. As the attentive observer, the teacher must first 
understand the students’ thoughts and at the same time, 
as the stimulating discourse partner, he or she must bring the 
students’ thoughts into the discourse and as the accompanying 
expert must offer further interpretations, as can be seen in the 
didactic triangle (Reiß & Freudenberger-Lötz 2012:134).
A well-trained teacher of religious education (Schwarz 
2011:153f.) should be in a position to give answers to the 
following three questions: Where do these children come 
from personally and socially (context)? How can they be 
appropriately accompanied by adults in their search for 
meaning (communication)? What is a good elementary 
selection of key knowledge that helps them in their cognition 
(content) (Roebben 2011:16):
It is very important to follow the discourse rules:
•	 no negative or judgemental comments
•	 questions may be asked
•	 one’s own opinion should be simply expressed.
The following techniques and questions help to understand 
what the students are saying:
•	 Questions: Could you explain that again?
•	 Repeating what has been said in order to confirm that 
it has been understood correctly: Did I understand you 
correctly, when you said …?
•	 Questions about justifications: How would you justify 
that?
•	 Questions about the underlying assumptions: What 
assumption are you making? Is it valid?
•	 Questions about terms, words or statements: What do 
you mean with this term, word, or statement?
What other terms could you use? What would be some 
contradictory terms?
•	 Attempts to delimit ideas: What would be a contradictory 
idea?
Source: Author’s own construct.
FIGURE 1: Didactic triangle of theologising with children.
Students
Topic
Brings thoughts
into discourse
Understand
thoughts
Oﬀers further
interpreta	ons
Teacher

http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v71i3.2848
Page 6 of 6
Original Research
•	 Questions about conclusions: What conclusions can we 
draw? Are they logical? What changes if you think that 
way, if everyone thinks that way?
•	 Questions about belonging to a group: Who else thinks 
the same way you do?
•	 Questions about biographical background: How did you 
arrive at this idea? Has this always been your opinion? 
When did you change your position?
The following techniques help to relate the various parts of 
the conversation to each other:
•	 A structure is found for the positions in the group: Which 
positions do we have? How are they different from each 
other?
•	 The positions are related to each other, similarities 
and differences are identified: How are they similar or 
different?
•	 The assumptions are clarified by making terms more 
precise, clarifying the context and asking about own 
experiences with the subject.
•	 The persuasiveness is weighted. Students, in particular 
those who previously had no position on the subject, are 
asked to examine the sustainability and persuasiveness of 
the arguments or positions.
It is possible to introduce theologically important but as yet 
unmentioned positions by:
•	 referring to positions from systematic theology or from 
church history in a way that is suitable for children
•	 introducing (personal) experiences
•	 explaining the position of an important person.
‘It all boils down [to] bringing children into enriching 
“green pastures” of thoughts, where their own theological 
imagination and reasoning is [sic] stimulated’ (Roebben 
2011:16).
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that she has no financial or personal 
relationships which may have inappropriately influenced 
her in writing this article.
References
Albrecht, M., 2007, Für uns gestorben: Die Heilsbedeutung des Kreuzestodes Jesu 
Christi aus der Sicht Jugendlicher, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen.
Bucher, A.A., 1992, ‘Kinder als Theologen?’, Zeitschrift für Religionsunterricht und 
Lebenskunde 20, 19–22.
Bucher, A.A., 2002, ‘Kindertheologie: Provokation? Romantizismus? Neues 
Paradigma?’, in A.A. Bucher, G. Büttner, P. Freudenberger-Lötz & M. Schreiner 
(Hrsgs.), Mittendrin ist Gott: Kinder denken nach über Gott, Leben und Tod, 
pp. 9–27, Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart. (Jahrbüch für Kindertheologie, 1).
Bucher, A.A., Büttner, G., Freudenberger-Lötz, P. & Schreiner, M. (Hrsgs.), 2002, 
Jahrbücher für Kindertheologie, Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart. 
Butt, C., 2009, Kindertheologische Untersuchungen zu Auferstehungsvorstellungen 
von Grundschülerinnen und Grundschülern, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen.
Büttner, G. & Rupp, H. (Hrsgs.), 2002, Theologisieren mit Kindern, Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart.
Dieterich, V.-J. (ed.), 2012, Theologisieren mit Jugendlichen, Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart.
Dillen, A., 2007, ‘Religious participation of children as active subjects: Toward a 
hermeneutical-communicative model of religious education in families with 
young children’, International Journal of Children’s Spirituality 12, 37–49.
Freudenberger-Lötz, P., 2007, Theologische Gespräche mit Kindern: Untersuchungen 
zur Professionalisierung Studierender und Anstöße zu forschendem Lernen im 
Religionsunterricht, Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart.
Freudenberger-Lötz, P., 2012, Theologische Gespräche mit Jugendlichen: Erfahrungen –
Beispiele – Anleitungen. Ein Werkstattbuch für die Sekundarstufe, Calwer Verlag, 
Stuttgart.
Freudenreich, D., 2009, Spiritualität von Kindern, Kassel University Press, Kassel.
Hay, D. & Nye, R. 1998, The spirit of the child, Harper & Collins, London.
Horster, D., 1992, Philosophieren mit Kindern, Leske & Budrich, Opladen.
Kammeyer, K., 2009, ’Lieber Gott, Amen!’: Theologische und empirische Studien zum 
Gebet im Horizont theologischer Gespräche mit Vorschulkindern, Calwer Verlag, 
Stuttgart.
Kraft, F., Freudenberger-Lötz, P. & Schwarz, E. (Hrsgs.), 2011a, ’Jesus würde sagen: 
Nicht schlecht!’: Kindertheologie und Kompetenzorientierung, Calwer Verlag, 
Stuttgart.
Kraft, F., Roose, H. & Büttner, G. (eds.), 2011b, Symmetrical communication? 
Philosophy and theology in classrooms across Europe, Religionspädagogisches 
Institut Loccum, Loccum.
Lipman, M., 1980, Philosophy in the classroom, 2nd edn., Temple University Press, 
Philadelphia, PA.
Martens, E., 2009, ‘Children’s Philosophie und Childrens’s Theology – A family 
resemblance’, in G. Yde Iversen, G. Mitchell & G. Pollard (eds.), Hovering over 
the face of the deep. Philosophy, theology and children, pp. 97–115, Waxmann, 
Münster.
Matthews, G.B., 1984, Dialogues with children, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
MA.
Matthews, G.B., 1991, ‘Piaget und die Entwicklungspsychologie‘, Zeitschrift für 
deutsche Philosophie 13, 4–8.
Matthews, G.B., 1993, Philosophische Gespräche mit Kindern, 2. Aufl, Freese E.G., 
Berlin.
Petermann, H.-B., 2009, ‘“The story wants to make us think…” – Opportunities for 
theologizing and philosophizing with children’, in G. Yde Iversen, G. Mitchell & 
G. Pollard (eds.), Hovering over the face of the deep. Philosophy, theology and 
children, pp. 129–145, Waxmann, Münster.
Reiß, A. & Freudenberger-Lötz, P., 2012, ‘Didaktik des Theologisierens mit Kindern und 
Jugendlichen’, in B. Grümme, H. Lenhard & M.L. Pirner (eds.), Religionsunterricht 
neu denken. Innovative Ansätze und Perspektiven der Religionsdidaktik, 
pp. 133–145, Kohlhammer Verlag, Stuttgart.
Roebben, B., 2011, ‘Children’s theology: Concepts and contexts, problems and 
horizons’, in F. Kraft, H. Roose & G. Büttner (eds.), Symmetrical communication? 
Philosophy 
and 
theology 
in 
classrooms 
across 
Europe, 
pp. 
11–24, 
Religionspädagogisches Institut Loccum, Loccum.
Roose, H., 2006, ‘”Wieso muss ich zu Jesus beten, wenn er neben mir steht?” – Eine 
Kartographie zum Thema Gebet’, in A.A. Bucher, G. Büttner, P. Freudenberger-Lötz 
& M. Schreiner (Hrsgs.), ’Vielleicht hat Gott uns Kindern den Verstand gegeben’: 
Ergebnisse und Perspektiven der Kindertheologie, pp. 137–146, Calwer Verlag, 
Stuttgart. (Jahrbuch für Kindertheologie, 5).
Rupp, H., 2009, ‘Auf der Suche nach dem Unterschied – Theologisieren und 
Philosophieren im Vergleich’, in A.A. Bucher, G. Büttner, P. Freudenberger-Lötz & 
M. Schreiner (Hrsgs.), ’In den Himmel kommen nur die, die sich auch verstehen.’: 
Wie Kinder über religiöse Differenz denken und sprechen, pp. 170–181, Calwer 
Verlag, Stuttgart. (Jahrbüch für Kindertheologie, 8).
Schlag, T. & Schweitzer, F., 2011, Brauchen Jugendliche Theologie? Jugendtheologie als 
Herausforderung und didaktische Perspektive, Neukirchener Verlag, Neukirchen-
Vluyn.
Schmidt, H., 2002, ‘Kinderfrage und Kindertheologie im religionspädagogischen 
Kontext’, in G. Büttner & H. Rupp (Hrsgs.), Theologisieren mit Kindern, pp. 11–20, 
Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart.
Schwarz, E.E., 2011, ‘“Theologizing and philosophizing with children’ – How can 
teachers learn to lead a theological discourse with children?’, in F. Kraft, H. Roose 
& G. Büttner (eds.), Symmetrical communication? Philosophy and theology in 
classrooms across Europe, pp. 151–171, Religionspädagogisches Institut Loccum, 
Loccum.
Schweitzer, F., 2000, Das Recht des Kindes auf Religion: Ermutigungen für Eltern und 
Erzieher, Gütersloher Verlagshaus, Gütersloh.
Schweitzer, F., 2003, ‘Was ist und wozu Kindertheologie?’, in A.A. Bucher, G. Büttner, 
P. Freudenberger-Lötz & M. Schreiner (Hrsgs.), ’Im Himmelreich ist keiner 
sauer’: Kinder als Exegeten, pp. 9–18, Calwer Verlag, Stuttgart. (Jahrbüch für 
Kindertheologie, 2).
Schweitzer, F., 2011, Kindertheologie und Elementarisierung: Wie religiöses Lernen mit 
Kindern gelingen kann, Gütersloher Verlagshaus, Gütersloh.
Yde Iversen, G., Mitchell, G. & Pollard G. (eds.), 2009, Hovering over the face of the 
deep: Philosophy, theology and children, Waxmann, Münster.
Zimmermann, M., 2012, Kindertheologie als theologische Kompetenz: Grundlagen, 
Methodik und Ziel kindertheologischer Forschung am Beispiel der Deutung des 
Todes Jesu, 2. Aufl., Neukirchener-Verlag, Neukirchen-Vluyn.
