Care at a Distance
A пқӯпқіпқҙпқҘпқІпқӨпқЎпқӯ U пқ®пқ©пқ¶пқҘпқІпқіпқ©пқҙпқ№ P пқІпқҘпқіпқі
Jeannette Pols
On the Closeness of Technology

Care at a Distance

CARE & WELFARE
Care and welfare are changing rapidly in contemporary welfare states.
The Care & Welfare series publishes studies on changing relationships
between citizens and professionals, on care and welfare governance, on
identity politics in the context of these welfare state transformations, and
on ethical topics. It will inspire international academic and political de-
bate by developing and reflecting upon theories of (health) care and wel-
fare through detailed national case studies and/or international compar-
isons. This series will offer new insights into the interdisciplinary theory
of care and welfare and its practices.
series editors
Jan Willem Duyvendak, University of Amsterdam
Trudie Knijn, Utrecht University
Monique Kremer, Netherlands Scientific Council for Government Policy
(Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het Regeringsbeleid вҖ“ WRR)
Margo Trappenburg, Utrecht University, University of Amsterdam
previously published
Jan Willem Duyvendak, Trudie Knijn and Monique Kremer (eds.): Policy,
People, and the New Professional. De-professionalisation and Re-professio-
nalisation in Care and Welfare, 2006
ISBN 978 90 5356 885 9
Ine Van Hoyweghen: Risks in the Making. Travels in Life Insurance and
Genetics, 2007
ISBN 978 90 5356 927 6
Anne-Mei The: In DeathвҖҷs Waiting Room. Living and Dying with Dementia
in a Multicultural Society, 2008
ISBN 978 90 5356 077 8
Barbara Da Roit: Strategies of Care. Changing Elderly Care in Italy and the
Netherlands, 2010
ISBN 978 90 8964 224 0
Janet Newman and Evelien Tonkens (eds.): Participation, Responsibility
and Choice. Summoning the Active Citizen in Western European Welfare
States, 2011
ISBN 978 90 8964 275 2
Patricia C. Henderson: AIDS, Intimacy and Care in Rural KwaZulu-Na-
tal. A Kinship of Bones, 2011
ISBN 978 90 8964 359 9

Care at a Distance
On the Closeness of Technology
Jeannette Pols

Cover photo: Ruud Mast
Cover design: Sabine Mannel, NEON graphic design company, Amster-
dam
Lay-out: JAPES, Amsterdam
ISBN
978 90 8964 397 1
e-ISBN 978 90 4851 301 7 (pdf)
e-ISBN 978 90 4851 629 2 (ePub)
NUR
882
В© Jeannette Pols / Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam 2012
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved
above, no part of this book may be reproduced, stored in or introduced
into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without
the written permission of both the copyright owner and the author of
the book.

Contents
Nightmares, promises and efficiencies in care and
research
1
Introduction
11
The telecare hype
11
Lack of knowledge
12
Noise and dust
14
This study
15
Various telecare practices
16
Studying innovative technologies
17
The chapters
20
Part I
Norms and nightmares
2
Caring devices: About warm hands, cold technology and
making things fit
25
Warm care, cold technologies
25
What (un)makes a human?
26
Palliative care in Friesland
27
Situating matters of disease
29
Building relations through the white box
32
Devices do not love us
34
Fitting individuals
37
The notion of fitting
38
Care that does not fit
40
Modest aesthetics
42
3
The heart of the matter: Good nursing at a distance
45
Goodness of fit
45
The heart of good nursing
46
Good nursing in practice
47
The importance of space
48
Division of labour
49
Keeping up old standards: correcting telecare
51
Telecare as an improvement: changing norms
53
From health status to process
53
From self-care to professional monitoring
55
5

New tasks, new goals
57
Persistent values, shifting norms
59
Contestable norms
60
Part II Knowledge and promises
4
Caring for the self? Enacting problems, solutions and forms of
knowledge
63
Shaping problems
63
Mrs Jansen and the heart monitor
64
Mrs Jaspersen and the webcam
65
Enacted trouble: objective symptoms versus subjective
experience
66
Monitored disease
66
Webcam worries
68
Articulating problems
71
Responding to problems
72
Measurements
72
Mutual support
74
Enacting problems, engaging in self-care
75
Fitting logics
77
5
Knowing patients: On practical knowledge for living with
chronic disease
79
The knowledge of patients
79
Knowing patients?
79
Difference
80
Sameness
80
Indifference
81
Tools for the case study: scientific versus practical knowledge
82
Practical knowledge for clinicians and patients
82
Practical knowledge of people with COPD
83
Introducing вҖҳknow-nowвҖҷ
84
Transporting knowledge
87
Technologies and translation
88
Coordinating knowledge
90
Coordination practices, blurring distinctions
90
Unhelpful knowledge, translation failures
92
Knowing patients
94
Practical knowledge and webcams
95
Part III Routines and efficiencies
6
Zooming in on webcams: On the workings of a modest
technology
99
6
care at a distance

Doing invisible work
99
Webcam practices
99
Webcams in action
100
вҖҳIt is much more personal than the telephoneвҖҷ
100
Webcams intensify concentration
102
Breaking the intensity
103
Together in the same room
104
Trust, familiarity and intrusion
107
Building on existing relations
109
Magnifying relational distance
111
What webcams do
112
Shaping care practices
113
Modest technology
113
7
Economies of care: New routines, new tasks
115
WhatвҖҷs in a routine?
115
Routine efficiency
116
Telecare and efficiency
117
Efficiency in practice
118
The place of caring
120
Reshuffling space
122
Different technology and tasks
123
Interpretation routines
126
The telekit as an umbilical cord
126
The telekit as an inhaler
127
Routines and identities
128
Old or new routines?
129
Treacherous routines
130
Efficiently organising messy practices
131
Conclusions: On studying innovation
8
Innovating care innovation
135
The politics of innovation
135
The object of research: innovative telecare practices
136
Research that does not fit
137
Fixed variables and unpredictable outcomes
137
Subjectivity and practical knowledge
138
Interference with construction sites
140
From subjectivity to normativity
141
Fitting research
142
Uncontrolled field studies
143
The influence of users
143
From buying, selling and voting to enacting innovations
144
Articulating positions
145
The status of articulations: comparisons and involving others
146
contents
7

The status of practical knowledge
147
Discussions unleashed by an uncontrolled field study
148
Promises, practices and close patients
148
Close professionals
149
Close technologies
150
Close research
150
Acknowledgements
153
Appendix: Projects studied for this book
157
Notes
161
References
181
Index of names
197
Index of subjects
199
8
care at a distance

Nightmares, promises
and efficiencies in
care and research


1 Introduction
The telecare hype
вҖҳTelecareвҖҷ is an umbrella term referring to the technical devices and pro-
fessional practices applied in вҖҳcare at a distanceвҖҷ, care that supports
chronically ill people living at home.1 With telecare, the formal or infor-
mal carer is not in the same place as the person receiving care. Instead,
carers use new communication tools such as webcams, electronic moni-
tors, email and websites to interact with patients, transmit data and pro-
vide instruction. Strictly speaking, the telephone is also a distant-care
device and it is often central to making telecare practices work. The
term telecare, however, commonly refers to the new technical arrange-
ments for care or, as the critics might say, to a new hype in care.2
Hype is indeed a part of the introduction of telecare in health care.
Innovations in telecare have seen optimists and pessimists hurrying
onto the soapbox to proclaim their opposing views. Innovative practices
are by definition not well researched, and these soapbox speeches em-
phasise either their pros вҖ“ the promises telecare is bound to fulfil вҖ“ or
their cons, the nightmares it will inevitably bring.3, 4, 5, 6
The promises heard most often in the Netherlands, where the re-
search reported in this book took place, concern improvements in effi-
ciency.7 Telecare promises to support care for a rapidly ageing popula-
tion, when fewer younger people will be available to care for a rising
number of older people with chronic diseases. This will have an even
greater effect because telecare promises professional long-distance
carers reciprocal support from their patients. Decision makers portray
modern patients as active, eager and well able to care for themselves.8
They claim that telecare will help patients manage their own care even
better. In addition to claims for the more efficient use of personnel capa-
city, there is a very different efficiency promise: telecare will reduce the
cost of health care.9 Both types of efficiency alternate in telecare procla-
mations (see Chapter 7).
The inevitable nightmares, on the other hand, are full of grim images
of care turned cold. Older people, instead of moving into a care institu-
tion when their minds and bodies start to fail, will have to stay at home,
surrounded by all kinds of cold mechanical devices, receiving no support
from caring people. Carers of these alienated people will only discover
that someone has passed away when the sensors stop reporting move-
ment and vital signs. Professionals, often nurses, lie awake, imagining
the fate of neglected patients and overlooking serious problems because
nobody actually bothers to go out and see these vulnerable patients any
more.10
11

These polarised views are not so much a debate but a juxtaposition, a
contest between вҖҳinevitableвҖҷ futures. Opponents accuse each other of
either standing in the way of a desirable future, or of helping a horrific
one emerge. The optimists accuse the pessimists of irrational resistance
to obvious improvements and a shocking neglect of the best interests of
patients. The pessimists accuse the optimists of trying to push technol-
ogy that is not evidence-based down their throats11 and, indeed, a shock-
ing neglect of what is best for patients.
The debate is further troubled because telecare equipment comes in
many shapes and sizes, from webcams to monitoring devices. The var-
ious items are often lumped together as вҖҳtelecareвҖҷ in these debates, as if
they all do the same thing. вҖҳSmart homeвҖҷ devices such as sensors or
alarms are sometimes included, as these devices support homecare pro-
cesses or watch over vulnerable people.12 Others sometimes throw in
telemedicine devices as well, which are devices used for contact between
professionals and their organisations.
The many potential users of the technologies, including patients, pro-
fessionals, health care organisations, the industry and the families of the
patients вҖ“ all having their different hopes and concerns вҖ“ cause even
further clouding. And who is to pay the bill? Industries, care organisa-
tions, health insurers and the national government all point at each
other to pay for the costly telecare infrastructure that has to be built. The
Dutch government has structured national health care as a (regulated)
market. This means that the government is вҖҳproвҖҷ telecare, but it does not
actively steer telecare development, although it does pay for screen-to-
screen contact, and project organisers may opt for starterвҖҷs grants.13 The
Dutch government wants care organisations, professionals, patient orga-
nisations and insurance companies to develop telecare projects together.
The producers of telecare devices are also involved, having an obvious
interest in selling their devices and services. Much to their dismay, they
cannot sell their products directly to patients, but must negotiate sales
with professionals and often find the latter not all that interested.
Although to date the Dutch national patient organisation is вҖҳproвҖҷ, the
people who actually have to live with the devices have no voice (or
choice) in the matter until their care providers offer them a particular
telecare device.14 Since the implementation of telecare is often done
through pilot projects, such offers may come and go.15
Lack of knowledge
Clearly, there are two conflicting scenarios for the future of telecare and
a confusing crowd of actively involved or mildly interested parties.
Neither scenario вҖ“ promise or nightmare вҖ“ can be confirmed, rejected
or modified yet. The telecare market does not seem to be selling many
telecare products, and there have been some spectacular bankruptcies in
12
introduction

projects and organisations already. Since there is no knowledge about
the actual workings of telecare, the audience gathered round the soapbox
will have to share the speakerвҖҷs convictions or has to believe the story at
face value.
This lack of knowledge may seem paradoxical, because international
publications of studies evaluating individual telecare projects keep piling
up. Yet these studies have not been able to substantiate the promises or
deal with the worries. How can we understand this paradox? Mostly
these studies reveal the difficulty of designing and conducting useful
evaluation studies on complex care practices.16 This has to do with the
nature of the innovative care practices, the design and rationale of these
studies, and the misfit between them.
Scientists model classic evaluation studies on the gold standard of re-
search into the effectivity of interventions: the randomised controlled
trial (RCT). The design of an RCT has strict conditions.17 Researchers
developed RCTs to test the effectivity of therapies, particularly drugs.
RCTs create controlled conditions to observe how a relatively small num-
ber of variables changes value under the influence of a small number of
other variables. To control conditions means setting up a control group
of patients who do not receive the experimental therapy. The design
averages out disturbing variables such as irrelevant differences between
individual patients by assigning patients randomly to either the experi-
mental or the control group. Preferably, both researchers and research
subjects do not know to which group the patients are assigned. This is
known as double-blind research. The research needs a substantial num-
ber of test persons for reliable comparisons and conclusions. The exact
number depends on the number of variables to measure, the homogene-
ity of the test population, the threshold deemed acceptable for false posi-
tives or false negatives, and so on.
The strict requirements of RCTs can rarely be met when this research
model is used on (tele)care practices. Randomisation is often impossible
in small pilot projects, or it is ethically dubious. Carers and patients tin-
ker with the telecare devices to make them fit to their purposes. Small
pilot projects rarely engage a sufficient number of patients. For these
reasons, many evaluations use suboptimal designs from the viewpoint
of authoritative quantitative research.18
Another complication for conducting controlled studies in care prac-
tices is that it is hard to keep interventions stable. Telecare devices are
not just interventions in the lives of individual patients, they intervene in
care practices as well. When devices enter health care, established prac-
tices must be organised differently in order to fit in the new devices.19
Consequently, nurses and patients may put the same devices to work in
different ways in different places, thereby varying the actual interven-
tion. For example, patients can use monitoring devices alone, assem-
bling and interpreting the parameters themselves, or nurses may inter-
pret the figures the patients produce in order to keep an eye on their
lack of knowledge
13

shifting symptoms. The results of the research may thus be the outcome
of varying interventions, even if they all use the same device. Rather than
going to great lengths to report how and in which context people used
the telecare devices in the study, researchers tend to describe interven-
tions briefly in the method sections. Because researchers assume that
specificities of the context are disturbing variables and average them
out, differences rarely become transparent. The results remain local and
as a result difficult to interpret, replicate and generalise.20
A related complication troubles research in innovative practices in par-
ticular. Quantitative research needs to work with the outcome variables
defined at the start of the study. This book demonstrates, however, that
innovative care practices are characterised by a process of identifying
and adjusting goals, because participants are looking for ways to make
new technologies work. In this process, the type of outcome is not fixed
but participants are on the way to define them. How they do this is diffi-
cult to predict, particularly when there are many participants with differ-
ent concerns and interests who all want to have things done their way.
This implies that rather than proving the effectivity of predefined vari-
ables, it would be wiser to first articulate the various possible effects of
using the new technology.21
Besides these methodological considerations, Dutch telecare practices
demonstrate yet another problem with research peculiar to the Dutch
health care market. The financing of telecare projects is often done in
combination with the research undertaken to evaluate them. The indus-
try, insurance company or care organisations thus own the results of the
study and may publish them at will, or might decide to keep the results
to themselves. Research results become business secrets that permit or-
ganisations to stay ahead of the competition. In technological innova-
tion, business and research are often intertwined.22
Another twist in this entanglement of industries, health care organisa-
tions, financers and researchers is that telecare projects and their evalua-
tion studies tend to start and end at the same time, regardless of the
results. The research infrastructure keeps the telecare practice going,
but also makes it fall apart when the research stops.23 I will discuss the
intricacies of research and telecare practices more extensively in the final
chapter.
Noise and dust
Proponents and opponents of telecare innovations are making lots of
noise, but at the same time, lots of dust clouds these innovations. It is
simply unclear what telecare technology can achieve in care. Promises,
nightmares, and dreams of efficiency have taken the place of knowledge
and facts in the debate. Research data are inconclusive or belong to mar-
keting departments rather than collective learning processes. Soapbox
14
introduction

accusations are often angry harangues by worried parties. The type of
telecare device and the funding depend on where you live in the Nether-
lands, on the organisation active locally, and on which devices they hap-
pen to have bought and managed to implement. Successful enterprise is
the basis for implementation, not public consideration of what defines
good care or a good life for individual patients, not knowledge about the
workings of telecare. Developing telecare, then, is about clever network-
ing and staying ahead of the competition rather than collective learning
about the best form of care for whom.
This study
We do not know how telecare works, and market/soapbox policies for
telecare development are not reassuring. The study in this book takes a
different approach from soapbox speeches, market transactions, or the
project evaluation study. It aims to develop a better way of thinking about
technological innovations in care. Is it possible to develop reliable knowl-
edge to support innovation? What would be useful to know? How could
decision makers improve the process of telecare development?
To address these questions, I analyse and compare various pioneer
telecare practices in the Netherlands, using an ethnographic approach to
gain insight into how telecare changes health care. Ethnography is a
good option compared to evaluation studies because it allows the re-
searcher to ask open questions. It does not have to define outcome vari-
ables at the start of the research but takes these вҖ“ the outcomes вҖ“ as the
result of the ethnographic study. It does not need large quantities of
patients but may learn from small, pioneering practices. Ethnographic
studies do not demand strict conditions for research, because they are
developed to do research outside the laboratory.
Ethnographic studies analyse what new devices and people do as the
achievements of practices rather than as points of departure. Researchers
do not decide upon the outcome variables in advance, at the researcherвҖҷs
desk, but identify what is a key variable for understanding telecare prac-
tices in situ, from the practices in which people use telecare. What are
the concerns in these practices? What values do people try to establish
in care when they start using telecare? How do telecare devices shape
these practices? I study telecare by observing how patients use it in their
daily life practices and how professionals use it in their daily work prac-
tices. I interview those who work with telecare about their experiences,
and ask the users to observe their own practices.
Ethnographic observation is never вҖҳblankвҖҷ registration. A theoretical
understanding of the object of observation informs the observation as
well as the registration. When people observe a flower, they immediately
make assumptions about its plant-like characteristics. When the obser-
ver is a trained biologist, the plant-like characteristics can be refined
this study
15

further (the flower is a poppy, member of the family of Papaveraceae, its
appearance points to the sour condition of the soil, and so on). This the-
orising or understanding is covert in the more commonsense observa-
tions of the world. In this study, I try to make them explicit by articulat-
ing24 and then critically analysing the theories that shape our vision of
care and technology.25 For example, the theoretical assumption that tech-
nology determines what occurs in a situation is embedded in both the
promises and nightmares articulated in the telecare debate.
To shape the ethnographic material, this study analyses theories of
care and theories of technology as instruments or tools that help to per-
ceive and articulate, to name and frame versions of the object under
study.26 What kind of вҖҳthingsвҖҷ are technologies supposed to be? How
can we to interpret their workings? What does the text make readers
think of the activity of caring? When is it good or bad?27, 28 How do
theories of care differ from observed care practices? Integrated in the
ethnographic study, this theoretical analysis creates a set of instruments
for naming and framing care and technologies that fits the observed care
practices. Practices may correct existing theory and provide the building
blocks for developing new theory. Using these tools, I articulate what
(tele-)care is and what it becomes in specific daily life and work practices.
Three questions guide the analysis: What normative shifts in what par-
ticipants regard as good can be witnessed when telecare devices enter
care practices? What types of knowledge do various telecare devices bring
into play? What new routines follow from the introduction of telecare, and
what do these routines imply for what care becomes? Despite the inevi-
table intertwining of norms, knowledge and routines in care practices, I
deal with these three questions separately in the three parts of the book.
This differentiation serves to trace the various threads for the sake of the
analysis, without suggesting they can or do exist separately.
In conclusion, I take up the question of how to think about technolo-
gical innovation in care. I study how to improve the way innovative prac-
tices emerge, how people argue about them and make decisions about
them. How can the process of innovation make better use of knowledge
instead of relying on unsubstantiated promises or nightmarish threats?
Various telecare practices
This book contains ethnographic studies of various care practices. There
is a telecare project in palliative care for oncology patients who will not
recover from their disease. There are the webcams used by homecare
organisations to provide professional support to people with severe lung
disease (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, COPD). These webcams
also allow fellow patients in the homecare organisation to contact each
other. There are the webcams used by professionals as a form of follow-
up care when lung disease patients leave a rehabilitation clinic. In one
16
introduction

project, call centre nurses monitor the vital signs (weight, blood pres-
sure, pulse) of people with severe heart failure. These call centre nurses
communicate with the nurses in the hospital, because the latter are re-
sponsible for the care of these patients. Another project has hospital
nurses and heart failure patients using an educational device without
the mediation of call centre nurses.
People with different chronic diseases use different devices. Telecare
developers target people with a chronic disease most often, as they form
the largest patient groups: COPD, heart failure, and diabetes. Palliative
care is a new branch on the Dutch telecare tree. I introduce and discuss
these telecare projects in the respective chapters. I list the complete col-
lection of projects in the Appendix for the reader to look up if confusion
threatens to strike. The scope of this book does not extend to telemedi-
cine (technologically mediated communications between professionals)
or smart home technology (technology working automatically in the
home), and both have been excluded from the analysis.
Observing this variety of practices makes it clear that care takes place
in various shapes and forms. It differs between people with different
diseases, but also between configurations of patients, professionals and
devices within the same patient group. Depending on the set-up, the
possible role of the professional and the type of responsibility taken by
the patient may differ dramatically. In telecare practices, participants are
actively experimenting with new ways of shaping care. In this process,
participants make implicit practices explicit, and what care is and how it
should be becomes a matter of overt concern. This makes innovative
telecare practices excellent places to learn about care. This concern runs
throughout this book. I want to learn more about what care is by studying
practices where precisely this question is at stake.
Studying innovative technologies
To study innovative and evolving practices I use tools developed from a
material semiotic elaboration of domestication theory. Material semio-
tics stands for the idea that people and objects shape each other in mu-
tual relations.29 Identities are situated; they are the result of specific rela-
tions within a situation. For example, a person in a white coat using a
stethoscope to listen to another personвҖҷs heartbeat is most probably a
doctor. The white coat and stethoscope help to create the вҖҳdoctorвҖҷ, but
not by themselves. The characteristics of the person wearing the white
coat, her working context and the patientвҖҷs situation turn the using of a
stethoscope into a doctorвҖҷs activity rather than, say, a game or an act. The
relation between humans and objects shape identities in practice, and
these identities change when the practices, relations, and attributes
change. The doctor from my example above may become a mother
when she picks up her child from the local school.
studying innovative technologies
17

My colleague Dick Willems and I missed this mutuality of adaptation
вҖ“ and thus the interdependence between technology and users вҖ“ in both
domestication and deterministic theories of technology.30 We were look-
ing for concepts that could make researchers sensitive to relationality,
which is why we were interpreting domestication theory in material
semiotic terms.31 Domestication originally referred to the processes that
led to humans living together with animals and plants, but this term has
since been adapted to include technology in order to analyse how hu-
mans put technology to use. Domestication theory forms a counter story
to deterministic understandings of technology, where the fate of a cer-
tain practice is at the mercy of the workings of a technology. Domestica-
tion theory granted humans more agency: animals, plants and technolo-
gies do not determine our lives but come to live with us, in our homes,
and on our terms. This approach informed the study of creative use
practices where users put technologies to different uses than their de-
signers intended.
Humans put technology, animals, and plants to use, and allow them
into their homes. To make this relational, one should look at the other
parties, too. Animals, plants and technology also вҖҳletвҖҷ humans into their
environment, or set the terms for living together with them. Nomadic
people, for instance, follow their flocks. Other animals вҖҳrefuseвҖҷ to live
with humans, like the vicuГұas in the Andes.32 To exploit the precious
wool of the vicuГұa, humans tried keeping them in captivity, but the vicu-
Гұa almost became extinct in the attempt. The humans had to set the
vicuГұas free and had to follow them high into the mountains to harvest
their wool. One could argue that the vicuГұas вҖҳsetвҖҷ the conditions for liv-
ing with them.
Unlike vicuГұas, technologies do not set their own terms by вҖҳdyingвҖҷ
from maltreatment, although they may get neglected to the point of вҖҳso-
cial deathвҖҷ. However, new technologies such as telecare are still far from
domesticated, a state that would be signified by more or less common,
culture-bound practices of living or working together between humans
and a certain вҖҳspeciesвҖҷ of technology. Heuristically speaking, one can look
for any of four вҖ“ sometimes overlapping вҖ“ activities that вҖҳunleashвҖҷ and
вҖҳtameвҖҷ individuals and devices, which precedes the domestication of a
species or their living together вҖ“ or apart вҖ“ happily ever after.
First, when new technology is вҖҳlet out of its boxвҖҷ, individual devices are
unleashed into the daily life practices to which they come to belong. This
means that their actual effect and working are unpredictable. They can
do all kinds of unexpected things. For instance, people domesticated the
telephone quickly because it facilitated the social chatter of American
women, even if its designers created it to transmit the business conver-
sations of American men.33 People domesticated the telephone, but dif-
ferently than expected. The history of technology shows again and again
that devices will behave differently to what their designers intended.
18
introduction

The second activity in the process of mutual adaptation involves tam-
ing the devices, in the sense that humans try to make them fit in with
how they want to use them in practice. For example, few people use all
the functions their personal computers provide; they just use the ones
they need and know about. These unleashing and taming processes go
the other way around as well. The third heuristic for analysing domesti-
cation processes looks at how devices unleash the imagination and crea-
tivity of their users who promptly invent new applications. This happens,
for instance, when physicists or chemists put substances to new uses.
Chapter 3 gives an example of how nurses in a heart failure clinic imag-
ined different uses for telecare devices. They envisioned using them as
research tools for their patient group, rather than for individual patient
care, and explored the possibilities for adapting the devices for this pur-
pose.
The fourth heuristic is to see how devices tame humans in their turn
by allowing for, or even forcing, some activities while hindering others.
A mundane example is the television that shows only ten channels in-
stead of the 30 advertised in the TV guide. Some technologies are more
coercive than others; a speed bump is coercive because it forces drivers
to slow down to prevent damage to their cars.34 Michel Foucault has ana-
lysed how the panopticon makes prisoners guard themselves; this exem-
plifies how objects can tame people into doing things.35
These four forms of unleashing and taming have heuristic value. Ulti-
mately, it is often unclear who did what first to arrive at a certain colla-
boration. In the resulting practice, humans and devices have established
their particular relations. Their identities and functions are interdepen-
dent. Unleashing and taming processes may lead to a fit between indi-
vidual devices and users, and, eventually, to a form of domestication,
implying more or less stabilised practices of cooperation, such as those
of the telephone. These processes may also lead to the immediate or
eventual rejection of a device (or, to be consistent, to a rejection of the
humans), as happens with technology nobody wants to buy or to mu-
seum exhibits on the history of technology.
There are niche applications. For example, DJs still use vinyl records
and turntables, which unleashed the invention of вҖҳscratchingвҖҷ, where the
DJ moves a disc manually to produce the scratching sound. Also, stable
practices may differ from one place to the next. For example, people use
mobile phones differently in different places. As Donner points out:
[The] widespread practice of вҖҳbeepingвҖҷ between mobile phone users in sub-
Saharan Africa [вҖҰ] involves calling a number and hanging up before the
mobileвҖҷs owner can pick up the call. The mobileвҖҷs call log and address book
functions signal who called, and when. Most beeps are requests to the mo-
bile owner to call back immediately, but beeps can also send a pre-negotiated
instrumental message such as вҖҳpick me up nowвҖҷ, or send a relational sign,
such as вҖҳIвҖҷm thinking of youвҖҷ. (Donner 2009)
studying innovative technologies
19

The fit between humans and devices and the practices it leads to, for
example, if the practice is a caring practice, is an empirical question. It
demands careful analysis of the implemented routines, the stable or con-
tentious norms and aims, and the issues addressed for solving.
To detect change, it is not enough to listen to the participantsвҖҷ ac-
counts; people may take things and events for granted in daily life. Rou-
tine practices may (have) become invisible to participants, but may be
visible to an involved observer. Devices obviously do not speak, and their
doings can only be observed and spoken about. Detailed insight into
what happens in care practices is thus important for learning what care
actually means in a particular situation. This explains my partiality to
ethnographic methods; they allow you to see people and devices вҖҳin ac-
tionвҖҷ, in the reciprocal taming and unleashing processes in the struggle
for fit, even if the participants are unaware of what exactly changes along
the way.
The chapters
Part one, вҖҳNorms and nightmaresвҖҷ, explores normativities in care and
how they can shift when telecare is put to use. They deal with the night-
mares of coldness and alienation in particular.
Chapter 2 studies a telecare project in palliative oncology. It analyses
the normative opposition between warm care and cold technology.
Warm care refers to good care for patients as subjects, whereas cold care
refers to rational, technical medical care that relates to patients as ob-
jects. In the case study, however, the technology provided care that these
theorists would label as warm. The study shows that metaphors of tem-
perature are not particularly suitable for discerning good from bad care.
I explore another concept for good care: care that fits.
Chapter 3 discusses the nursesвҖҷ fear that telecare will impoverish pa-
tient care, because it could hinder the development of good relations
with patients. Nurses also fear that telecare will make it harder for them
to notice if patients have problems, because they are not actually visiting
them at home. The chapter analyses how telecare changes the work prac-
tices of the nurses involved, and, with that, their notions of good care.
Telecare challenges the idea that вҖҳseeing the patientвҖҷ is the gold standard
for good nursing care, without dismissing the idea altogether. Contrary
to expectation, telecare supported the nursesвҖҷ desire to spot in time any
troubles that patients might have. However, the type of problem chan-
ged. Neglected households became less important than a change in
symptoms. Instead of making any sign relevant, telecare selected parti-
cular signs to look for and intensified their control. The concept of вҖҳfitвҖҷ
from the first chapter gains more substance here. Fit not only refers to
the relation between nurses and individual patients but also to notions of
what is a problem and how best to care for that problem.
20
introduction

The second part, вҖҳKnowledge and promisesвҖҷ, discusses the implica-
tions of using telecare devices for the kind of knowledge that can be
accessed, used and developed. I relate this analysis to the promise of
increased self-management for chronic patients that telecare is supposed
to provide.
Chapter 4 juxtaposes two ways of living with chronic disease incorpor-
ating telecare. Two devices help to shape the way each patient lives with
their disease in important ways. The devices influence the understand-
ing of what the problem is, what to do about it, who should do this, and
what knowledge helps the person to do it. In doing so, the telecare prac-
tice intervened in or co-existed with other forms of care. A fit was not
always established. Instead of one вҖҳselfвҖҷ doing all the managing, various
collectives set to work consisting of patients, professionals, family,
friends, and devices, each implying different tasks and responsibilities
for the participants. Patients were never caring for themselves вҖҳaloneвҖҷ.
Instead, the question was who else was involved in organising their care.
Was there a key role for professionals, or did the patients undertake their
own care together with friends, family, and fellow patients?
Chapter 5 analyses in more depth the relation between knowledge and
the role of telecare technology. Instead of setting the patientвҖҷs knowledge
in opposition to the doctorвҖҷs knowledge, the chapter contrasts scientific
medical knowledge with the practical knowledge of patients. Patients use
and develop practical knowledge that allows them to live their daily life
with their disease. If the knowledge they receive вҖ“ albeit embedded in
devices or otherwise вҖ“ is not practical or вҖҳready to useвҖҷ, they have to trans-
late it to make it fit their situation, for better or for worse. They have to
do this anew in every new situation. In the process of assembling, creat-
ing, and fitting practical knowledge, the patients enact their bodies in
different ways. The question is how telecare may fit the use and develop-
ment of practical knowledge.
The third part, вҖҳRoutines and efficienciesвҖҷ, analyses how telecare de-
vices influence caring routines. The analysis unravels вҖҳwhatвҖҷs in a rou-
tineвҖҷ in relation to the promise that telecare will bring efficiency.
Chapter 6 identifies the deeds of the webcam. What does it do? Users
and scholars often praise the webcam as an intimate means of commu-
nication for care at a distance because of its invisibility and absence. It is
a вҖҳsee-through deviceвҖҷ that does not influence or hinder what is seen or
said. However, I show how the webcam contributes to intimacy by its
active presence rather than by its absence вҖ“ for instance, by making peo-
ple stare at each otherвҖҷs faces on the screen. The workings of the web-
cam delineate the limits of its use. As a means of communication, peo-
ple may experience it as intrusive. Patients were reluctant to use
webcams for contact with people they did not know. The proximity in-
voked by the webcam did not fit the distance demanded for relating to
strangers.
the chapters
21

Chapter 7 tackles the question of efficiency head on by analysing rou-
tines in care as forms of efficiency. Managers often take efficiency as a
вҖҳgood in itselfвҖҷ, of which there is only one variety, usually brought about
by rationalisation and cost reduction. The chapter shows that efficiency
itself cannot be a goal of care; efficiency comes in different versions that
are fixed to particular versions of how the content of care is shaped. It is
impossible to separate what (good) care comes to mean from the way in
which it is organised. Changes in routines imply changes in the goals of
care and in ways of defining the problems. It is always wise to question
how claims of efficiency fit to what kind of care.
In the final chapter, I return to the question of how to understand
innovation in care. My analyses suggest new ways of studying innova-
tion, ways that fit better with the way care practices work and with the
normativity embedded in care practices, and that make better use of
knowledge about the workings of telecare technologies.
22
introduction

Part I
Norms and
nightmares


2 Caring devices
About warm hands, cold technology and making
things fit
Warm care, cold technologies
Theorists of medicine as well as lay people often put healthcare technol-
ogy, including telecare, in opposition to warm human care and contact.
They assume that medical technology is cold, rational and functional,
whereas human care is affective and comforting. Where does this oppo-
sition of warm and cold care come from? Social theorists often distin-
guish care from biomedicine and management, presenting the latter as
examples of the Habermassian system world. This system world has a
logic of instrumentality and threatens to colonise the вҖҳlife worldвҖҷ charac-
terised by intersubjective relations.1 Opposing biomedicine and care in
the trope of вҖҳsystem world conquers life worldвҖҷ makes a spatial contrast.
On the one hand, there are biomedical practices dominated by technical,
objectifying and causal reasoning about the body and its diseases. On the
other hand, warm care occurs between people, and patient subjectivity
flourishes in the empathic relations between carer and patient at home.
Warm care relates to sensitivity and concern, to вҖҳbeing thereвҖҷ for those in
need.
Although theorists accept that there is a legitimate space for detached
and objectified medical treatment, for instance, in setting the proverbial
broken bone, the opposition of warm and cold is partial to warmth. The
metaphors criticise instrumental and objectifying treatments by pointing
to the concern for the shivering patient needing a warm blanket after the
bone-setting operation. Although necessary, the operation is a cold tech-
nical intervention, whereas the blanket signifies warm care and thus
makes the practice вҖҳgoodвҖҷ. Warmth, then, equals goodness.2
Ironically, theorists often interpret the work of Michel Foucault, the
philosopher who so subtly analysed the advent of clinical knowledge, as
critical of medical rationality.3 David Armstrong (1983), for instance, in-
terprets FoucaultвҖҷs analyses as conceiving all medical knowledge as a
form of discipline or surveillance.4 People start regarding themselves
and others with a monolithic, totalitarian medical gaze. For these Fou-
cault interpreters, subjectivity is not merely oppressed but is invaded
and shaped by a medical logic that disciplines the ways individuals be-
have and perceive themselves. Without being aware of it, people reshape
themselves according to medical norms.
In the opposition between warmth and coldness, or care and medi-
cine, technology is especially cold.5 The philosophy of technology further
25

enforces dichotomies between technical objects and affective subjects. A
Heideggerian inheritance has taken root in commonsense thinking
about what technology does. Technology gets вҖҳin betweenвҖҷ us and the
world, alienating us from natural, unmediated ways of relating to what
is around us.6 Medical technology has a rational and functional image.7
Devices may be clumsy and ugly, but they do what they have to do and
are not regarded as part of a personвҖҷs life world, although the industry is
busy changing this.8, 9, 10
Warm and cold care stand for a more broadly defined opposition that
separates an ethical relation to patients from an epistemological relation to
patients. In an ethical relation, the clinician is empathic and involved
and tries to care for patients as persons who have perspectives of their
own, have feelings about their situation and concerns that encompass
more than their disease. In an epistemological relation, the clinician is
detached, like a scientist, and attempts to objectify what is the state of the
patientвҖҷs body, interferes in it and evaluates the result. In this chapter, I
empirically question the metaphors of warmth and coldness and the op-
positions they stand for. To make this as concrete as possible, I take
some of the worries about cold care by technologies as a starting point
and proceed with an empirical analysis of the workings of a specific tele-
care device.
What (un)makes a human?
When framing technology as вҖҳcoldвҖҷ, a central fear is that it will replace
humans and face-to-face contact.11 The fear is that those already deprived
of social contact will lose even more when technology takes over the
tasks done by humans.12 The horror image is the alienated old woman,
detached from the world, surrounded by machines. This is the first ob-
jection Sparrow & Sparrow formulate in their 2006 paper on the use of
robots in care for older people. Sparrow & Sparrow carefully consider
whether robots could take over caring tasks from humans without losing
quality of care. Their firmly negative answer resonates with the fear of
dehumanisation.13 Their arguments articulate the suspicion, deeply
rooted in Western experience, of using machines in care.
Apart from the fear that technology will dehumanise care, Sparrow &
Sparrow have at least three other objections against technical care. The
first is that machines do not improve control because of their limited
functionality. They can only perform specific tasks and will not help fulfil
alternative needs. The second argument is that machines do not really
care for us and certainly do not love us. Machines cannot have feelings or
express empathy. The premise is that no person can feel cared for with-
out being on the receiving end of real affection and concern. Robots and
machines can only take over the instrumental вҖ“ cold вҖ“ parts of care.14
26
caring devices

Finally, Sparrow & Sparrow warn that technology cannot relate indivi-
dually to humans. Technology is predictable and standardised to perform
one simple trick rather than another. People can switch it off at will, and
it lacks the characteristics that make people care for other people вҖ“ and
pets вҖ“ who have unpredictable needs that may call for attention at odd
times.15 Good relations take other people as вҖҳends in themselvesвҖҷ, not as a
means to something else. You cannot achieve this, Sparrow & Sparrow
argue, when the other can be вҖҳswitched off or put on pauseвҖҷ and is conse-
quently completely dependent on our own manipulations.16
Table 1 Why technology is cold
Technology...
does not enhance control
takes the place of human relations
has no feelings and so, cannot love us
cannot relate individually to humans
Based on Sparrow & Sparrow, 2006
Palliative care in Friesland
How does this image of cold technology relate to telecare practice? I
studied care in a practice people generally think that warmth is the pri-
mary ingredient: palliative care. Palliative care is for those ill people
whom doctors cannot cure. Professionals support patients to allow them
the best possible quality and duration of life.17 In the northern Dutch
province of Friesland, the location of the project studied, professionals
were concerned about a particular group of their incurably ill cancer pa-
tients. The disease can cause severe complaints, especially pain. The pa-
tients were on chemotherapy, not with the intention of curing their dis-
ease but to help keep tumours at bay and reduce their impact on their
condition and remaining years of life. Chemotherapy can cause distres-
sing side effects, such as fever, nausea, vomiting, constipation, loss of
hair, ruined mucous membranes, and so on. Most symptoms can be
effectively treated or tended, but, as the hospital staff in Friesland
learned, these patients tended to underreport their complaints and suf-
fer in silence. The project intended to reach out to these all too silent
patients in order to treat them more adequately. To this end, they
brought in a communication device called the health buddy or вҖҳwhite
boxвҖҷ, the patientsвҖҷ own name for the device.
The white box is a telecommunication modem installed in the pa-
tientвҖҷs home (see Illustration 1). It transmits data over the telephone line
to a server that encodes them, and then on to a personal computer in the
oncology department of the hospital. Every day the patients receive a list
palliative care in friesland
27

of questions that they answer by pressing the blue buttons. A flashing
light indicates that the new questions have arrived for the day. The list
starts with an extensive check of symptoms and continues with ques-
tions on psychosocial well-being, spiritual questions on coping with im-
minent death, information about diet, and so on. A team of medical pro-
fessionals and the project coordinator from the company that distributes
and maintains the white boxes developed the question protocol, which is
the same for all patients. The session ends with a вҖҳquote of the dayвҖҷ, wis-
dom borrowed from classical and popular philosophers.
Illustration 1 Using the white box
The software in the server automatically codes answers with a red flag
whenever patients may need specialist intervention вҖ“ for instance, if the
patient reports fever. It also flags cases more difficult to interpret, such
as alarming answers to the questions on spiritual and psychosocial well-
being. When flagging an answer, the white box gives patients feedback,
urging them to call the nurse, adding the telephone number. In any
event, each session reminds patients that they can always call the nurse
or their GP. If they do not call, the nurse may respond to the alarm and
call a patient to discuss if she needs to do something.
Clearly, designers did not intend the white box to be cold, merely func-
tional technology. The white box aims to tend to psychological, social,
physical and spiritual matters and acknowledges the subjectivity of pa-
tients in their struggle with disease rather than just dealing with their
medical condition. However, you could argue that providing spiritual
care through technology takes away humanity and intimacy. Compared
to the ideal of discussing such matters in person, telecare communica-
28
caring devices

tion may be seen as second best, with the patient at home, alone, answer-
ing hard questions outside the context of human(e) conversation, im-
mediate attention and a supportive hand on the shoulder. In this inter-
pretation, telecare swaps human care for technological attention.
However, this is not what the patients and their families reported
when I visited them.18 Patients and spouses were eager to convince me
that they felt extremely well cared for. One couple used a Dutch idiom
for luxury: they felt вҖҳbedded on cotton woolвҖҷ [in de watten gelegd]. This is a
metaphor for softness rather than warmth, but it shows the patientвҖҷs
satisfaction with the device. How did care achieve this? One explanation
is that patients did not regard the telecare system as a вҖҳseparateвҖҷ thing in
their care but as part of all the care they were getting, which they were
especially pleased to receive. General appreciation was certainly there,
but, as I will demonstrate, this is not the whole story. The telecare system
made a specific contribution in the caring arrangements. The questions
I ask in this chapter are: how do the participants and the telecare system
re-shape care, and what does this say about the opposition between
вҖҳwarm careвҖҷ and вҖҳcold technologyвҖҷ?
Situating matters of disease
Let me start with some background on the patientsвҖҷ situation. My infor-
mants reported that learning their diagnosis was a devastating experi-
ence. It was a вҖҳbombвҖҷ falling down on their world, or a вҖҳblow to the
headвҖҷ. The impact was a telling image of a barren battlefield or a blanked
out perception, instead of normal life following its predictable course.
Whatever had seemed clear and straightforward in life was no longer
that. Loss of certainty and control and lots of empty spaces and questions
confronted people. What will happen? How will I react to chemotherapy?
What does it mean now that death is, somehow, coming closer? What
will happen to my partner and kids?
Mrs Jansen:19 When they told me, the diagnosis hit me like a bomb. I didnвҖҷt
feel ill. I was functioning like I always did. A little pain here [points to her
belly], but just slight. And then this diagnosis. You donвҖҷt have a clue whatвҖҷs
going to happen to you.
The chaos created by the diagnosis creates a demand for information,
facts, predictions and new footholds. Patients have to establish a new
order to enable a life with a completely changed perspective. As the on-
cology nurse told me: вҖҳWe are all immortal, until we fall ill,вҖҷ meaning that
we do not or are unable to reckon with death before the circumstances
actually force us to do so. The patient, however, was not the only one
taking the blow and experiencing a loss of control. The illness inflicted
situating matters of disease
29

family, friends and neighbours, too. Sometimes patients stated that their
family had more trouble dealing with the new situation than they had.
Mrs Hallenforder: The first 14 days it was justвҖҰ he [her husband] couldnвҖҷt
speak, he couldnвҖҷt eat, couldnвҖҷt sleep anymore. I have the disease, but he
avoided everyone, talked to no one. Later my son told me: вҖҳWe [he and his
father] didnвҖҷt look at each other, the first 14 days. We stood there in the
stable, milking the cows with our backs turned. We couldnвҖҷt look each other
in the face because then we would have started crying.вҖҷ
Those who receive the prognosis that they or their loved ones would not
recover from the disease needed a new order, but too many вҖҳremindersвҖҷ
were unproductive. The patients did not want to be struck down repeat-
edly by having their situation pointed out to them again and again.
Somehow, daily life with all its minor ups and downs and trivial develop-
ments had to continue, for as long as it could. It is good when a device
reminds one of oneвҖҷs disease, but it is also good not to dwell upon it. Mr
Frederiks worked in a shop when he fell ill:
They [the customers] constantly wanted to know what was going on, how
you are, really, right down to the bone. But if you tell that story 10, 20, 30
times a day, you get sick of being ill. ThatвҖҷs really heavy, psychologically
speaking. So I said: вҖҳIf you want to visit a patient, come when IвҖҷm in hospital
having chemo.вҖҷ Tube stuck into my hand, me lying flat out on a bed, nurse
in the vicinity. Then IвҖҷm sick. Not on other days. Outside the hospital I donвҖҷt
want to be confronted by this. Then itвҖҷd rule your life. I donвҖҷt want to be just
someone sick. ThatвҖҷs not how I want to live my life.
It is important to care for oneвҖҷs illness, but it is impossible to be a sick
person all day and have oneвҖҷs identity and concerns narrowed down to
the illness. My informants told me it was crucial to continue with ordi-
nary life and keep up their interest in other people. They reconsidered
their priorities and often spent more time with their loved ones. Still,
they were very much aware of the illness: вҖҳItвҖҷs always there. When you
wake up, you think, gosh, I have cancer. ItвҖҷs never not there, device or
not.вҖҷ The presence of the disease was a given, but not the scale, shape or
understanding of it.
So there were at least two, sometimes conflicting demands on care for
these patients. On the one hand, care had to provide handholds for deal-
ing with the disease, the palliative chemo treatment, and ways of dealing
with physical deterioration and approaching death, both for the patients
and those living around them. On the other hand, the environment
could not supply handholds too often, as that would make life unbear-
able. It is impossible to be an incurably ill person who is dying all day
long; it would be impossible to continue showing an interest in the
30
caring devices

everyday muddle of ongoing life. In this field of tensions the telecare
system played its part.
How did the patients and the telecare system shape the process of
caring here? The exchange of content through the white box helped pa-
tients find a вҖҳnew orderвҖҷ in the chaos brought about by their new situa-
tion, but not merely that. The very presence of the device, the regularity of
its demands for attention, the modest investment of time needed to com-
plete the questionnaire and the repetitiveness of the questions all contrib-
uted to the creation of order.
Mr Frederiks: ItвҖҷs a bit of self-discipline. It makes you aware of certain
things. Have I got fever, did I throw up, have I weighed myself? I always do
what the white box tells me to do. It says: вҖҳDid you step on the scales today?вҖҷ
so I go to the scales and check my weight. I do the questions, and when I am
done with the white box, I concentrate on the rest of my day. It is a moment
of checking. I send information to the hospital, and get some information
back for me. ThatвҖҷs what the white box does for me.
Every day the light on the white box flashes to signal the arrival of new
questions. Taking the time to answer the questions made Mr Frederiks
think about his illness and how he felt, reminding him to care for him-
self and his disease. That is what he meant by his вҖҳdisciplineвҖҷ. The white
box made him ask himself вҖҳHow am I today?вҖҷ in comparison to the day
before. The device made him analyse and articulate how he was doing,
and made him take specific action. It only took a few minutes and al-
lowed him to continue with whatever else he wanted to do afterwards.
Thus, the illness received a designated place in his daily life, connected
to his use of the white box. It was his memento mori, or at least вҖҳremem-
ber caringвҖҷ, after which he went on with his day.
So while the telecare system helped to create and manipulate time for
disease, it also created space for matters concerning disease. Technicians
often installed the white box in the living room, because this is where
most people have their telephone connection. It was not placed in the
centre of the room, but often near a table where patients, with or without
companions, could sit down to think about and answer the questions.
Patients could spare their visitors a long list of complaints, having dealt
with them on the white box.
Mrs Fransen: You answer questions every day, and thatвҖҷs how you let them
know if something is wrong. And when someone visits, IвҖҷm glad and donвҖҷt
feel the need to complain about how bad I feel. So, itвҖҷs a nice alternative. It
helps. You donвҖҷt have to wait for somebody to show up.
The regularity and position of the white box helped to tame disease mat-
ters, and also helped to create time and space for an ordinary life as well.
situating matters of disease
31

Having an incurable disease and facing death is as terrible as it is
abstract. By helping to ground disease matters, the device met the criter-
ion of control that Sparrow & Sparrow formulated for good care: it gave
the users a sense of control over their lives by allowing them to situate
matters of disease and dying in time and space, even if this did not work
for everyone (more on this below). This includes warm care qualities in
the workings of the technology. The device helped patients deal with
emotions and provided support. However, there were also elements
from the cold side, such as the list of symptoms. The device could sup-
port more detachment in routine tasks such as weighing oneself. It put a
boundary on self-pity or empathy from oneвҖҷs spouse: five minutes a day
might be just enough. The patients used comparative expressions re-
lated to space, time, order and size. These terms provide criteria for
shaping the right scale for matters to do with illness and care (not too
much, not too little). The categories run through the dichotomies of
coldness and warmth, opening up a different set of concerns.
Building relations through the white box
Sparrow & SparrowвҖҷs greatest worry, the most prominent commonsense
fear of technology, is that machines will replace all human contact, mak-
ing care cold by reducing it to mechanical interactions with machines.
My informants, however, reported something else. They pointed to the
ability of the telecare system to bring people together. Particularly patients
living with partners reported that the questions on the white box gave
them openings to discuss difficult subjects, or to reflect on how they
had been doing in the past.
Mrs Torensen: Well, he [her late husband] did the symptom checks really
fast, hop, hop, hop, just like that. Then, the other questions, sometimes
weвҖҷd sit down and talk about them. WeвҖҷd be thinking, this is a kind of com-
munication that we wouldnвҖҷt have that often together. The white box hands
you, say, a problem. And then you can talk to each other about it. ThatвҖҷs
really good, I really enjoyed that. It would bring up subjects that are not so
easy to talk about. For instance, it asks if you can talk about things with your
children. The box asks about something, you talk about it and it makes you
think: how do we discuss this with the children? And that brings you to quite
different conversations, really.
Instead of severing ties, the technology seemed to strengthen bonds by
making people talk about subjects other than day-to-day matters. Besides
handing them topics to discuss, the white box gave the informants the
language in which they could talk about disease matters.
32
caring devices

Mrs Torensen: You see, Gerald emailed friends and family, and so on. When
heвҖҷd had chemo, he would email them about how his week had been, and so
on. And I noticed that as time went by, he became far more open in his
emails to others. And I still think that is because he had to name it, each
time, how he felt, what was going on. I feel that it may help people get past
the barrier of being close-mouthed. He could not only tell people that heвҖҷd
been ill, but also how ill heвҖҷd been.
Mr Torensen had learned to articulate how he was doing, and this helped
him stay in touch with his family and relatives. The white box literally
provided him with words (better than yesterday, worst than last time,
particular symptoms showing strongly, mildly or not at all). It had
opened him up.
Apart from connecting patients to their loved ones, the white box also
linked the patients to the nurse. The telecare system functioned as a new
communication line to her. One message the system got across clearly to
all informants was this: вҖҳPlease call the oncology nurse when there is
trouble. You can never call us too much, you can only call us too little.вҖҷ
The nurse who called patients if she thought contact was needed only
reinforced the importance of calling. The white box helped to establish
an easily accessible phone connection between patient and nurse.
Mr Smit: It is really nice to know that you can call the oncologist [nurse]
directly. It makes it all closer.
Mrs Smit/patient: There is less of a threshold, each time they tell you: вҖҳCall
the oncologist, hereвҖҷs the phone number, otherwise call your GP.вҖҷ Here they
donвҖҷt give a phone number, because itвҖҷs different for everyone. So the mes-
sage is clear: вҖҳCall, call, call. DonвҖҷt be shy. Call.вҖҷ So that gets you going, too.
In general, the connection between nurse and patient was probably the
most successful achievement of the telecare system. All patients re-
ported this. With the white box, the telecare system managed to establish
and strengthen human relations rather than disrupt or replace them.
When human relations are warm, the telecare system, again, provides
warm care. But do human relations always guarantee warmth? The pa-
tients also talked about relations that came undone when they fell ill.
They gave quite a few examples of friends or family who walked out on
them because they did not want to confront illness and death. The litera-
ture propagating warm care overflows with critical examples of uncaring
professionals. Warm care needs good relations. The telecare system sup-
ported good relations by strengthening ties that were already good. This
is why the patients saw the white box as a warm and caring technology.
On the other hand, the warm contact with the nurse mostly served to
deal with вҖҳcoldвҖҷ matters, such as medication and pain relief. Treatment of
symptoms was the most important reason for both nurse and patient to
get in touch.
building relations through the white box
33

Mrs Dodijn: She [the nurse] called me later in the day, and I asked why. She
said a red flag had come up for my dizziness [Mrs Dodijn had reported a
high degree of dizziness]. She wanted to know what had caused it. Well, I
knew! From vomiting after chemo. I was so sick, so nauseous, I couldnвҖҷt
keep anything down. So I thought: thatвҖҷs why IвҖҷm dizzy. So she said: LetвҖҷs
handle this another way. IвҖҷll ask the doctor to give you more pills for the
nausea. So I had one and three [pills], but now I have two, three and four,
plus two extra. And now, the two extra make me constipated.
One could label Mrs DodijnвҖҷs nausea, dizziness, vomiting, tablets and
constipation as вҖҳcoldвҖҷ matters. It is also clear, however, that in this situa-
tion it is necessary to deal with cold matters to craft good care. Setting
warm versus cold, good versus bad, subjective versus objective is proble-
matic. Rather than opposing an ethical relation between subjects or an
epistemological relation between subject and object, it seems that the
creation of a practical and aesthetic relation of making something fit needs
both ideas. This may be a better way of thinking about good care, to in-
clude elements formerly dubbed cold. Caring is good when it seeks to fit
the situation of the individual patient, as in вҖҳtailor-made careвҖҷ. Nausea,
dizziness or family relationships may trouble some people sometimes,
but not others. Good care needs both subjective and objective elements,
mixed to different tastes and concerns, depending on the situation at
hand.
Devices do not love us
What does the analysis of the workings of the telecare system reveal
about the notion of вҖҳfittingвҖҷ? Sparrow & Sparrow made it clear that you
cannot expect a device to вҖҳloveвҖҷ you. Inanimate devices obviously do not
have feelings. However, expressions of love and concern for others did
become apparent in two forms: as care for the nurse and as care for the
device. Primarily, the patients experienced using the device as a way of
caring for the nurse. This has nothing to do with actual love by devices,
as Sparrow & Sparrow rightly show is impossible, but with expressing
concern through devices.
Mr Dieriks: You have this thing [white box] that makes it easy to pass infor-
mation on to the nurse. The step to fill out the questions is far easier than
phoning the nurse or a doctor. You know these people are busy, they have
patients, meetings. You always feel, if you call, youвҖҷd only be disturbing. I
donвҖҷt have that with the white box. They can read it when it suits them and
IвҖҷve still passed on my information. ThatвҖҷs nice.
Mr Dieriks does not want to disturb the nurse, but more than that, he is
willing to help the nurse and doctor care for him. The telecare system pro-
34
caring devices

vides a device that aligns the demands of not wanting to disturb, re-
sponding responsibly to problems when they appear, and helping to
care for the professionals in return. Thus, the white box is a device that
helps patients to actively care for their nurses just as much as the other
way around. Mrs Smit became aware of her own caring role the time she
did not report how unwell she was feeling.
Mrs Smit: IвҖҷd had the flu, and then got really bad anaemia. I couldnвҖҷt get
warm. Well, we survived the weekend, no problem. Then she [the nurse]
called about something to do with the device and heard that I was in bed,
shivering. She canвҖҷt see that through the device! She couldnвҖҷt have known I
was unwell from the questions. IвҖҷd called my GP for antibiotics, for the flu.
And I went to the hospital on Monday for another course of chemo and she
said: вҖҳO my God, I didnвҖҷt know.вҖҷ She was shocked when she saw me.
Mr Smit: We should have called [about your flu], really.
Mrs Smit: Yes, it was a mistake not to call. Because it meant they didnвҖҷt
know what was happening to me.
Mr Smit: You have to learn this.
What Mr and Mrs Smit had to learn was that reporting complaints was
not just a matter of bothering professionals with things unimportant, but
of helping them to plan their treatment. When Mrs Smit, a particularly
thin 76-year-old, showed up shivering from anaemia, she could not get
the planned course of chemotherapy and got a blood transfusion instead.
But there was also the matter of the upset nurse: the patient was so ill,
and the nurse was shocked to realise that neither she nor the telecare
system had noticed. This turn of events made the patient feel as if she
had вҖҳmade a mistakeвҖҷ by not reporting her bad condition.
So вҖҳhelping the nurseвҖҷ was a strong motivation for using the white box
and reporting complaints, and this gave the patients support in return:
they were happy to help and act like вҖҳgood patientsвҖҷ.
Then there was the love for the device. The white box took the initiative
by demanding the patientвҖҷs help. The patients cared for the box because
it told them what they could do to help. The following quote shows this
reversal of roles, with the patient caring for the device instead of the
other way around.
Mr Klaasen: Well, IвҖҷm not usually in a rush to phone, and now you donвҖҷt
even have to call. [laughs] ThatвҖҷs the benefit. IвҖҷm not one for telling long
tales on the phone. But then I think: Hey, here he is again, that buddy wants
to ask me something. ItвҖҷs become more or less a friend of mine, so to speak.
ItвҖҷs like you have a cat or a little dog. I have my health buddy. [emphasis
mine, JP]
The white box does not put the patient in the position of having to ask
busy doctors or nurses for help: the buddy asks Mr Klaasen questions,
devices do not love us
35

and he is happy to oblige. Addressing the white box as a friend or pet
also points to how the white box has itself become an вҖҳendвҖҷ rather than a
вҖҳmeansвҖҷ for Mr Klaasen. He was happy with the device for being there
and keeping him company. It exemplifies a caring relation between hu-
man and device.
Love for the device and care for and from the nurse can also become
entangled.
Mrs Wilkens: I think it is really great. We always say: hereвҖҷs Tania [nurse]
winking again. You see, when the light starts flashing [to announce the arri-
val of questions], we say: Tania is winking at us.
Here, the white box is a metonym for the nurse, signifying her presence
and the care and support she provides вҖ“ with a little help from the pa-
tient. If anything, the use of the device does not put care at a distance but
in close proximity, since it facilitates closer and more frequent contact
with the professional carers in the hospital.
These examples show the different roles of patients who care for
nurses and devices, as compared to nurses and devices caring for pa-
tients. For the nurse, affection is not the sole part of a good professional
caring relationship. The nurse may appreciate her patients, she may un-
derstand them and be empathic, she may even like them, but she does
not love them, nor is this necessary or desirable for her care to be good.
She should bring in her knowledge of symptoms and cures, ways of
dealing with nausea and pain, and the ability to judge what is relevant
for individual patients. This would be called вҖҳcold careвҖҷ in the warm-cold
dichotomy, but the term sounds awkward here.
On the other hand, patients can be far more liberal with love. They
may love the device and care for the nurse, but they can only do this
because the device and the nurse look after the knowledge aspect of the
caring relationship. Patients depend on this knowledge that they do not
possess themselves. What they offer is вҖҳmaterialвҖҷ that helps the nurses
build their clinical picture вҖ“ and their appreciation for the accuracy of
their diagnosis and treatment. To call a professional caring relationship
good, it indeed needs some of the presumably cold characteristics:
knowledge of symptoms and their treatment, experience of patients
with comparable forms of cancer, the ability to discern worries from
symptoms, the capacity to behave and react appropriately, and so on.
Professional care, by both humans and machines, can be analysed
more adequately in terms of continuously shaping a match between
needs and interventions. In terms of the aesthetics of fit, both warm and
cold elements are present, as long as their combination matches the par-
ticular situation of a patient. This aesthetic is not concerned with the
вҖҳsublimeвҖҷ, as in the beauty of art, but with a more unassuming form of
beauty. Professional aesthetics are distinctly different from idiosyncratic
interpretations of life aesthetics aimed at вҖҳindividual excellenceвҖҷ, an Aris-
36
caring devices

totelian twist. This would turn clinicians into artists rather than profes-
sionals, ignoring matters of the body, technology, knowledge and respon-
sibility. Here it is self-effacing practicality, a nitty-gritty20 professional-
ism that aims to fit to the situation of the individual, while the
individual actively participates in this process. It resembles the func-
tional aesthetics of tailors and carpenters rather than artists, where fit is
a sine qua non for the beauty or elegance of the crafted object. A table or
pair of trousers with one leg longer than the other(s) would be useless,
rubbish, rather than a thing of beauty.21 However, different from fixing a
table or piece of clothing, care for chronic or terminal patients does not
lead to a final product, because the situation of a patient keeps changing.
The tinkering continues even after the patient is dead, for the relatives.22
Fitting individuals
Good care requires warmth and coldness, knowledge and empathy, but
carers need to mix them in quantities that fit the particular and tempo-
rary situation of individual patients. This is in accordance with Sparrow
& SparrowвҖҷs demands for individuality in the caring relation. How did
the telecare system relate to individual situations? As a group, the ob-
served patients underreported their suffering. This became very clear in
the interviews: my informants did not like phoning doctors or nurses
one little bit. They were afraid their call would come at an inconvenient
time and be a bother to the nurse. This is a specificity of the patient
group using the white box.
Mr Johansen: ItвҖҷs a step you have to take. I am not really super sensitive to
pain [kleinzerig], so when I went to the GP I had to introduce myself. IвҖҷd
never seen the guy before. That was my medical history: there wasnвҖҷt one.
ItвҖҷs a big step for me, something has to be really wrong, IвҖҷd have to be sick as
a dog before IвҖҷd call a doctor. But with the device, I keep them up to date,
and if something is wrong, they call me. They get a red alert, and sometimes
they call within five minutes. I imagine they read it when it suits them. IвҖҷm
not bothering anyone, and my problem still gets attention.
Besides sharing the fear of causing disturbance, my informants saw
themselves as realists вҖ“ plain and sturdy people. They took pride in not
running to the doctor for just any little pain. Rather than meeting the
popular image of consumers actively demanding care, my informants
spoke of themselves as reluctant to bother doctors. Patients in the other
case studies for this book reported the same reluctance, but here they
did explicitly link this to their own phlegmatic вҖҳcultureвҖҷ вҖ“ or nature.
fitting individuals
37

Mrs Dodijn: By nature IвҖҷm just normal, down-to-earth, Friesian, and if I
have some little pain, I donвҖҷt just run to the phone. It has to go on for a few
days, and then IвҖҷll think: if itвҖҷs not over by so and so, then IвҖҷll go.
One patient told a long, heartbreaking story about how her doctor seemed
to have hinted that she was a fraud, a hypochondriac reporting imaginary
complaints, because there was nothing to see on the scan. Although her
story made it clear that the doctor had not in fact said any of this, she was
still deeply hurt by what she saw as an attack on her own virtue, and her
care for herself and her doctor. The suggestion had broken the вҖҳunspo-
ken agreementвҖҷ between doctor and patient whereby she would not both-
er him and he would treat her complaints seriously when she finally
uttered them.
The telecare system and these particular patients вҖ“ with their specific
virtues, concerns and reluctance to bother others вҖ“ established an impor-
tant fit. The system made a match between needs and ways of being. The
individuals shared particular characteristics, even if the device did not
address them, in a completely individualised way. There was a fit be-
tween device and human because the device interfered with the relevant
problems (e.g. patients who do not contact their doctors in time). Note
that the patients were not passive in making things fit. Patients could
also establish a fit when they refused to use the device, brought it back,
or took time and possibilities to adapt to its questions. This stopped mis-
matches turning into problems, as I discuss below. Fits are relational
products, as are warmth and coldness.
The notion of fitting
When вҖҳmaking something fitвҖҷ is a characteristic of caring relations be-
tween devices, carers and patients (or a group of patients and their
spouses), it becomes possible to understand giving medical information
as a way of caring, too. The notion of fitting makes it hard to label parti-
cular care content as either warm or cold regardless of the context it
would or would not fit in.
Mrs Abenes: [The white box] asks some questions so often you get to know
what theyвҖҷre all about. If you live through something, like being unable to
sleep, you can see by the questions that insomnia is just part of the process.
It comes back to you, it gets a name. ThatвҖҷs really very nice.
The quote shows that the telecare system helps patients to name their
experiences and thus localise and give meaning to their feelings. Is your
insomnia a symptom of cancer? Or an effect of the chemotherapy? Or is
it just the flu, or, even worse, is there no explanation at all? The content
of the information is good, not because it is medical information, but
38
caring devices

because it was relevant to Mrs Abenes and was given at the appropriate
time.
Mrs Veronica: I was in terrible pain after the first chemo. And I thought: вҖҳIf I
have to go through this every time, oh that would be dreadful!вҖҷ But that was
the first time. IвҖҷm not someone to take pills easily. Usually IвҖҷd wait until I
felt in pain and only then take my painkillers. But you have to keep ahead of
the pain, not wait for it to come, because then youвҖҷre too late. The device
[white box] taught me this, so yes, itвҖҷs really good. To make sure you donвҖҷt
get the pain you take the pills in advance.
The white boxвҖҷs advice released Mrs Veronica from the torment of her
pain. That the fit is about sleep or pain, medical subjects or spiritual
matters, is not a distinction of a priori interest to patients. They have
concerns and complaints that may be both medical and social, and they
are grateful for help with them. It would be unethical to hold Mrs Vero-
nica by the hand and not help her take the painkillers in an effective way.
The argument also holds for supposedly warm topics.
Mr Frederiks: IвҖҷm an atheist. The question вҖҳDo you find comfort in your
philosophy of life?вҖҷ has a religious perspective. If you are an atheist, it is
impossible to find this kind of support in your viewpoints. To me, after
death, it all stops. Others may think they go to heaven or the eternal hunting
fields, or whatever they believe. But to me, it stops. I cannot find support in
the fact that it stops, and they did not think about this when developing the
telecare system.
Spirituality did not support this atheist. On the contrary, the question
disheartened him for it did not take his minimalist philosophy of life
into account. The mention of spiritual matters is not by definition com-
forting. Mr Frederiks does not consider it comforting that, after death, вҖҳit
all stopsвҖҷ, even if others might find the thought of a heaven reassuring.
When вҖҳfitвҖҷ as a temporary result in the process of caring is a criterion
for calling care good or not, the goodness of the intervention, be it med-
ical or spiritual, is contingent on the relation. Neither warmth nor cold-
ness has a pre-given meaning that is hidden in the essence or nature of
the intervention. Both medical and spiritual interventions may be good,
as long as they fit. Supposedly warm interventions may go cold when
they discourage a patient. Empathy has a limit when a patient needs
painkillers. Patients warmly welcome assumed cold interventions such
as technical advice on how to use medication. Fitting is a relational activ-
ity, a way of interacting rather than an effect of machines. Users and
devices have to continuously establish what may fit where.
the notion of fitting
39

Mrs Wilkens: You have to get used to it [the white box]. You have to get to
know each other [laughs]. And you do that in a playful way. ItвҖҷs nice and
easy!
Care that does not fit
People and devices establish fits interactively, but misfits as well. What
misfits вҖ“ i.e., failed attempts at good care вҖ“ did I witness here? The pa-
tients complained about repetitive questions or unacceptable questions,
for example on sexuality, which were regarded as an infringement of
privacy. Some found it tiresome to read the long list of symptoms day
after day if they did not have any, although it made some patients count
their blessings. However, usually patients reported this as a minor nui-
sance. They could deal with it by skipping these questions or quickly
running through them. They did not fit but did not disturb them either,
and patients often kept the possibility open that they might become rele-
vant later. The limited investment of time in dealing with misfits was a
mollifying factor here.
The general protocol that made up the questions did not tune to indi-
viduals, but, paradoxically, this also helped the patients to deal with ques-
tions that did not fit their own situation. Apparently, the questions ad-
dressed other people.
Mrs Veronica: The white box asked about financial things. And that makes
you think. I had some complications after my first chemo. Then you go out
and buy things, but luckily we can afford it. And when I lie awake, I think
about it: what do people do if they have to live off charity? They are just as
sick as I am. It must be very hard for them when they have to buy things,
like the expensive gel I bought to heal the blisters in my mouth. It made me
think. And it made me sad. Some people canвҖҷt do this so easily.
The inquiry about finances did not fit Mrs VeronicaвҖҷs situation, but she
made it meaningful by relating it to hypothetical others around her. If it
did not fit, it did no harm when the patients could situate the concern
elsewhere, and they could even empathise with the implied others.
The most serious misfits were questions experienced as вҖҳtoo confron-
tationalвҖҷ, which only made a situation worse. A few people returned the
white box in the first week of use.23 They found it too strenuous (they
were too ill) or too confronting, meaning that they did not want to think
about questions of death and dying, possible symptoms or the impact of
the disease on their lives because they experienced these matters as too
intrusive and scary. The problems and refusals did not relate to placing
care at a distance. The refusers and troubled patients felt the device was
bringing care too close or made it excessive, comparable to the shop-
keeperвҖҷs complaint about his over-inquisitive clientele.24
40
caring devices

The recurring example of a misfit initiated by the device was a set of
questions on bedsores. The carers eventually modified these questions,
but at the time of the study, the patients often discussed them. Mrs Jan-
sen explained that they scared her. She was feeling well at the time and
she was not thinking at all about becoming bedridden. The information
on bedsores made her realise that having them was possible in her fu-
ture too. She needed a lot of thinking to work out how to deal with this
information.
Mrs Jansen: You can look at it in another way. You can say: well, I might be
in this situation, later. You have to think ahead, it could happen. But you
donвҖҷt always want to be confronted with it. But it is reality, it could be my
reality. If youвҖҷre prepared, you could deal with it better. You have to look on
it like a maybe, not necessarily, but you could end up in this situation. Well,
thatвҖҷs scary at first. Then you think: you should look at it another way.
It took Mrs Jansen lots of energy to make the bedsore information use-
ful, or at least not harmful to her (it is a possibility, not a pre-determined
fact, and if you do get them, you may as well be prepared). She had to do
a lot of work to make a liveable fit that allowed her to relate to these
questions. She described this as a confrontation of worldviews.
Mrs Jansen: I refused it at first [when the white box was offered to her],
because I was scared. Well, yes, I have my own views and theyвҖҷre optimistic.
I told them I did not want to be put down in the dumps by the device. It
would keep confronting you with questions you donвҖҷt feel like answering. I
donвҖҷt want to change my view of life because of this device. I was scared it
would press a pessimistic view onto me.
The difficulty with confrontational questions is to know what makes
these questions confronting or unfitting. There was consensus on the
misfit of questions about bedsores when one was not already bedridden.
What surprised me was that it hardly ever concerned the idea of having
an incurable disease. The patients who used the white box mostly dealt
with this as a fact.
Mrs Veronica: IвҖҷd looked at the questions [on the white box] with a friend,
and she told me later that she found it all so terribly confronting. It said so
clearly: you wonвҖҷt get better, asking questions like вҖҳHow do you see this, how
do you deal with that, and are you sad about that?вҖҷ She thought that was very
confronting. But I said to her: вҖҳYes, but I have this disease. And I live with it.вҖҷ
So, to me, itвҖҷs very different. I know I canвҖҷt get better. TheyвҖҷre doing lots to
slow down the disease. But they canвҖҷt stop it. So you know what the situation
is. This is the way it is, I donвҖҷt have a choice. I have to take it from there.
care that does not fit
41

Users of the telecare system evidently could think about their incurable
disease but, apparently, the refusers did not. The refusers feared that the
telecare system would make their illness too central in their lives, un-
leashing their disease rather than taming it, blowing it up rather than
reducing it to a manageable size. Indeed, patients engage in a relation-
ship with a device that acts in their life. It is pivotal in that they may вҖҳopt
outвҖҷ of such a relation when they feel it is impossible to deal with, exces-
sive, or too hard to establish fits. When the relation establishes un-
needed or untimely collisions rather than fits, care is harmful rather
than good.
Modest aesthetics
вҖҳWarmвҖҷ signified good care by its emphasis on ethical relations that
respected patient subjectivity and acknowledged their feelings and
thoughts. Cold care served as a critical term signifying an epistemologi-
cal relation regarding patientsвҖҷ bodies as the object of knowledge that
doctors should diagnose and treat. Doctors use objective parameters for
this, such as lab tests and scientific knowledge, rather than patientsвҖҷ
thoughts. The case of the white box demonstrated that putting both rela-
tions in opposition to each other does not help to analyse why patients
experienced the telecare system as caring rather than as a cold technol-
ogy. Even so, warmth alone does not fully describe what the practice of
palliative care is about and why it works so well in Friesland. Elements of
warm and cold, ethics and epistemology, subjectivity and objectivity are
entangled. In practice, вҖҳknowing patientsвҖҷ cannot be done without taking
the experience of the patients into account. The patients need to sense
and report вҖҳwhen, how and where it hurtsвҖҷ. Respect comes from taking
their treatment seriously and knowing when to apply empathy or when
painkillers are the better option. When professionals do not look after
bodies, empathy for pain is not ethical but cruel. When one profession-
ally engages in caring, knowing the situation is also an ethical act,
whereas ethically relating to patients is also a matter of using oneвҖҷs
knowledge. In practice, the two do not exist separately.
So, both subjective and objective elements are part of a professional
caring relation, but they cannot be neatly categorized into pre-estab-
lished activities. Instead of separating and opposing warm and cold
care, or ethics and knowledge, my analysis suggests a third metaphor to
understand the goodness and badness of care, one that overcomes these
fruitless oppositions: the metaphor of fitting. I analysed fitting as engag-
ing in a practical and aesthetic relation between patient and carer or car-
ing device. It is a modest aesthetics, lacking grandiosity or sublime
beauty, acknowledging the limited possibilities for great results such as
a permanent cure. It is also modest because the professional cannot con-
trol the process of caring; inevitably, the patients and their bodies play
42
caring devices

their part. It is a professional aesthetics, where professional stands for
crafting and shaping fit, including the employment of clinical knowledge
shared with other professionals that is needed to do what seems right. It
is contextual, referring to the openness and sensitivity to the situation a
patient is in at a particular moment. Clinicians need this sensitivity to
evolving and unpredictable situations that are characteristic of the pro-
cess of caring. And it is a practical aesthetics, where practical stands for
the pragmatics of interventions; they need to be helpful to make the pa-
tient function as well as possible. Aesthetics, then, signify the beauty of a
fit between relevant variables.
Like a good extension of a good clinician, the telecare system ad-
dressed a variety of relevant topics and their development over time (e.g.
by repeating questions). It aimed for fits, trying to create them, avoiding
and preventing misfits, and getting patients to help work on creating the
fit. The telecare system would fail if it gave users no other option than to
experience it as rude and unfeeling (as it did for refusers and with overly
confrontational questions), if it made a wrong diagnosis or misinter-
preted symptoms or when users would not engage in a relation with it
out of indifference. As it happened, it did not reduce patients to their
bodies or their minds but tended to both.
In an aesthetics of fitting, technology can be understood as caring вҖ“ or
not. Medical technologies are creative interventions that aim to trans-
form the situation of a patient in order to improve it вҖ“ even though, like
FrankensteinвҖҷs monster, their вҖҳeffectsвҖҷ are not in the hands of their de-
signer and are not the sole product of the device alone. The role of users
and their ideas of what care should look like is not passive and needs to
be taken into account to understand вҖҳeffectsвҖҷ. People engage in real rela-
tions with technology. These relations may fail to improve situations or
they may succeed, and both users and devices may initiate these failures.
Essentially, it is no different from professional care by humans; but
rather than just taking careвҖҷs temperature, one might do better to look
for the process of fitting interventions in the nitty-gritty order of the pa-
tientsвҖҷ lives (see also chapter 5).
Interestingly, the fitting here also relates to the mode of deliverance,
that is, a device asking for response rather than a patient having to call a
nurse. The patients did not experience their interaction with the device
as impersonal or problematic but as supportive of their desire not to dis-
turb their carers while helping them by staying in touch. Using the white
box, patients acknowledged the subjectivity of their caregivers as well as
their own.
So, should this be the end of metaphors of warm and cold? They can-
not form a tenable opposition. Yet it may be too early to discard them.
After all, as qualities of a relation between carer or caring device and
patient, they did alert to the way in which affective relations between hu-
mans and technology may take shape. The metaphors discard a notion of
technology, especially medical technology, as вҖҳemotionally neutralвҖҷ and
modest aesthetics
43

merely functional. Affective relations with, say, cars, peak flow meters,
insulin pens, computers, stamps and mobile phones, may prove to be
an interesting topic for future research and an enrichment to compar-
able research in robotics and computers.25
44
caring devices

3 The heart of the matter1
Good nursing at a distance
Goodness of fit
The metaphors of warm and cold point to the affective quality of rela-
tions between carers, devices and patients, where warm refers to loving,
good and well liked, and cold to unfeeling or neutral at best. Metaphors
of temperature drag along with them a set of influential yet вҖ“ in care
practice вҖ“ untenable oppositions, separating the objective from the sub-
jective, the technical from the human, the ethical from the epistemologi-
cal, and ultimately: the good from the bad. I have suggested a practical
aesthetics of fitting as a way to avoid this opposition.
The aesthetic verb вҖҳfittingвҖҷ, however, may imply that fitting is about
authentic relations between individuals. Instead of the system world in-
vading the life world, everything would consist of intersubjective rela-
tions, including relations with devices. This is not a position I would
want to end up in. In this chapter I hope to show that fitting is not a
mere matching of people (or people and devices) but is situated in prac-
tices that include other devices, bodies, ideas about the world and вҖ“ the
focus of this chapter вҖ“ norms that define good care. For instance, in the
aesthetics of palliative care for people with incurable cancer, far more
professional care is deemed fitting than, say, in the care for people with
COPD or heart failure. The latter demands вҖ“ and deems appropriate вҖ“
more activity and initiative from patients. Fitting care may aim for pa-
tient independence in some situations, whereas it would mean close pro-
fessional monitoring in others.
In other words, fitting care is not merely dependent on the satisfaction
of the participants, it also takes shape by aligning care to the norms that
define good care. I understand norms of good care as values (say: good
relations, independence, cut-off points that define deviations) combined
with directives for what to do and who should do it (call or see a patient,
ask a patient to measure vital signs, prescribe medication). Both values
and directives are built into telecare devices2 as well as activities of pro-
fessionals and patients or in the ways they enact3 good care. One needs to
ask whether the human participants see their acts as good or not, or ana-
lyse their activities as I do with the activity of devices, that is, within the
logic of the practice in which they are used. For example, devices assign
alerts in particular situations for the nurses to follow up. If nurses do not
follow up on an alert, this is not good according to the norm of the de-
vice. On the other hand, nurses may have good reasons for not following
45

up on the alarm. Care norms can be analysed, but following norms does
not necessarily lead to good care. The result is debatable.
In this chapter I trace how good nursing norms enacted by the nurses
and patients in this study changed when they started using telecare de-
vices.4 Particularly, I analyse what happened to the norms of good care
that nurses were afraid might be threatened by the regular use of tele-
care devices. What new norms do nurses and telecare devices bring into
being, and how do these relate to the ones already present?
The heart of good nursing
Nurses have particular concerns about telecare practices. The first is that
telecare will upset their relationship with patients. The second concern
is that telecare will stop nurses noticing signs of trouble in time since
they are no longer seeing their patients at home or in the clinic. The
worst consequence would be that patients suffer needlessly.
Homecare nurse: As a nurse you have a kind of sixth sense. When you visit
patients at home, you immediately sense if something is wrong. ItвҖҷs hard to
put into words, but itвҖҷs crucial for your work. If you use a webcam, you
wouldnвҖҷt, for instance, be able to smell the dirty dishes that have been lying
about for a while. What would happen if you took that away? WouldnвҖҷt you
destroy the heart of what it means to be a nurse? ThatвҖҷs what IвҖҷm worried
about.
The quote comes from notes I took at a European conference on telecare
that was organised in the Netherlands in September 2007.5 The confer-
ence was organised to discuss concerns and opportunities for telecare in
the care for older people. The nurseвҖҷs remark is typical of the kind of
worry that nurses put forward in discussions on telecare. The profes-
sional fear is that telecare systems will make it harder for nurses to act
competently and responsibly when looking after patients, because the
nurse is not in the same space as the patient.6 Although videoconferen-
cing often gets a somewhat better press,7 nurses often regard these and
other forms of telecare such as sensors and monitoring devices with sus-
picion. The horror image is one of cold negligence: the patient is on tele-
care and gets worse without anybody noticing.8 The final image is that
the patient dies, isolated from the world, without relatives or carers, un-
der the rational surveillance of electronic movement detectors, having
felt the last supporting hand on their shoulder years ago. Telecare makes
it impossible to use all the senses, let alone a sixth one, and the nurses
worry about missing signs of trouble as well as losing human contact.
This is a direct threat to вҖҳthe heart of good nursingвҖҷ.9
46
the heart of the matter

Good nursing in practice
What did the introduction of telecare mean to nursesвҖҷ relations with pa-
tients and the fear of neglect? I traced norms of good nursing in what I
observed nurses and patients doing with the telecare devices (and the
devices with them), in what nurses and patients told me about what they
were doing and how they value this. I analysed material sourced from 12
specialist nurses observed or interviewed in depth. The informants came
from five telecare projects based in three homecare organisations, seven
hospital departments (cardiology & diabetes), a regional network of gen-
eral practices and one homecare project for COPD patients.
Three devices were involved here, the first of which was a monitoring
device for heart failure patients. Patients weigh themselves and measure
their blood pressure daily. The devices transmit the measurement fig-
ures to a server where they are coded for deviations and made them
available to nurses in a call centre. Patients can keep track of their own
measurements on their TV. Call centre nurses monitor the daily figures;
a sudden gain in weight may point to fluid retention that may, if ne-
glected, be lethal to heart failure patients. Low blood pressure may point
to medication problems. The call centre nurses follow up on deviations
and discuss treatment options with the nurse in the hospital who is res-
ponsible for the patient.
The second device monitors patients by asking them questions daily.
The вҖҳwhite boxвҖҷ installed in the heart failure or COPD patientвҖҷs home is a
variation of the device analysed in the previous chapter. The white box, a
health buddy, asks patients to observe their bodies for symptoms, as it
did in the palliative care practice. In contrast to the palliative care prac-
tice, however, the white box also provides education and advice on good
ways of living with heart failure or COPD. Specialist nurses in the hospi-
tal (in the case of heart failure and diabetes), in homecare (in the case of
COPD) or assistants in general practices (in the case of diabetes) keep an
eye on the answers that patients give and are warned by alarm signals if
intervention is needed.
The third device is the webcam used by COPD patients associated
with a homecare institute. Here, patients have weekly webcam contact
with nurses. In addition, a touch screen gives patients access to a web-
site offering entertainment and news on neighbourhood activities. A
central Service Centre provides online bingo and other entertainment.
The local homecare organisation is responsible for care. Email and inter-
net is available to advanced users. One homecare organisation used both
the webcam and the white box for COPD patients. I will mainly use ex-
amples from the first devices while using the webcam examples only to
discuss the importance of meeting patients in the same space.
good nursing in practice
47

The importance of space
Chapter 2 discussed the nursesвҖҷ most heated controversy in telecare
technology: Would telecare come to replace contact with patients in the
same space, and should this be a matter of concern? Why is actual con-
tact in the same space so important for nurses? What would they lose if
telecare removed or reduced actual contact? These questions are hard to
answer. What exactly makes webcam contact so different from an actual
visit? But even if many questions are still open, nurses are usually quite
firm about one thing: without actually meeting patients, good nursing
care is impossible.
Specialist COPD nurse in homecare: I would never opt for вҖҳjust telecareвҖҷ [in
this case: using webcams]. As a professional nurse, I would quit the job if
this was the case, if it was only care at a distance. I donвҖҷt think you can
deliver good care [when you are only working at a distance].
Why do carers say they need to see patients in real life? Obviously,
hands-on care, as in washing and dressing patients, is impossible with
care at a distance. It is also impossible to make a proper diagnosis. Pro-
fessionals draw on a variety of information sources to make a diagnosis.
For instance, besides talking to the patient, they may need to take blood
or urine samples; besides observing the patient walking, they may need
to examine their inner ear; they might need to use a stethoscope to in-
vestigate their lungs or might have to palpitate their chest; and even the
sense of smell may be helpful to detect a disease or complication. Medi-
cal examinations require material visualization tools. There is also a con-
sensus that some patients need home visits to вҖҳsniff outвҖҷ neglected
households, which would signify trouble with the patientвҖҷs condition.
One specialist insists on personally meeting very ill patients:
Cardiologist: Especially the very ill, you need to see them in person and get
to know them. Individual circumstances make all the difference. вҖҳShortness
of breathвҖҷ may not mean much for one patient, but it may be a very severe
symptom for the next. When you see patients face-to-face, you can see a lot,
things that would escape you even if you have a webcam. The colour of the
skin, the way someone walks towards you, a cold handshake or a pinched
nose. Some things you have to really see and feel.
Webcam users always point to the visibility of the reactions of oneвҖҷs con-
versation partner as well as the greater chance of seeing and reading
non-verbal signs (see Chapter 6). Seeing the other person draws the visi-
ble body into the conversation. This makes a webcam conversation more
embodied than a telephone conversation, even if the bodies are not in
the same space. Nurses using webcams still worry if this is good enough.
48
the heart of the matter

Homecare COPD nurse: Sometimes you have to feel people. ErmвҖҰ itвҖҷs dif-
ferent. A flat screen is only a flat screen, even if it is better than the phone.
ItвҖҷs more intimate to actually meet. ItвҖҷs that FingerspitzengefГјhl you get sit-
ting beside someone in the same room. ItвҖҷs harder if you only see each other
on the screen.
FingerspitzengefГјhl (gut feeling) adds a sensory metaphor to understand-
ing what is going on in a particular situation. In Dutch this is also re-
ferred to as the pluis/niet pluis gevoel (okay/not okay feeling), which
senses the presence of trouble even if the source of the trouble has not
yet been detected or made explicit. Nurses fear that these ways of sens-
ing trouble will get lost if they only see patients through a webcam.
Another concern is the loss of non-verbal communication and how
the physical position of bodies in space enacts ways of relating to a per-
son.
Homecare COPD nurse: Sometimes you should stand or sit beside some-
body. This is a real nursing task that doctors never, or rarely, perform. You
put a hand on someoneвҖҷs shoulder, make physical contact, know what I
mean?
The position of bodies is also part of the non-verbal conversation. Sitting
in front of a screen, looking at the otherвҖҷs face, sets the stage for engaged
conversations (see Chapter 6). Sitting beside somebody may signal em-
pathy and support, even if there are no words or solutions.
So, reasons for actually meeting patients have to do with required ma-
terial and the embodiment of certain forms of care. The material may be
lab tests or handshakes but also the less explicit ways of discerning that
something is not as it should be. An embodied presence is needed to
вҖҳsenseвҖҷ trouble and also to give the right kind of support, particularly
when words are running out. Hence, nurses feel that a good relation
between carer and cared for demands being in the same room.10 Both
the concern for noticing signs of trouble and patient relations are at
stake here.
Division of labour
The importance of meeting patients in the same space is never ques-
tioned by the carers involved in telecare, but they may delegate actual
meetings to particular professionals while others look after the telecare.
This happened, for instance, when a call centre linked up with specialist
heart failure teams in hospitals. The hospital nurses met patients in
their offices, whereas the call centre nurses used the telecare device and
the phone. The necessity of meeting the patient was uncontested. Or
was it?
division of labour
49

The call centre nurse told me how well she could do her job without
seeing the patient. With some reshaping of new skills, she claimed she
could work well with the telecare device and the phone. The new skills
involved learning how to pose questions that would uncover the things
she would have observed had she actually visited a patient. Although she
stressed that the responsible heart failure nurse really should meet the
patient, she felt confident she could do a proper nursing job even when
telecare excluded the visual and the smelly bits.
Call centre nurse: You can find out most things by asking the right ques-
tions. Like вҖҳswollen anklesвҖҷ, youвҖҷd ask, for instance: вҖҳCan you get your shoes
on okay?вҖҷ People tend to make things sound better than they really are. But
in a social chat youвҖҷll soon notice if they are getting out to the shops or if
they see their family.
The nurse directed the eyes of the patient to observe the relevant clinical
signs for heart failure. But she did more than that. She invited the pa-
tient to chat about everyday life to focus the вҖҳclinical eyeвҖҷ and interpret
the signs for their relevance. In telling their stories, patients gave the
nurse relevant information about their condition without being aware of
it. Symptoms are retold in stories about everyday practices. Do patients
get out to the shops, even if they say their ankles are okay?
Interestingly, being unable to see patients also revealed the benefits of
not seeing patients. Here, telecare disconnects everyday life from useful
information.
Interviewer: What is it like sitting at the computer instead of visiting pa-
tients at home?
Call centre nurse: That is a choice IвҖҷve made. I want to do something for
patients in my care, but I donвҖҷt particularly want to see them. The good thing
about not seeing patients is that somehow you start afresh. An image can
distract. If you know what someone looks like, you can become prejudiced.
There is lots of information you donвҖҷt actually need, like if someone is
smelly, or looks unkempt. We have a fixed list to go through: meds, allergies,
history. ItвҖҷs a fresh image.
This nurse found a rationale where physical presence and visibility were
not prerequisites for good nursing. In defining the information she
needed to take care of people with heart failure, the call centre nurse
excluded the way the patient dresses and smells as relevant signs. Good
nursing meant concentrating on the physical condition and ignoring dis-
tracting impressions.
This is a big change from the idea of the sixth sense needed to spot
any kind of trouble, which is also a way of saying that different problems
relate. Symptoms may not be so easily distinguishable from other prob-
lems.
50
the heart of the matter

Homecare COPD nurse: We want to know how the patients feel, emotion-
ally, and also physically. вҖҳHow did you get up this morning? How is your
medication?вҖҷ Often people have their own questions. Sometimes itвҖҷs just
hot air, so to speak, just chatter about household stuff. And that is the nur-
sing side of it: you should be able to do that, too; you listen between the
lines. You jump on the signs you read between the lines. It could be that so-
and-soвҖҷs sister-in-law is really ill. You talk about it, because it has an impact
on how he is. You look at the total picture of the patient, not just the COPD,
the whole patient really. How theyвҖҷre doing in life.
The call centre nurse did not spot ill sisters-in-law or вҖҳwhole patientsвҖҷ.
She spotted weight and blood pressure deviations. Therefore, this parti-
cular telecare device specialised the nurseвҖҷs observations, while at the
same time the daily measurements intensified them. The nurse estab-
lished the link with daily life practices only if shifts in vital signs gave
reason for phone calls.
So, carers strongly defended the necessity of actually meeting patients,
even if they did not do this themselves. Telecare practices where nurses
did not see patients, however, also challenged this вҖҳrock bottom of clini-
cal knowledgeвҖҷ. Nurses thought about forms of care that did not need
meetings with patients in the same space. At the same time, the moni-
toring system changed what problems were relevant to watch out for. It
reduced the chance of spotting relevant signs in any situation, but it in-
creased the frequency of monitoring specific symptoms. Only when the
monitored figures started deviating did the nurse retrieve older and
broader norms to interpret the deviations.
Keeping up old standards: correcting telecare
Another general objection to putting telecare to work is that devices pre-
sumably standardise care at the expense of individually tailored care (see
Chapter 2). This is not valid for webcam telecare but may apply to other
devices. The next example is from a hospital ward for heart failure pa-
tients. There was a clash between a particular norm of good вҖҳcare as
usualвҖҷ and the norms inscribed in the educational device, a variant of
the white box. The educational device tried to implement a general
norm for the right way of living with heart failure. The white box asked
patients about their weight, physical activity, salt intake, fruit rations,
cholesterol level, medication, and so on. The protocol defined norms
that fit all heart failure patients: be careful with salt, and exercise is
good. The alarm labels signalled any deviation from these general life-
style rules; this was the clinical relevance that the deviceвҖҷs script sup-
plied.
This general recipe for good patient care turned out to challenge
norms of flexibility, individually tailored care and clinical relevance in
keeping up old standards: correcting telecare
51

вҖҳcare as usualвҖҷ. Here, nurses attempted to tune their care to the individ-
ualвҖҷs situation. They found that giving information on medication to pa-
tients who did not take it, as sometimes happened with the white box,
was confusing and wrong. They insisted that signs and symptoms were
only relevant if they fitted the patientвҖҷs specific situation.
The conflict between general advice and individual situations became
clear when Maartje Schermer and I11 interviewed 83-year-old Mrs Smit,
who did not see the point of taking physical exercise even though the
white box told her that she should. When the white box asked if she had
exercised, she answered вҖҳnoвҖҷ. This sent an alert to the nursesвҖҷ office,
which the nurses followed up. When they called, Mrs Smit explained
that at her age she did not feel like exercising. The nurses accepted this.
Heart failure nurse: You keep an eye on things, and if everything is stable, I
donвҖҷt complain. Some people choose not to follow the advice. One woman
just says: вҖҳItвҖҷs all right by me, this box and all these questions, but I wonвҖҷt
always do what it says. IвҖҷll only eat salt-free three days a week. I canвҖҷt do
more than that.вҖҷ If someone manages, one way or another, and theyвҖҷre in
good condition, you shouldnвҖҷt make things stricter than necessary.
Happily for the patients, the nurses held on to their norms of good nur-
sing and stuck to the personalised treatment. But sadly for the nurses,
this implied a more complicated relation with the telecare device. The
device kept sending alerts to the nurses, even when вҖҳdealsвҖҷ had been
made with particular patients. Technicians could not change this for in-
dividuals, as the nurses learned from them, which probably had to do
with the difficulty of making exceptions to a general protocol. In this
case, the nurses worked around the norms imposed by the device and
kept up their preferred norms of good nursing.
Yet doing this came at a price for the nurses. It meant that if they knew
the patients and accepted their particular ways of living, they had to
ignore the alerts that warned of this вҖҳagreed deviationвҖҷ of the protocol.
The alerts could not be вҖ“ and were not вҖ“ used at face value, but nurses
needed to connect them to the patientвҖҷs background. The nurses had to
make the fit between general norms and individual situations. The
nurses tackled this problem by reading all the answers of all the 66 pa-
tients in their telecare project and by establishing their own criteria for
judging them, phoning up patients when they were in doubt. This was
an option because the nurses had a limited number of patients involved
in the pilot project. It would be different if more patients used the de-
vice, or if nurses were more pressed for time. If nurses do not know
their patients, you can expect many false alarms.
So there was a clash between norms. There were the general lifestyle
rules versus tailor-made care; there was efficiency in informing many
patients versus tailored information. Extra work by the nurses provided
the answer to saving the perceived best norm: tailor-made care. Telecare
52
the heart of the matter

put an extra burden on nurses to correct the problems the device intro-
duced in order to ensure that telecare fit their idea of good care. Hence,
relations between nurses and patients remained good and even became
closer (see below). Rather than missing out on trouble, the devices iden-
tified a surplus of problems. It was up to the nurses to distinguish be-
tween them.
Telecare as an improvement: changing norms
In the first examples, telecare was seen as an addition that cautiously
challenged meetings in the clinic or at home. Nurses also saw telecare
devices as complicating factors when tailor-made care was the ideal and
devices brought in general protocols. The devices also created new prob-
lems, such as the many false alarms or incomprehensible signals. There
were, however, also arguments for seeing telecare as an improvement to
care as usual. When this happened, consultations at home or in the
clinic ceased to be the gold standard of care. It substantially changed
ways of thinking about good care.
From health status to process
How can telecare do better than care in the same space? At a meeting
with call centre staff, the project coordinator and the call centre nurse
monitoring heart failure symptoms discussed what care for heart failure
patients is all about.
Project coordinator: вҖҳTime and attention are very important to patients.
What happens with heart failure? You go to hospital, time is limited, and if
they solve one problem one day, the next problem will pop up the next day.
Patients donвҖҷt take it all in at once, they forget to ask about the things they
wanted to ask.вҖҷ
Call centre nurse: вҖҳItвҖҷs always hard for these patients to accept that they are
ill. It takes them a lot of time.вҖҷ
Project coordinator: вҖҳQuality of life comes first in our project, itвҖҷs most im-
portant. Quality is in the daily grind. And in education and practical advice
on looking after yourselfвҖҷ [she adds quickly].
The call centre staff told me that the monitoring system lets them tend
better to changeable trouble in the вҖҳdaily grindвҖҷ of living with disease.
Daily monitoring, they claim, means they can tend to the process of ill-
ness better than encounters in the clinic once every three months would.
The situation of the patient changes over time, they encounter new prob-
lems, and so it helps to check the patient frequently. And unlike visits to
the clinic, the patient is free to call in whenever he or she wants to dis-
cuss worries. Even if frequent phone calls established such relations
telecare as an improvement: changing norms
53

with only some patients, this is the general idea. Frequent monitoring вҖ“
and calling вҖ“ makes a high frequency of patient contact possible and
attractive. In the same vein, the object of care and concern changes from
health status to process, adapting the question from вҖҳHow have you been
feeling these past three months?вҖҷ to вҖҳWhatвҖҷs up today?вҖҷ. Instead of a pa-
tient history, they address the patientвҖҷs here and now. This changes how
nurses get to know their patients.
The daily delivery of signs from patients and the availability of fre-
quent contact made nurses keen spotters of trouble when it arose, parti-
cularly in the project using the white box with heart failure patients. Pa-
tients informed nurses every day about an abundance of topics.
Heart failure nurse in hospital: You get to see patients earlier, yes, youвҖҷre
right on top of it! People donвҖҷt always call when thatвҖҷs the advice on the white
box. YouвҖҷd be lucky if they come into hospital when theyвҖҷre having a bad
time. But if they donвҖҷt call, theyвҖҷd end up in a hospital bed. You canвҖҷt always
prevent that, but now youвҖҷre right on top of it all.
Nurses can be вҖҳon top of it allвҖҷ because they call their patients if they dis-
cover that something is out of order. Patients rarely called the nurse in
this practice, even when the telecare device urged them to call. This re-
luctance to call also came up with the Friesian oncology patients and the
homecare COPD patients. The device corrected this by sending informa-
tion that would warn the nurse when something was wrong. When it
happened, the nurse could respond quickly and call the patient. Nurses
knew something was wrong at an early stage, even if the patients had not
called. So the frequency of the telecare communications emphasised
good care as interventions in the day-to-day process of tending to illness.
In contrast, consultations every three months now seemed badly timed.
Interestingly, the homecare nurses using webcams reported another
effect of more frequent contact. They did not find that weekly webcam
chats added further information to the answers generated by the white
box, nor did webcam chats reach the depth of the three-monthly perso-
nal encounters in the clinic.
Homecare COPD nurse: I noticed the [webcam] contacts became superfi-
cial. When patients come in every three months, you talk for half an hour,
using the protocol for all the questions you want to go into. You discuss
smoking, for instance. If you meet on the webcam, you donвҖҷt discuss smok-
ing every week. ItвҖҷs rather: how are you and whatвҖҷs happened this week?
In the cases of monitoring symptoms or responses to standardised ques-
tions, stable patients do not demand attention, even if the white box pro-
vided a seemingly endless list of topics. In webcam conversations, they
do. The monitoring practices may thus hide the symbolic meaning of
вҖҳdaily checksвҖҷ; they would be particularly useful for patients going
54
the heart of the matter

through many ups and downs. Exhaustive questionnaires add a few extra
patients. Patients, however, often felt the daily monitoring was a com-
fort, even when their illness was stable. Telecare intensified the role of
the professional.
From self-care to professional monitoring
For patients, daily connection to the nurses induced feelings of safety in
any telecare setting, regardless of whether they were actually experien-
cing problems. They thought that the nurse would be the best judge if
something was wrong.
Mr Danick: If they took it [the monitoring system] away from me, it would
be like taking my phone. Some of your security would disappear. Of course,
you know a lot, because you have lots of experience with your heart and with
your body. But this is the next step, so to speak. It feels safer. The thought
that there are people out there checking on you puts you at rest.
The patients saw their relations with the nurse improve through the fre-
quent contact. The nurses also experienced closeness but related this to
their phone calls with patients.
Heart failure nurse [talking about the white box]: What we notice, especially
in the beginning, is that patients give answers that need a response. So the
phone contact with new connections is really intense. One way or another,
you get more familiar with these people, even on the phone. You get good
contact. They start trusting you, вҖҳHey, theyвҖҷll call me if there is something.вҖҷ
To them, thatвҖҷs a revelation, really.
The safe feeling that patients experienced came from the regular checks
and their experience of the nurses calling them if something was out of
the ordinary. The patientsвҖҷ satisfaction with this may be related to the
fact that many people with a chronic disease are scared. In the words of
HenriГ«tte Langstrup: вҖҳfor patients, telecare practices seem to treat fear
rather than symptoms.вҖҷ12 This may well be true, although fear often re-
lates closely to symptoms. Being rid of fear may also mean a reduction of
symptoms such as breathlessness.
Mrs Jansen, homecare COPD patient: If you get scared or insecure, you get
out of breath. Because fear gives you cramp. Then IвҖҷm glad when IвҖҷm out of
breath that I can talk to them [the nurses] about it. I have a son, but you
donвҖҷt want to bother him all the time. It gives you a breather [lucht op], takes
away the tension that builds up when youвҖҷre sitting here alone, when you get
breathless. I canвҖҷt quite explain it butвҖҰ
telecare as an improvement: changing norms
55

The nurses felt that their more permanent presence in patientsвҖҷ lives
would have a therapeutic effect in the long run. The telecare nurse
served as a reminder that some tasks were still open, particularly for
patients needing to change their lifestyle.
Homecare COPD nurse: You see people becoming more aware. They some-
times say: вҖҳI donвҖҷt want to be confronted by my illness all the time.вҖҷ But even
so, they need to change their habits. It matters if you keep an eye on that
from a distance. It gives the patient the feeling, вҖҳsomeone is looking over
my shoulder, IвҖҷll have to do somethingвҖҷ. For instance, if you saw [COPD]
patients in the consultation room, youвҖҷd talk to them about quitting smok-
ing. YouвҖҷd discuss the consequences of smoking. Whenever they visited you,
theyвҖҷd say: вҖҳI really want to quit smoking, but not quite yet.вҖҷ In the end they
come and say: вҖҳI want to do it.вҖҷ So when youвҖҷre watching them constantly
from the background, the problem stays up front.
Even if frequent webcam contacts were superficial, they still served the
purpose of keeping patients alert.
The increased frequency of contact meant a big change in nurse-
patient relations. The nurse no longer just reacted to the patientвҖҷs ques-
tions or problems discovered in the quarterly clinical encounters. In the
telecare projects, the nurse exerted more professional control, foregoing
any ideals of leaving the initiative to ask for help with the patient or mak-
ing patients responsible for their own care. This meant a shift from a
reactive, reticent form of nursing to the prevention of crises.13 Nurses
taking responsibility for prevention gave patients peace of mind. The
patients trusted that nurses would keep them out of harmвҖҷs way or
would act if they could not avoid harm.
Ironically, professionally guided telecare fits well with the nursesвҖҷ fear
of negligence and their urge to spot trouble. The nurses may have found
their mechanical sixth sense in the very practice they feared would take it
away вҖ“ that is, in using telecare devices. Especially practices that allowed
them to address different problems daily gave nurses the sense of being
on top of things. The patients were happy with the increased profes-
sional care and the good relations they had with their nurses. To them,
sending out information was a way of having the nurses check them
daily, and the nursesвҖҷ follow-up was a welcome addition that initially sur-
prised them but in the end made them feel safe.
Mr Welvoorden: When I got that box, I thought: what a load of rubbish! You
get a whole load of questions, yes, no, one, two, three, all answers are good.
So I gave the wrong answer, on purpose. And half an hour later, the phone
rang. ThatвҖҷs how I tested it, to see if it worked. Then I did it again a few
weeks later, because maybe they only check new patients. But again, the
phone rang! So they really do something with it.
56
the heart of the matter

Both patients and nurses saw telecare involving daily input from the pa-
tients as a fitting improvement. It signalled trouble quickly so that
nurses could intervene quickly to avoid crises. Older values that were
previously deemed fitting, such as patient responsibility and caution
with medical intervention, tacitly disappeared.
New tasks, new goals
So far, the new norms developed in new telecare practices have dealt
with treatment or guidance for patients, and this was what the task de-
signers intended for the telecare devices. In the following example, this
link with patient care was broken. The potential of telecare unleashed
the nursesвҖҷ creativity and let them invent new tasks and goals for their
device. It started when the heart failure nurses realised that as an educa-
tional device, the white box was teaching them new things about their
patients, different from what they would have learned in actual meet-
ings.
Heart failure nurse: We were stunned by the answers people gave. It made
us think: вҖҳWhat is this? DoesnвҖҷt he know that?!вҖҷ All of a sudden you get an
enormous amount of information from a patient, stuff you wouldnвҖҷt get in
the half hour of face-to-face contact. So the white box is a great way of get-
ting to know a patientвҖҷs missing bits.
The вҖҳbitsвҖҷ missed in the quarterly consultations took specific shape: they
were facts about the disease that patients did not know. It could often be
very many facts, so new topics became a matter of concern. The white
box identified the problems in the variety of questions it posed through-
out the months. Problems related to mood and sexuality worried the
nurses. The patient might mention these topics in a personal consulta-
tion, but the problems could remain invisible if patients did not report
them out of embarrassment or other reasons.
Heart failure nurse: The answers are far less вҖҳsocially desirableвҖҷ. On the one
hand, they feel safe, because they know somebody is there. But on the other
hand, it doesnвҖҷt bother them to fill out a questionnaire. IвҖҷm sure that if you
asked some people about their weekly salt intake, theyвҖҷd say: вҖҳOh I never take
salt.вҖҷ But when the question is put on the white box, theyвҖҷll answer: вҖҳI take
salt three, four days a week.вҖҷ See? TheyвҖҷre far more honest. ThatвҖҷs surpris-
ing, really. Rarely does someone tell the white box that they stick to a com-
pletely salt-free diet.
Seeing the answers from many patients, corrected for social desirability,
made the nurses wonder: what do we know about mood and sex-related
problems for people with heart failure? How can we find out if these
new tasks, new goals
57

problems affect many patients and maybe add something to the care we
deliver in order to help change these problems?
Nurse: If 80 out of 100 patients give the wrong answer to a certain question,
you should look at yourself вҖ“ not at the patient, but at how you explain
things to them. ItвҖҷs a way of checking to see if youвҖҷre getting stuff across the
right way, asking yourself вҖңHow can we do that better?вҖқ
White box usage shifted away from facilitating treatment and became
instead a tool that heart failure nurses used to study the care they gave.
Rather than acting like hands-on (or phones-on) clinicians, the nurses
became researchers of their own practices. The object of their research
was different from the object of clinical practice: it was not the case of
the individual patient but the characteristics of the group of heart failure
patients that the nurses were researching.
To fit this new goal of research, nurses had to make singular observa-
tions gained through the telecare device meaningful in new ways. Taken
out of context, it was not always clear what the answers meant. Was a
patient just reporting a blue day? Or did the blue day point to a depres-
sion that needed treatment? Taken out of context, it was not clear how
reliable one observation was. The nurses wanted to collect statistics from
the group of patients so that they could aggregate the scores for all pa-
tients and find out, for example, how often depressed feelings were re-
ported and if certain problems were typical for this patient group.
Sadly, at this point, the device that had first unleashed the nursesвҖҷ en-
thusiasm now tamed their excitement. The software could not handle
creating statistics for the whole group. The only graphs possible sum-
marised data for individuals only. So the nurses figured out different
ways of getting the information needed вҖ“ for example, by sending out
paper questionnaires to assess depression. Although the device may
have unleashed the idea, the nurses did the actual work to achieve what
they now thought was important for good patient care.
The shift to quantitative data collection and interpretation meant a
shift towards embedding a form of local epidemiological research in
clinical practice. To the nurses, this was a valuable option because it fit
their norms of good nursing. Again, telecare helped to uncover more
problems that patients might have. Moreover, the telecare device cor-
rected a problem with face-to-face contact: patients may be too shy or too
reluctant to disappoint the nurse to talk about problems that are easy to
confess to a white box. This appealed greatly to nurses who were worried
they would oversee any problems suffered by patients.
58
the heart of the matter

Persistent values, shifting norms
Telecare did not brashly overrule the norms important to good nursing.
On the contrary, telecare turned out to strengthen some of these norms.
The nurses in the study were firm about the importance they attached to
contact in the same space and to maintaining good relations with their
patients. Even if some nurses delegated personal contact to others and
pointed to the problems of these actual meetings, their importance was
unchallenged. Contrary to what they had expected, the nurses succeeded
in using telecare systems to create even closer relations, through frequent
contact and by responding to the signals sent. They maintained their
link with individual patients despite the sometimes heavy demand for
extra work put on them by the telecare systems.
Telecare did not seem to endanger problem-spotting. In the practice of
the white box, the number of possible problems to spot increased. How-
ever, in the monitoring practice the problem content changed as well as
the frequency. The nurseвҖҷs expertise in вҖҳreadingвҖҷ symptoms in daily
situations at home remained important. Mouldy dishes seen firsthand
could point to a degree of breathlessness that might not let the patient
get to the kitchen. Creative nurses, however, could make these observa-
tions on the phone. Patients might not report swollen ankles, but they
might be tempted into telling the nurse what they had been up to lately.
However, before these вҖҳbroad viewsвҖҷ of any sign of trouble came into
play, the type of problems nurses thought fit to signal changed in the
monitoring practices. The monitoring system brought about a reduction
and specialisation in problem types, but it also intensified monitoring.
Thus, there is both continuity (broad values persist) and change; the
way to enact good relations, the problems to target and how to do this
changes. More frequent monitoring brought the possibly daily shifting
process of illness to the foreground. Hence, nurses felt they could re-
spond far more readily to problems than they could in hospital visits
every three months. They explored other possibilities for identifying
problems by imagining using telecare for research. Here again, the prob-
lems changed, this time from those of individual patients to the prob-
lems of the group of patients. Changing objectives and problem defini-
tions also brought a change in values. Responsibility shifted to the nurse,
away from the patient, and the value shifted to prevention and away
from self-help and cautious medical intervention. Consequently, patients
felt safe (rather than responsible) and well looked after by their nurses.
To them, telecaring nurses took the place of their own vigilance in pre-
venting crises.
persistent values, shifting norms
59

Contestable norms
These findings do not suggest that nurses need to worry about a reduc-
tion in the quality of relations with patients or in their ability to spot
problems. Instead, telecare could lead to over-involvement and problems
targeted too frequently. There is a fit between the nursesвҖҷ use of telecare
and the values that nurses take as central in care, even though other
values entered their practices as well. The nurses could only establish
this fit, however, when they could link вҖҳdataвҖҷ to individuals, particularly
when it concerned the use of the white box. When nurses were unfami-
liar with patients using the white box, they would have many more вҖҳfalse
positivesвҖҷ to follow up.
The feeling of security the patients experienced was an intriguing
finding that deserves more reflection. These feelings may not always be
realistic. Patients still have chronic and potentially fatal diseases, and
telecare does not take that away. One woman became very cross because
she had a heart attack, despite sending in her vital sign measurements
twice a day. When fear is an important problem and a recurring theme
for COPD and heart failure patients, this suggests that it deserves atten-
tion. The best way of dealing with this is a discussion I would like to
open up. It is also unclear how feelings of security may relate to the
responsibilities that professionals cannot take on. Patients may be dis-
couraged from looking after themselves. This is a huge leap from the
promise that telecare would promote self-management of their care. The
patients in the practices I studied became passive rather than active,
although some webcam practices succeeded in setting up вҖҳcommunities
of careвҖҷ between patients (see Chapter 4).
The analysis shows that fitting caring relations is more complicated
than merely assessing if the вҖҳcarerвҖҷ and вҖҳcared forвҖҷ are both happy with
their relations, devices and activities. Fitting does not only take place in
relations between patients, devices and carers but between different
norms in care as well. These norms do not always go together easily.
Increased professional control is at odds with norms of self-manage-
ment by patients. Relations in which the patients feel safe and the
nurses feel on top are excellent for both parties. Yet one may neverthe-
less argue about the desirability of these norms. This may become even
clearer when one compares monitoring practices with alternative prac-
tices and different norms of living with disease. The next chapter com-
pares the ways in which two devices support very different ways of living
with chronic disease.
60
the heart of the matter

Part II
Knowledge and
promises


4 Caring for the self?
Enacting problems, solutions and forms of
knowledge
Shaping problems
In this chapter, I look at the ways devices and their users solve particular
problems together and how, by enacting remedies together, they shape
what these problems are. Problems are defined by particular knowledge
(e.g. physiology) within which some variables fit (e.g. overactive angio-
tensin-converting enzymes) and others do not (e.g. trouble getting to the
shops). The second problem would be relevant in the clinic and at home,
but doctors may or may not translate it in physiological terms. Hence,
the terms describing problems and the practices in which they are enacted
matter to the form a certain problem takes.1
There are various ways to describe the patientsвҖҷ problems. Devices
contain various forms of knowledge, and patients and carers enact yet
other versions in their activities. Using different forms of knowledge
means that different facts are relevant to understanding what is wrong
with patients, as in the physiology and housekeeping problems de-
scribed above. You can learn about these forms of knowledge by asking
participants in care practices to tell you how they understand and deal
with patientsвҖҷ troubles or by studying the context in which devices are
used and facts are enacted.
My analysis in Chapter 3 described norms as containing values as well
as directives. Knowledge in care practices contains facts as well as direc-
tives. The directives are, for example, on how to obtain knowledge and
on how to solve the identified problems. For example, the overactive en-
zymes suggest treatment with drugs (ACE inhibitors, to be precise),
whereas the problem of getting to the shops may demand the purchase
of a mobility scooter. The directives connect and enact facts and values
simultaneously. Another example: patients and nurses enact the daily
process of illness (fact) by frequent measurement (directive) to facilitate
quick intervention (value).
This chapter zooms in on the situation of patients, analysing the var-
ious problems, solutions and ways of living with chronic disease that are
enacted in two care practices by patients using two different types of
telecare devices.2 I demonstrate that both practices contain different
kinds of knowledge about the problem and about how the patient cares
for this problem. The chapter outlines the kinds of self-care that patients
engage in. вҖҳSelfвҖҷ and вҖҳcareвҖҷ have no fixed meaning here but will be shown
to differ in and between telecare practices.3 The place of experience is,
63

for instance, very different in both practices, and so is the way the tele-
care solution relates to the forms of self-care that patients already use. I
show that patients never care for themselves alone but rather together
with devices, professionals, family, friends and fellow patients, in var-
ious configurations.
In this demonstration, I analyse the situation of two chronically ill wo-
men, Mrs Jansen and Mrs Jaspersen. Both are fictional compilations of
real patients, put together to include the elements needed for the presen-
tation of this analysis. The quotes are real but stem from various real
patients. Each situation sketched here features another telecare device
that co-shapes knowledge on the possible problem and invites patients
to engage in particular forms of self-care. The telecare device is not the
only form of care in the lives of the patients. Telecare co-exists with other
ways of defining and solving problems.
Mrs Jansen and the heart monitor
Mrs Jansen suffers from heart failure. This means that her heart is fail-
ing to pump blood properly around her body, placing Mrs Jansen in
acute danger of retaining fluid. If she retains too much fluid, it may fill
her lungs, and this would mean the end of Mrs Jansen. Obviously, she
and her doctors must find ways to prevent this from happening. Mrs
Jansen has to stick to a strict diet that regulates her salt and fluid intake,
and she does not know which she finds harder to live with вҖ“ less salt or
less fluids. She cannot drink more than 1.5 litres a day and she has to
avoid eating salt. To keep an eye on her condition, Mrs Jansen is вҖҳon the
monitorвҖҷ, as she puts it. Every day she weighs herself on the special
scales that she has in her house, and after that she measures her blood
pressure. The monitor transmits the daily measurements to the hospital,
where the heart failure nurse checks them. Should anything be out of
order, the nurse will call Mrs Jansen to discuss what she needs to do. A
sudden weight gain might signify fluid retention; low blood pressure
might point to trouble with medication.
Mrs Jansen is encouraged to call the nurse herself if she feels some-
thing is wrong or if she notices that her weight or blood pressure meas-
ures go beyond set thresholds. But this, she says, she will not do. She
does not want to bother the nurse. вҖҳIn most instances, it passes,вҖҷ she
explains to me. She says she can spot fluid retention: it makes her ankles
swell. When in doubt, she used to step on her own scales to check her
weight, although she does not do this anymore now that she has the
telecare scales. If she sees she is retaining fluid, she lies down for an
hour or so and it goes away. And if it does not, she might take an extra
half or a whole diuretic pill. вҖҳThe doctor said I could do that!вҖҷ she assures
me, as if I were accusing her of trespassing on the doctorвҖҷs territory. She
also takes ACE inhibitors, but her doctor does not let her tinker with
those.
64
caring for the self?

I ask her why she needs the monitor if she seems to have things under
control anyway. Mrs Jansen shrugs and says it is nice to have it. She feels
safe having the nurse keeping an eye on things. вҖҳOf course you know a
lot, because you have lots of experience with your heart and with your
body. But this feels safer. The idea that there are people out there check-
ing on you puts your mind at rest. They know a lot more about heart
failure than I do.вҖҷ
Mrs Jaspersen and the webcam
Mrs Jaspersen suffers from COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease), a progressive lung disease. It used to be called emphysema, sig-
nifying that the lungs lose their elasticity and become prone to inflam-
mations that may lead to immediate hospitalisation. The disease makes
breathing difficult, and Mrs Jaspersen gets out of breath quickly. After
walking a hundred metres, she has to sit down to recover. Shopping was
a truly athletic endeavour for her, until she was no longer able to do it.
Then Mrs Jaspersen became desperate. After consulting her GP, they
admitted her to a rehabilitation clinic where she learned to live with se-
vere COPD. Her вҖҳlife, body and soulвҖҷ, as she put it, were turned inside
out to find potential improvements, from breathing and walking techni-
ques to pacing her energy and panic control, and from medication to
daily routines and exercise. Upon her discharge from the clinic, a com-
puter with a webcam was delivered to Mrs JaspersenвҖҷs home. She can
use the computer to surf the internet, check email, and use the webcam
to talk to others on a closed network of fellow patients from the clinic. In
the three months following her discharge, she had weekly webcam meet-
ings with her carer from the rehabilitation clinic.
When does Mrs Jaspersen use the webcam to talk to other patients?
вҖҳWhen IвҖҷm not feeling well or looking for distraction. Then you think a
lot of things: would my illness be coming back, is the hospital waiting
for me again? Then I talk to my friend to find out how she feels and what
may be wrong.вҖҷ
Mrs Jaspersen continues: вҖҳShe [the webcam friend] told me some cra-
zy things. She said that when she gets out of breath, she puts two chairs
beside her own, one to the left, one to the right, and then she puts her
arms on the back of the chairs.вҖҷ Mrs Jaspersen looks at me slyly, as if
daring me to challenge her. Having convinced herself that I am inter-
ested, she adds: вҖҳYou know what? I tried it and it really helps me too!вҖҷ
Mrs Jaspersen points out how she has pre-set the chairs inconspicuously
around her dining table so that she can quickly take up this pose by
moving only one chair. Dragging furniture around is not easy when you
are out of breath! The arrangement had to be subtle; there is no other
option when one wants the house to look spick and span at all times.
Mrs Jaspersen also points to a bag filled with boxes of medication. If she
feels a crisis coming up, she has to take her own antibiotics and predni-
shaping problems
65

sone to avoid hospitalisation, involving a drip with a mixture of corticos-
teroids and antibiotics. The clinic encourages her to take advantage of
this ability to self-medicate. Mrs Jaspersen can recall the exact date of
her last ride in the ambulance for emergency admission to hospital; it
was more than two years ago now.
Enacted trouble: objective symptoms versus subjective
experience
Two women, two devices, two chronic diseases and several possibilities
for support. Both women use different forms of knowledge brought in
by various means and persons, aimed at different problems. Mrs Jansen
has her measurements, the diet, the educated and experienced nurse,
the bed rest, diuretics and ACE inhibitors. Mrs Jaspersen has the web-
cam, her fellow patients, the chairs, the carer in the clinic, the bag of
medication, internet and email. Each of these implies ways of under-
standing what is wrong and suggests possible things to do in a particular
case. The telecare device is but one of various possibilities. LetвҖҷs analyse
these care practices more closely to see how different problems are en-
acted.
Monitored disease
LetвҖҷs take Mrs JansenвҖҷs monitoring device. By weighing and measuring
herself, Mrs Jansen produces figures. If blood pressure or weight values
deviate from their individually defined standards, that is defined as a
problem. This applies if either value crosses the threshold set by the
cardiologist. The computer protocol will detect it and send an alert to the
nurse, who will then call Mrs Jansen.
Mrs Jansen: Well, they [the nurses from the call centre] are really nice and
friendly people, honestly. ItвҖҷs, well, just... See, my weight is usually between
62 and 63 kilos and one day it went up to 63.1, well, this one little ounce may
be gone the next day, but me, I got called straight away. I think this is over
the top.
Although one ounce may not seem like much to Mrs Jansen, according
to the logic of the device, it does cross the threshold value. This is what
thresholds are for: to signal when they are crossed, whether that is by a
little or a lot. The only way out of this would be to change the threshold
levels.
Organising problem identification like this separates subjective com-
plaints from objective measurements. When you measure objective
parameters in a patientвҖҷs body, the nurse does not have to wait for Mrs
Jansen to report complaints. The purpose of measurement is to warn of
66
caring for the self?

trouble, and this creates the difference between what devices do and
what people experience in their own bodies. Value deviations may be
ignored or go unnoticed, or complaints may be reported without the fig-
ures running wild. In the case of monitoring heart failure patients, this
difference is even more important because, as the telecare project leader
told me, these patients tend to underreport complaints. They actually
feel, or pretend to feel, better than is warranted by the objective measure-
ments. Close monitoring makes it possible to intervene when it is neces-
sary, meaning when the numbers signal real trouble. The monitoring
device, or so the project leader argued, enables nurses to see patients
faster, before things get out of hand.
The device does not target the problem of people who feel worse than
they really are. These patients either go to their doctor or suffer in si-
lence. Sticking to the logic of objective disease means that the doctor
may reassure them by pointing out that their values are okay or the doc-
tor might tackle the less vital problems. If they stayed at home they
might feel miserable, but nothing would actually be wrong with them вҖ“
that is to say, nothing directly related to their failing heart. They may be
suffering but they do not need life-saving intervention. Their bodies are
fine; a glance at the figures proves this. So, with the nurse watching over
the daily measurements, the monitoring device favours objective mea-
surements more than subjective complaints. This makes sense when
complaints are unreliable, meaning they do not point to a relevant physi-
cal reality. The monitoring device thus corrects unreliable subjective ex-
periences of the disease.
What is made to matter here is the condition of a body that may be
objectified but is hard to know subjectively. Mrs JansenвҖҷs comment that
the nurse вҖҳknows bestвҖҷ is understandable. The nurse has the knowledge
to distinguish relevant symptoms and knows how to interpret the signs
that no longer belong to the patientвҖҷs subjective realm of experience. But
what is this subjective experience? Mrs Jansen tells me that she knows
when her body is retaining fluid. She may not feel it but she can cer-
tainly see her swollen ankles. And she is perfectly capable of interpreting
the measurements herself, even if she does not do this. Thus the mea-
suring device does not merely objectify disease, it also shifts responsibility
for spotting trouble from the patient to the nurse. As such, it competes
with Mrs JansenвҖҷs other practices in self-care and troubleshooting. For
instance, Mrs Jansen has the discretion to adapt her dosage of diuretics
and handles the ways to shape her diet and deal with reduced fluid in-
take. Crises remain, however, the responsibility of the nurse.
The nurse вҖҳmanningвҖҷ the monitoring device in the call centre en-
courages patients to call and share whatever worries they have. However,
patients like Mrs Jansen hardly ever call. According to the nurse, people
start confiding in her only after she has spoken to them on the phone a
few times. When this happens, the call centre nurse develops quite inti-
mate relations with the patients.
enacted trouble
67

Nurse: People can always call, whenever they like [during office hours].
Interviewer: Do they call you when they get a new grandchild?
Nurse: [laughs] Yes, we get to know those things. One time a patient called
to tell me exactly that.
The team is looking for ways to phone people more often to develop this
closer contact and was preparing information videos at the time of the
study. At that point, however, the set-up facilitated objective symptom
monitoring better than any discussion of complaints and personal wor-
ries.
Webcam worries
Now letвҖҷs turn to the care practice of Mrs Jaspersen. What kinds of prob-
lems are enacted using webcams in follow-up care? Typically, the web-
cam does not script the content of problems in any structured manner,
as was the case with Mrs JansenвҖҷs monitoring device. Patients can com-
municate anything discussable by webcam, from vital signs to leisure
time, and from breathlessness to domestic affairs. The various commu-
nication partners connected to the webcam network multiply this вҖҳany-
thingвҖҷ. Apart from the carer, there are the fellow patients. A clear direc-
tive from the webcam is, however, that patients address problems by
making webcam contact, to explore and pinpoint what these problems
are interactively.
LetвҖҷs see what problems were mentioned during the interviews and
the observations in the clinic. On the webcam with her caregiver, Mrs
Jaspersen discusses her treatment plan and any troubles she is having
in adapting her daily life to what she has learned in the clinic. The carer
is happy with virtual meetings on the webcam because patients like Mrs
Jaspersen may feel embarrassed to вҖҳconfessвҖҷ explicitly when they are not
doing so well. They are not unreliable reporters without a clue of their
true condition, but they feel embarrassed about asking for more help
when they have already had so much. The consequences of stating ex-
plicitly that something is wrong can be far-reaching: every patient fears
hospitalisation.
Mrs Jaspersen: My social worker, she knew me so well, and the [webcam]
vision was so clear, she could spot right away if I was lying to her.
Interviewer: Lying?
Mrs Jaspersen: Well, in a manner of speaking. If I just sat there, looking at
her, sheвҖҷd say: вҖҳI can see by your eyes that you are not doing well.вҖҷ So, thatвҖҷs
the advantage of a good [webcam] system.
The webcam helps to overcome the barriers in reporting trouble, not by
objectifying symptoms but by extending the trust and intimacy of the
caring relations established in the clinic. The carers can see when things
68
caring for the self?

are not well; they know the patients and they know what they look like
when they are doing well and when they are not. They use intimate
knowledge of this particular patient to observe if there is any trouble. For
instance, Mrs Jaspersen always dresses well, so it would be immediately
obvious that something was wrong if she showed up for her webcam
session in a dressing gown. Mrs Jaspersen told me that her carer knows
her so well that she always gets tailor-made advice, even more than from
her carers at home. The webcam uses the familiarity of the webcam part-
ners to identify problems (see also Chapter 6), and support therapy (see
Chapter 3).
Mrs Jansen also uses the webcam to talk to fellow patients when she is
not feeling well, she said, but also вҖҳjust for a chatвҖҷ. A couple of fellow
patients from the rehabilitation clinic have become her close friends. It
is not hard to take the initiative to contact them, especially when there is
trouble. The others can identify with her problems and they are very
happy to support each other, all having been in the same position them-
selves.
When Mrs Jaspersen is worried for whatever reason, she can call a
fellow patient. The existence of a relationship prior to the one developed
over the webcam turns out to be a condition for benefiting from the
visual potential of the webcam. Without this relationship, visibility did
not add much relevant information, and patients even saw it as too in-
trusive for talks with вҖҳstrangersвҖҷ (see Chapter 6). It is the same for the
carer: familiarity with the other is a condition for the webcam to function
like this.
But fellow patients share more than friendship. They share knowl-
edge. They know what it means to live with COPD and to have to fight
for breath. Mrs Jaspersen could call on her friend, the expert, to help her
find out what might be wrong with her. Together they might compare
their shared phenomenology as COPD sufferers.
Gunvar, Jane and Rose, three COPD patients, are chatting in the rehabilitation
clinic
Gunvar doesnвҖҷt often use perfume even though she loves wearing it. вҖҳIf I put
some on, it makes me gasp for breath. But,вҖҷ Gunvar adds, вҖҳthen I just open
the window, and my breathlessness is gone. I donвҖҷt worry about it.вҖҷ
Jane mentions a perfume by name, adding, вҖҳItвҖҷs the only brand that doesnвҖҷt
take my breath away.вҖҷ
They talk about Rose, who told the others that she gets out of breath from
cooking smells. Jane does not believe her. вҖҳI think she is exaggerating.вҖҷ Gun-
var defends Rose. вҖҳItвҖҷs different for everyone.вҖҷ But none of them can bear
aerosols.
Here, the problem is not one ailment in a single defective body but
rather the sharing of the experience of living under the various condi-
tions related to COPD. Air pollution, panic attacks and weather condi-
enacted trouble
69

tions all influence breathlessness, and all need solutions other than
medication. Everyone mentions they feel depressed at times, and web-
cam support often successfully cheers people up. The patients recognise
the problems and think about them collectively. Illness connects them,
not primarily in a disease category but by a set of physical, emotional and
practical variables that they share and can develop knowledge about
(more on this in the next chapter).
Fellow patients could articulate more problems together. For example,
they discussed the invisibility of their symptoms to ignorant others,
which made them feel misunderstood and misjudged.
Mrs Jaspersen: What I find really very hard about this disease is that you
canвҖҷt tell from the outside that someone is ill. Sometimes IвҖҷm better than at
other times. People just donвҖҷt have a clue what it means. When I told my
neighbour about my emphysema [the term formerly used for COPD] she
just said: вҖҳOh, my grandson has eczema, too.вҖҷ Really, people have no idea.
Apart from being misjudged by others, there was also the trouble they
themselves had in seeing that they were ill or accepting their illness, as
they and their carers would put it. All patients had experienced the trap
of вҖҳgetting it wrongвҖҷ and overburdening their bodies on a good day. Ac-
cepting that one has a particular disease, however, implies far more than
mental acts of вҖҳfacing the factsвҖҷ. It implies new ways of behaving, observ-
ing the variations in oneвҖҷs condition and capabilities, learning how to
negotiate the changes and reacting with what one deems to be important
to do despite the difficulties. The patients must get to know themselves
anew and learn what they can do. They may learn this in the rehabilita-
tion clinic: to acquire a new sense of what to do when old routines have
let them down. The active re-interpretation of physical symptoms and
the retraining of their bodies involves a tough learning process. The pro-
cess is not merely a psychological matter; it is something the body has to
learn as well.
Mrs Jaspersen: You see, once you get out of breath, you think everything is
going to happen, you think this or that, you think youвҖҷre going to die. But
no, you should try to synchronise your breathing with your mind. Then
youвҖҷll be okay again.
Simply breathing and getting out of breath sends the wrong signs, ex-
plains Mrs Jaspersen. It leads to panic and an acute fear of dying. What
she had to learn was to вҖҳsynchronise her breathing with her mindвҖҷ вҖ“ that
is to say, to breathe not on automatic pilot as always but in a new way
that depended on self-reflection and practice before it became routine.
In this case it would be to вҖҳtalk backвҖҷ to her body (вҖҳYou are not dyingвҖҷ)
and teach it a new response (вҖҳSit down, donвҖҷt panic, try to breath nor-
mally, check if you need to take a pillвҖҷ). It is to re-educate and resocialise
70
caring for the self?

the lived body. Together, the befriended COPD patients made these
problems visible by articulating them as shared problems. They sup-
ported each other in building a new understanding of themselves as
вҖҳbodies with invisible diseaseвҖҷ and вҖҳbodies having trouble understanding
breathing difficultiesвҖҷ and live accordingly.
These examples show a knowledge of daily life with COPD that is
shared, actively developed and used by people living with the condition.
The exchange and development of this knowledge are embedded in both
friendly and professional relations. This is a big contrast to Mrs JansenвҖҷs
practice. Mrs Jansen had to deal with the tensions arising from unreli-
able subjective experiences and symptoms objectified by the monitoring
care practice, and she was responsible for finding out other things by
herself. In her own practice, however, Mrs JaspersenвҖҷs experience forms
the starting point and points to a shared reality of living with disease and
access to shared knowledge that comes with this. The knowledge is not
about reporting symptoms to caregivers (both patient groups seem to be
bad at this) but about living with them. Familiar others are helpful here.
They may confirm trouble or explain it by comparing things to their own
situation or ways of experiencing the world, or to how they know their
friends behave. Mrs JaspersenвҖҷs group actively produces knowledge that
is relevant to their present condition.
Here, experience is not suspect or in need of correction; patients can
shape it productively, share and sharpen it with fellow patients. It is
knowledge about вҖҳliving with a condition on a day-to-day basisвҖҷ. It is dif-
ferent from professional knowledge because it stems from embodied
experience and shared skills (see Chapter 5 for more on this).
Articulating problems
So, in these two care practices, different problems emerged as relevant,
requiring different knowledge and a different place for patientsвҖҷ experi-
ences. Obtaining this knowledge required different activities by different
actors (patients, professionals, devices, medication). These problems
were not вҖҳalready thereвҖҷ but were actively shaped to create a fit between
the devices, the role of the carers and the distribution of responsibilities.
Monitoring vital signs helped establish an objective disease in the body,
whereas the webcam encouraged interactive problem definitions using
the patientsвҖҷ experiences and observations. Vital signs connected with
professional interpretation. Interactively defining problems needed
knowledgeable friends with phenomenological insight into their res-
ponses and appearance.
Although I have not yet analysed the вҖҳcareвҖҷ invoked, clearly вҖҳself-careвҖҷ is
never just about the вҖҳselfвҖҷ or one single body. Who cares for what pro-
blem is not set in stone вҖ“ it shifts. Devices took their part, professionals
took or were appointed particular positions, and fellow patients were or
articulating problems
71

were not consulted. There were combinations of at times contradictory
strategies and knowledge. There were bodies carrying objective diseases,
and bodies with shared concerns. In each genre of presenting facts
about problems, the вҖҳselfвҖҷ was a different entity with different problems
and different parts to play.4 The patientsвҖҷ role emerged in the material
setting and in their use of available strategies, which created the distribu-
tion of responsibility among patients, professionals and devices. Telecare
devices helped to unleash or tame some versions of disease rather than
others.
Responding to problems
What patients are supposed to do about their problems differed in the
practices of Mrs Jansen and Mrs Jaspersen. It depends on the way prob-
lems are identified. As became clear, the different settings shaped вҖҳthe
selfвҖҷ and вҖҳdiseaseвҖҷ differently, but what did вҖҳcareвҖҷ come to mean?
Measurements
LetвҖҷs go back to Mrs Jansen and her monitoring device. Patients like Mrs
Jansen are invited to put on and inflate the cuff to measure their blood
pressure and step on the scales to weigh themselves. They have to do
this every day to provide the figures for the nurses. It must be a daily
routine because of the nature of measurement. A single measure on its
own is meaningless and unreliable. Patients may be unreliable reporters
of their own disease; they also have to correct for the unreliability of the
monitoring devices вҖ“ or the amateur patientвҖҷs use of them вҖ“ by frequent,
routine measurement.
Mrs Jansen: ItвҖҷs part of what you do, your life. How shall I put it. I get up in
the morning, go to the loo and step on the scales. And then we have break-
fast. And after that I take my blood pressure and everything. ItвҖҷs all part of
the routine. And once all of that is done, I can get on with my day.
Patients need to produce measurements for extended periods. Their dis-
ease is chronic; the figures may shift at any time. The measurements
that patients produce with their devices should ultimately lead to warn-
ings of possible trouble. And this is where the nurse comes in. The nurse
has to make sense of the figures and come up with a solution. The divi-
sion of labour in the monitoring practice seems to be that patients are
responsible for producing the figures via the telecare system, while
nurses are responsible for encouraging them to do so, interpreting the
figures and coming up with a remedy if needed. The participants tacitly
agreed upon this вҖ“ Mrs Jansen by her passive waiting for a call and the
nurse by her active calling.
72
caring for the self?

The patients were glad to leave it to the nurse to contact them. Mrs
Jansen said: вҖҳIвҖҷm happy to be looked after by someone who knows more
about my condition than I do.вҖҷ Even if Mrs Jansen knows something is
wrong, the nurse and patient will use the monitoring device to establish
professional control at home anyway. It makes Mrs Jansen feel safe and
allows the nurse to spot trouble as soon as it appears. She does not wait
for patients to call her but intervenes when it is timely. So, in this care
practice, patients are more actively involved in their own care than they
were before the telecare device arrived: their action is in the realm of
вҖҳtaking daily measurementsвҖҷ and following the instructions of the nurse.
When it comes to interpreting symptoms and treatment decisions, the
monitoring system intensifies professional care rather than delegating it
to the patient. Patients appreciate this: they feel safe and taken care of
because the nurses monitor them.
The responsible nurse caring for symptoms contrasts with Mrs Jan-
senвҖҷs need to maintain a salt-free diet, mind her fluid intake and manage
her diuretic medication. She had to figure these things out for herself
and had to decide if and when she needed professional help. At the time
of the study, the call centre staff was working on an information cam-
paign. They sent out informative videos вҖ“ for instance on prescribed
diets вҖ“ for patients to watch at home. However, the videos did not go
down well. The videos were made in America and did not fit Dutch prac-
tices вҖ“ or attitudes вҖ“ in a straightforward match.5 The nurses intended to
send patients good salt-free recipes, using spices instead of salt for sea-
soning. They planned to spread ideas on how to keep fluid intake low on
hot days, for example, by sucking on frozen pieces of pineapple. They
did not address diuretic use, since not all patients took them indepen-
dently.
The life of Mrs Jansen shows three configurations of self-care. First,
there is the monitoring practice where Mrs Jansen is, above all, a patient
suffering a disease needing specialist care. Self-care thus takes on the
form of вҖҳdoing the legworkвҖҷ for the nurses. Second, there were the emer-
gency diuretics or resting in case of fluid retention. The clinicians left it
to Mrs JansenвҖҷs discretion to take a pill or take a rest, although the nurse
may make suggestions too. But Mrs Jansen never calls her. These self-
care options target the same symptoms as telecare devices do (fluid re-
tention), but their logic is quite different, particularly because the patient
herself is responsible. This responsibility exists although medication is
considered a вҖҳmedicalвҖҷ solution, and lying down is not. Third, there was
the daily inconvenience of coping with the diet and reduced fluids.
Again, Mrs Jansen was responsible for this, although plans for support
in this area were in preparation at the time of the study. The nurse may
address these matters should the figures start to deviate. However, pa-
tients dealt with them as they thought fit, and doing so allowed them to
balance the importance of diet against their other assignments in life.6
responding to problems
73

How do these self-care configurations relate? In the practices studied,
they do not relate at all other than the fact that Mrs Jansen had somehow
to live with them all together. The introduction of telecare did not relate
to whatever the patients had been doing before; most patients were al-
ready watching their weight or signs of fluid retention, if not as system-
atically as in the monitoring practice and not in digital form. More sys-
tematic monitoring and control by the nurse now replaced homemade
pencil-and-paper monitoring or accompanied ankle observations as well
as a great degree of discretion in matters of using diuretic medication or
dieting. Ways of caring for oneself followed quite different logics.
Mutual support
What type of self-care did Mrs JaspersenвҖҷs practice of using the webcam
put forward? Clearly, videoconferencing helped bring about care that in-
teractively shaped problems as well as solutions. If something was
wrong, the webcam invited patients to get help and share their experi-
ences. This served to articulate what the problem was and address it at
the same time. What remedies did the patients come up with? The first
remedy was social diversion. Taking your mind off the hardship of living
with chronic progressive disease may be a good thing every once in a
while. Webcams allow you social contact without having to leave the
house.
Mrs Jaspersen: One time, I was a bit down in the dumps, so to speak. So I
went to the computer and what happens? Suddenly, another patient calls me
up. Well, you go sit at that thing [the computer] and you donвҖҷt feel well, and
so on. Then this fellow patient calls you and you start chatting. And [swears],
when youвҖҷre done youвҖҷre a completely different person! I noticed that a few
times. [...] Or playing some game or another on your computer distracts you,
so your breathing gets more relaxed. Because youвҖҷre not paying attention.
The computer and the webcam promote another form of self-care too:
patients вҖҳbroaden their horizonвҖҷ by engaging in meaningful activities
rather than just focusing on their illness. Although it takes great effort
and much training to get elderly patients comfortably using a computer,
this effort allows new problems to emerge and provide new ways to solve
them. The result here was that supposedly technophobic elderly patients
such as Mrs Jaspersen started using email and surfing the internet. Mrs
Jaspersen stopped just focusing on what was wrong with her and looked
for positive things to do in her life, by вҖҳbringing the world into her homeвҖҷ
and by caring for her friends.
Now wait a minute. Down in the dumps? Diversion? Loneliness?
Broadening horizons and finding meaningful things to do? Could these
be medical issues? What the problem is as well as ways of solving it may
indeed be articulated along different lines than what is often understood
74
caring for the self?

as вҖҳmedicalвҖҷ. The webcam shapes and addresses a fluid mixture of physi-
cal, social, emotional and practical problems and solutions, and stages
events in the midst of many routines of вҖҳgetting through the dayвҖҷ. These
are all ways of making life bearable. The self-help in this practice aimed
to do just that: help patients live their daily life.
The webcam also allowed patients to address the difficulties related to
symptoms and to share and refine the solutions. Take the three-chair
solution Mrs Jaspersen learned from her friend: rest your arms on two
adjacent chairs to ease your breathing. Mrs Jaspersen refined this techni-
que by integrating the required set-up of chairs into her normal furni-
ture arrangement. This meant she could position herself quickly without
having to shuffle around or move the dining room chairs every time the
need to breathe better got in the way of the demands of having a tidy
house. This remedy relieves symptoms, and yet the doctor may not
know of it. It connects different goals of equal importance (alleviating
breathlessness versus keeping a tidy house). It is an invention created
by patients living with breathlessness.
Interestingly, it is not despite but because of the shared problem of liv-
ing with COPD that Mrs Jaspersen developed an extensive support net-
work. She receives care and support, and she herself is a carer and sup-
porter as well, lending her expertise to others. She can be active and take
the initiative to look for help. As a collective, the patients share the care
for each other and engage in reciprocal or вҖҳtogether-managementвҖҷ of their
lives.7
Mrs JaspersenвҖҷs self-care practices were comparable with the discre-
tion that Mrs Jansen was given over her diuretic medication (I analyse
this more closely in Chapter 5). And Mrs Jaspersen encountered prac-
tices of objectifying disease in the body as well. She visits a pulmonary
specialist every year to have her lung capacity measured. As an interven-
tion in daily life, Mrs Jaspersen is less than happy about this (more ana-
lysis of this point too in the next chapter). Overall, using the webcam was
not at odds with how Mrs Jaspersen was accustomed to care for herself.
The webcam extended her network and gave her alternatives for consult-
ing professionals.
Enacting problems, engaging in self-care
Different enactments of problems and self-care imply a different appre-
ciation of patientsвҖҷ experiences and know-how. The more their experi-
ence is questioned, the less often patients are addressed as responsible
partners in their own care, as вҖҳself-вҖҳ or rather вҖҳtogether-managersвҖҷ. The
professionals and telecare device took care of monitoring objective
symptoms. The patients had little access to the parameters monitored
and lacked the knowledge to find solutions when these were out of line.
Mrs Jansen observed her body retaining fluid but did not do this by
enacting problems, engaging in self-care
75

monitoring her personal measurements вҖ“ instead, she observed her an-
kles. The monitoring practice did not relate well to Mrs JansenвҖҷs other
self-care practices and these were sometimes inconsistent, especially re-
garding who was responsible for what; they merely co-existed next to one
another.
The more socially or interactively enacted problems facilitated by the
webcam helped turn experience into knowledge. This process brought
other potential carers into the picture such as fellow patients, people
who shared Mrs JaspersenвҖҷs specific interests and ways of living with
disease. Framing issues as problems of daily life made professional res-
ponsibility and expertise only one (much valued) source of solutions. It
actively engaged patients in identifying their worries and finding the
best way to deal with them.8
Self-care gained different meanings. It turns out that it is misleading
to think in terms of one patient (one self) caring for the self. The work is
always distributed among patients, professionals, devices and others.
The self of the patient may do more or less work, take more or less re-
sponsibility, or be more or less creative. This self is, however, never by
itself. Devices, professional carers, objects, regimes and other people
shape it together.9 The term вҖҳself-careвҖҷ or вҖҳself-managementвҖҷ glosses over
these interdependencies. Indeed, together-management would be a bet-
ter term, granted that the devices are included in the вҖҳtogetherвҖҷ.10
But what about the care aspect of self-care? As shown, there is no sin-
gle rationality or epistemology underlying the practices of living with a
disease. There are many rationalities, including professional surveil-
lance, responsibility for medication, or for bringing the world into oneвҖҷs
home. Patients tinkered with various logics of care11 for themselves, pie-
cing them together using particular strategies for particular problems.
You could say the telecare devices tinkered with the patients too, since
the devices permitted several ways of using them and had their re-
straints as well. Webcams made it easier to contact others in case of trou-
ble. The monitoring system with the nurse вҖҳat the other endвҖҷ led to the
nurse rather than the patient taking action.
Different telecare systems supported different ways of living with
chronic disease. There is no single way of doing this that follows from
the вҖҳnature of a diseaseвҖҷ. The type of disease does not determine care;
COPD patients may objectify their condition, for instance by blowing
into peak flow meters or by having their lung functions measured. Heart
failure patients, in turn, could also use webcams. This would not exempt
them from the task of keeping an eye on their weight and fluid intake,
but it would make other knowledge and activities important as well and
enable another kind of life with chronic disease. It makes the question of
what device to use, and a fitting logic to live by, important for potential
users to ask.
76
caring for the self?

Fitting logics
The previous three chapters have shown the processes of fitting devices
and people, fitting norms of good care as well as fitting forms of knowl-
edge. This chapter makes clear that fitting responds to and establishes
various logics of care. There are also relations between logics. These lo-
gics could co-exist in the practices of an individual patient вҖ“ either ham-
pering or supporting one another. But there are also clear differences
between the practices of Mrs Jansen and Mrs Jaspersen living with mon-
itoring devices or webcams respectively. Different logics of care become
apparent: values (quick detection of problems versus mutual support),
facts (problem identification by vital sign deviation versus discussing
personal experience) and directives may or may not become routines
(measurements versus mutual support). In the next chapter I look in
more detail at the knowledge that patients need for fitting вҖ“ and switch-
ing between вҖ“ various logics in their daily lives.
fitting logics
77


5 Knowing patients
On practical knowledge for living with chronic
disease
The knowledge of patients
In the previous chapter, the examples of Mrs Jansen and Mrs Jaspersen
and their respective telecare devices showed how they used norms and
knowledge from different logics they had to somehow fit together. To the
facts, values and directives derived from devices and professionals, both
women added their own experiences. By using the webcam, Mrs Jasper-
sen could develop yet a different kind of knowledge by sharing her con-
cerns about living with COPD with her fellow patients. In this chapter, I
look at how people with severe COPD use knowledge in their daily life
practices to deal with their disease and the things they want to do in life.
What kind of knowledge is this? How does it relate to professional
knowledge? How can telecare devices such as the webcam support the
development and use of this knowledge?
Studying the knowledge of patients is, however, easier said than done.
There is much opacity on what this knowledge could be about and how
to study it. The main pitfalls seem to be either completely separating the
knowledge of patients from medical science and technology or making
them the same. A way out of these difficulties is to ignore the knowledge
of patients and professionals for the greater good of вҖҳempoweringвҖҷ pa-
tients. Obviously, this does not help much to put the knowledge of pa-
tients on the research agenda, even if it does greatly influence ways of
thinking about patients and what they can and should do. Before analys-
ing the practices of people with COPD, I will briefly consider these prob-
lems, in order to avoid them and prepare the tools for the analysis.
Knowing patients?
The question of what the knowledge of patients is must be placed in the
context of the emancipation of patients. The days are long gone when
doctors and others saw patients as passive and ignorant lay people de-
pendent on and sometimes abused by medical/research practices.1 Mod-
ern patients have gained influence in medical practices and in the pro-
duction of medical knowledge. Health care policies, laws and guidelines
have been developed and implemented to protect and make use of the
new position of patients.2 What happened to the knowledge of patients
in this process?
79

Difference
There have been attempts to study the knowledge of patients as вҖҳknowl-
edge by experienceвҖҷ. Patients obtain this knowledge by living with a
chronic disease or disability. Much confusion surrounds the term. There
is the danger of romanticising experiential knowledge by defining it as
essentially different from medical knowledge.3 A romantic notion of
knowledge by experience risks trivialising this knowledge; it is not вҖҳrealвҖҷ
knowledge but the вҖҳexoticвҖҷ lay wisdom of patients.4 It may be meaningful
to them but may be completely wrong according to professional medical
standards. There is no reason to trust its claim to truth.5 Defining experi-
ential knowledge as different from medical knowledge is also proble-
matic in a high-tech medical world. In the life of chronic patients such
as the ones described in this book, medical knowledge is everywhere, in
the form of devices, medication, lifestyle rules and so on. This knowl-
edge does not always fit but is difficult to ignore as part of the patientsвҖҷ
experience and expertise.6
Sameness
The term experiential knowledge often pops up in situations where med-
ical experts do not recognise diseases7, in the case of вҖҳorphan diseasesвҖҷ
lacking medical research8 or where patients find medical knowledge and
interventions unhelpful.9 Experiential knowledge is then the only knowl-
edge available, and these patients organise themselves in their struggle
to gain medical recognition for their disease and to promote medical
research to understand and treat it. Here, experiential knowledge runs
the risk of switching from being essentially different from scientific med-
ical knowledge into becoming generally the same as scientific medical
knowledge. The patients become what Epstein calls вҖҳlay expertsвҖҷ вҖ“ well-
informed patients who discuss science on an equal basis with scien-
tists.10 The difference between what patients and their organisations
know and what medical science may extend and confirm is roughly that
medical scientists have access to laboratories and scientific methods,
whereas patients develop their knowledge вҖҳin the wildвҖҷ.11 Although the
tension between patient experience and вҖҳevidenceвҖҷ is far from resolved,
patients do engage in the production of medical knowledge or guide-
lines.12 The production of knowledge has changed in the process, but not
the object of this knowledge nor the methodology to develop it.
The call for scientific medical knowledge is widespread, and the idea
that this knowledge is the same as the knowledge that patients might use
and help to develop is very common. Another example is the policy of
self-management. The self-managing patients as described in the UK
policy on the вҖҳexpert patientвҖҷ,13 for instance, and in the discourse on the
modern вҖҳinformed patientвҖҷ14 get hold of medical technologies to support
themselves. The most cherished technology is the internet, which pro-
80
knowing patients

vides all the medical information anyone might need and gives access to
a variety of aids, portals and discussion platforms. The idea is that equip-
ping patients with the right technology вҖ“ and this certainly includes tele-
care вҖ“ will help patients to manage themselves, their bodies and their
diseases. Patients get to know as much about their disease as their doc-
tor does, if not more. After all, they have only one specialisation to keep
up with.
To equate the knowledge of patients with state-of-the-art scientific
medical knowledge, as the above examples do, obscures the translations
that patients (and clinicians!) need to make in order to make scientific
knowledge useful. It is nothing new to state that statistics, for instance
on groups of patients, are not directly applicable to individuals.15, 16 The
patient in the doctorвҖҷs surgery may have complicating co-morbidities
that patients in the study did not have. Patients may gamble on the idea
that they are the exception to the rule (вҖҳMy granny smoked and she lived
to be 95вҖҷ), or find that treatments do not work in their individual case. To
make scientific knowledge useful to them, something has to happen to
it. Patients need to translate this knowledge and tinker with it to fit the
particular situation at hand.
Indifference
Equating scientific knowledge with patientsвҖҷ knowledge makes the latter
invisible as an object of study in its own right. This is also the case in
discourses on dominance in doctor-patient relations that assume that
differences in power should be the focus of attention rather than knowl-
edge. The idea is that societies should enhance the power of patients, not
by learning about their rationality but by taking their emotions, choices
and preferences seriously. This discourse frames the patient as a consu-
mer, a character that shows up in several places.17 This type of patient, for
instance, plays a political role in the Dutch health care market as the
вҖҳthird partyвҖҷ counterbalancing the power of health care providers and in-
surance companies.18 Consumer-patients may do this by negotiating
with decision makers, by refusing to accept care they do not want, and
by declining to pay too much for the care they do want. For consumers it
is not important what they know, but what they want.
The consumer-patient also makes an appearance in theories about evi-
dence-based medicine (EBM). To reconcile medical rationality with pa-
tient preferences, EBM frames the patient as given the choice between
two equally effective treatments. Irrationality does not get free rein, be-
cause doctors are supposed to have only evidence-based treatments on
offer.19 In the juridical sense, however, the consumer-patient is free to
prefer and choose anything, even if their choices do not fit with medical
rationality or will lead to the certain death of the patient.20 The patient is,
legally speaking, autonomous.21
knowing patients?
81

Tools for the case study: scientific versus practical
knowledge
The ideas of вҖҳexoticвҖҷ knowledge, expert patients and active consumers did
not help to put the knowledge of patients onto the research agenda.
When exotic, the knowledge of patients would not be analysed as knowl-
edge but as perspectives or beliefs. An analysis of patientsвҖҷ knowledge
would be irrelevant when it is taken to be the same as scientific medical
knowledge, or superfluous when the power to choose is deemed more
important than sharing knowledge. In this chapter I will use a contrast
between practical and scientific knowledge to study the knowledge of peo-
ple with COPD. This contrast allows for distinctions between medical
knowledge created by scientists, clinical knowledge from professionals,
and practical knowledge from patients, without losing sight of their com-
plex intertwinements.
The idea of contrasting practical and scientific knowledge is based on
the work of Georges Canguilhem.22, 23 On the one hand, there is what
Canguilhem calls the laboratory, meaning the formalised or scientific
knowledge that presents transportable and comparable facts. This
knowledge comes in different versions or logics that separate enzymes
from anatomy and genes from epidemiology.24 The clinic, on the other
hand, signifies the knowledge that doctors need to treat individual pa-
tients. Clinical and scientific knowledge generally differ in their aims.
Scientific practices aim to generate knowledge about the way bodies be-
have in particular conditions. Clinical knowledge does not aim to accu-
mulate knowledge but to improve the daily life of individual patients. To
this end, clinical knowledge feeds from numerous sources such as the
scientific literature, medical tests, patients reporting trouble, and so on.
Another difference between scientific and clinical knowledge is the
way in which they are legitimized. Scientific knowledge comes with pro-
cedures for creating this knowledge that the scientific community has
agreed on. Clinical knowledge derives its authority and reliability from
the experience of the clinician and builds on many observations of pa-
tientsвҖҷ reactions to treatment and advice, as well as the ongoing process
of observing, intervening and evaluating this particular case.25, 26 Does
the patient improve? If not, what could be the next step? Clinical knowl-
edge is about tinkering and adjusting rather than finding evidence.27 It
is about improving rather than proving.28
Practical knowledge for clinicians and patients
If clinical knowledge is the practical knowledge of professionals, it is
possible to extend CanguillhemвҖҷs reasoning to think about the practical
knowledge of patients.29, 30 There are, however, also differences between
the two. The clinician aims to treat or support individual patients,
whereas individual patients aim to live with their disease in a good way.
82
knowing patients

The clinician knows how to instruct patients; the latter need to be good at
putting instructions into practice. This is a difference between explicit and
tacit knowledge. Polanyi showed that tacit knowledge is not necessarily
explicit, or it has ceased being explicit.31 It is embodied. The bicycle rider
relies on many tacit routines that would take much effort to articulate.
This does not mean that one cannot make tacit knowledge explicit,
although philosophers argue about the extent to which this is possible.
Another difference is that patients move through several practices be-
yond the clinic, constantly finding new situations to deal with. The pa-
tient may talk about these situations to the clinician but primarily has to
live them. Dick Willems gives a useful example when he set the stage for
a GP, Bob, and a patient, Susan. Susan suffers from asthma and Bob
gives her an inhaler to help reduce her breathlessness.32 As a GP, Bob is
perfectly able to explain to Susan how to use the inhaler. Susan, however,
is the expert when it comes to the embodied skill of using the device and
in using it inconspicuously and conveniently in everyday life. She not
only needs know-how to do this, she must also interpret new situations
to know if she needs to use the inhaler or not. Explicit вҖҳknowing about
know-howвҖҷ may be shared between patients and professionals. Actual
embodied knowledge is, however, specific to those living it. It is not exo-
tic but rather highly dependent on the specific situations in which they
find themselves.33
Practical knowledge of people with COPD
These concepts enable me to differentiate between forms of knowledge
without having to deny their interdependencies. I will now turn to my
case study of practical knowledge of people suffering from chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease (COPD) to see what they are worth вҖҳin the
wildвҖҷ.34 The people with COPD struggle to shape their lives and their
disease, helped by the people around them and the technology they use.
My analysis draws on fieldwork in the rehabilitation clinic for COPD and
asthma that Mrs Jaspersen from the previous chapter visited as well. I
conducted follow-up interviews with patients who were using webcams
to stay in touch with each other and the clinic. I also conducted fieldwork
in the clinic to study how patients and carers use webcams and how
volunteers trained the patients to use computers. When I questioned
how this device fit into the daily life of the patients and how they used it
to transport what they had learned in the clinic back home, I learned a
great deal about the strategies and obstacles of living with COPD on a
daily basis and gathered many examples of their practical knowledge.
I distinguish three levels of practical knowledge in the practices of
COPD patients (see Table 1). The first is explicit knowledge. Theorists
sometimes call this propositional or declarative knowledge, which is
formed from statements of fact or propositions about the world (for ex-
practical knowledge of people with copd
83

ample: oil does not dissolve in water). The second level of knowledge is
based on know-how or skills and is sometimes called procedural knowl-
edge. This knowledge is embodied or embedded in routines and pro-
vides techniques and methods. Skills may be enacted or expressed and
may be applied in particular situations. An example is skill in using in-
halers or in baking apple pies.
The third level emerged from the study of the practice of patients with
COPD. I have dubbed this category know-now to indicate the activity of
knowing in a particular situation. Patients use know-now when they inter-
pret new situations to establish what the problem is and how they should
act. Know-now is about asking open questions вҖ“ What is the matter here?
What should I do about it? вҖ“ instead of giving answers or applying skills.
For example: вҖҳHow should I interpret that red spot on my face? Does it
need treatment? Is it a sign of the measles; is it eczema, acne or some-
thing else altogether?вҖҷ Patients also need know-now to coordinate knowl-
edge from different sources and logics.
Table 2 Levels of practical knowledge
Propositional knowledge35
Know-how
Know-now
Statements or propositions
Skills
Semiotic problems
Descriptive, declarative
Directives & routines
Open questions: what is ...?
Matters of fact
Methods & procedures
Tools
General
Specific to (familiar) task
Specific to (new) situation
Explicit facts
Tacit embodied knowledge36
Sensitising concepts
Valid in different situations
Experience
Improvisation
Detached from personвҖҷs body Body as source of knowledge Body as instrument
Result
Method
Observation
Knowing that
Knowing how
Knowing here & now
White box37
Monitoring device38
Webcam
Introducing вҖҳknow-nowвҖҷ
COPD patients clearly displayed both tacit and explicit pragmatics in
their practical knowledge. They needed directives and suggestions for
вҖҳwhat to doвҖҷ to improve their daily life or keep it stable. Interviewing
patients who had left the clinic, I asked what they had learned in the
clinic. Only occasionally did they treat me to stories on the chemical
composition of drugs or the physiology of lungs extracting oxygen from
air. Mostly, their answers were about practical arrangements that allowed
them to interpret, respond to and deal with the breathlessness they faced
in their daily lives.
The term вҖҳknow-howвҖҷ refers to a set of tacitly and automatically ap-
plied skills. If you look at the practices of COPD patients, skills are in-
deed important, but many are involved and their application (which skill
84
knowing patients

to use when) was not straightforward. What seemed more urgent were
resources that allowed people to improvise in new situations, to вҖҳknow-
nowвҖҷ. This means they looked for ways to understand and act in this par-
ticular situation. Here is an example.
Mrs Smit: I learned [in the clinic] that you should focus on getting to know
your limitations, and also that you have to make these limitations explicit. So
when you are doing sports and you should stop: how can you let others
know? How can you tell youвҖҷve reached a limit, how do you deal with that?
A lot of work in the clinic aims at that: that you need to recognise your limits
and learn what to do with them.
This practical knowledge gives Mrs Smit pointers to things she should
be aware of: her limits. A related element is the proposition that one
should вҖҳrespectвҖҷ these limits. However, the patients must assess the ac-
tual meaning of вҖҳrespectвҖҷ and вҖҳlimitsвҖҷ in concrete situations. A limit is
temporary and situated. It gains meaning only when it is encountered in
a specific situation; it is know-now. вҖҳLimitsвҖҷ functions as a sensitising
concept, not a definitive one.39
After Mrs Smit has sensed and identified the nature of a particular
problem (or limit), she has to figure out what to do. This requires an
assessment of the context and those in it as well as a strategy to deal
with it. Should she explain her disease to people? Merely wave to signal
that she will wait behind? In Lucy SuchmanвҖҷs terms, situated action is
called for rather than plan implementation.40 Mrs Smit must improvise,
using what she knows about the situation and about different ways of
dealing with problems.
In the quote, questions form the tools for assessing the situation: Is
this a limit? What kind of limit is it? How can I deal with it? These ques-
tions are specific and open at the same time. They are tools or methods for
understanding a situation and finding out what to do in it. It is the active
verb of knowing rather than the noun of knowledge. Every set of activities
needs to be sensed and thought through in terms of expended energy
and new arrangements to be made in order to best live them. The prac-
tical rationality needed here demands solutions to new puzzles and cal-
culations with ever-changing sets of variables.
Mrs Matthijsen: You have to think more when you do things вҖ“ thatвҖҷs what I
learned. You sort things out: if I do this, I canвҖҷt do that. Tonight, for instance,
I have a meeting. And I said: LetвҖҷs make it at my place so I donвҖҷt have to go
up and down four flights of stairs. Before, IвҖҷd just go and work out how on
earth IвҖҷd get up the stairs again when I got back.
Mrs Matthijsen uses the expression вҖҳsorting outвҖҷ a problem. In this ex-
ample, the stairs formed the problem. On other days, it may be some-
introducing вҖҳknow-nowвҖҷ
85

thing else. She needs a kind of knowledge that allows her to assess and
find ways to deal with different circumstances.
Know-now points to the process of understanding. In the rehabilitation
clinic, but especially in the webcam practice, patients could be seen to
develop know-now together, by assessing someoneвҖҷs situation together.
They do this, for instance, when they are trying to understand the rea-
sons for their breathlessness. Does it relate to cold weather, air pressure,
pollution, lung inflammation or something else? The webcam patients
form an active community of know-now producers to identify and solve
emerging problems. Here is an example of how the webcam helped the
COPD patients practise know-now together.
Mr van Leeuwen: The contact with fellow patients is really nice. ThereвҖҷs al-
ways a night when you wake up short of breath, things are not working out,
and then you think: Is this me, is it my illness, or what? If you can talk to
another patient and he or she feels just as bad, then you think: Well, IвҖҷm not
the only one suffering today. Then it turns out that there is a storm depres-
sion coming or weather like that. That has the same effect on you as going
up a mountain: less air pressure. If your breathing is bad and thereвҖҷs less
oxygen in the air, you notice it right off, definitely. And then you see: Well,
itвҖҷs not just me.
A law of physics вҖ“ less air pressure equals less oxygen, which makes
breathing more strenuous вҖ“ a proposition is included in this knowledge.
But know-now is not aimed at establishing this proposition, it is used to
help diagnose a particular situation and find ways to react to it. Mr van
Leeuwen and his webcam companion are trying to learn what their
bodies are doing at a particular time. They are not sure why they are
getting out of breath. But being out of breath in thundery weather is
something you can sense, it is a reaction to be expected when your body
is susceptible to it. To check if this was indeed happening, they had to
ask each other if their bodies were acting like barometers, or if some-
thing else was the matter. They used their bodies to know-now, to identify
the nature of todayвҖҷs problems and to think of appropriate strategies to
deal with them.
Interestingly, their bodies are both the problem and the instrument
used to diagnose the nature of the problem. They produce knowledge
when they need it, about the atmosphere and about themselves. Van
Leeuwen and his companion need each otherвҖҷs bodies to check what
they are dealing with. Thus, they create a shared, practical and fluid way
of physically being in the world, creating knowledge by and for bodies
with extremely sensitive lungs. The illness here connects them to a car-
ing community of people who share physical, emotional and practical
capabilities, interests and difficulties, skills and strategies. These things
are what fellow patients know about and through their bodies and from
sharing this knowledge in order to test and check it.
86
knowing patients

Transporting knowledge
Mrs SmitвҖҷs practical know-now (acknowledging and dealing with limits)
has to be put to use in different situations. This is why the clinic started
using webcams in follow-up care вҖ“ to transport the lessons from the
clinic to the home and other situations. Once patients had learned to
observe and respect their limits under clinic conditions, they had to
learn how to do this elsewhere. In theory, or as explicit knowing about,
transporting this knowledge is not that hard. Anyone with an average
memory can do it, and repetition brings the message home securely. It
is different in the case of embodied knowledge. Explicit know-how needs
translation, adaptation, reflection and training to become embodied so
that it is effective and usable in varied situations. Everywhere, particulars
need to be taken into account. No one book of rules fits all, and in any
situation, no one skill always applies. If there are rules, these need to be
sensed (Is this a limit?), interpreted and understood (Yes it is, and I have
reached it because I overexerted myself) and obeyed (Now I should rest).
Back home after the clinic, patients sometimes referred to the вҖҳlabora-
tory situationвҖҷ of the clinic where they had obtained theoretical know-
how and put some into practice.
Mr Bakker: There are so many little things you bump into. ItвҖҷs as if you have
had 12 weeks of theory and practice, and when youвҖҷre back home, youвҖҷre
thrown back on yourself. The transfer is really intense. It all seems so easy
in the clinic. They show you how to do things. For instance, you learn to find
a balance between exertion and relaxation. You should always exert, then
relax, exert and relax, exert then relax. ThatвҖҷs the balance. But at home, you
have a date with X, an appointment with Y. And before you know it, youвҖҷve
slipped back into your old routines. You cannot learn new habits in only 12
weeks. In theory maybe, but not in practice.
Mr Bakker is talking about вҖҳputting theory into practiceвҖҷ. The theory is
not the problem here. Mr Bakker has an easy mantra for the theory (вҖҳex-
ert then relaxвҖҷ). It is enacting the mantra that is causing him concern.
There are many different situations and things to do in a day and over
time. One situation is the physiotherapy class at the clinic. But it can also
be вҖҳback homeвҖҷ, вҖҳat workвҖҷ, вҖҳlooking after the childrenвҖҷ, вҖҳshoppingвҖҷ, or gen-
erally getting on with life as usual. The mantra, or theoretical know-how,
has to fit varied situations. It is a directive for how to deal with the new
and unexpected. It is not so much about applying knowledge, but about
living knowledge in various contexts, shaping it вҖҳin actionвҖҷ. Practical
knowledge is about doing and intervening. Know-now, skills and proposi-
tions should enable people to act in multiple contexts.
Mr BakkerвҖҷs story makes it sound as if the body вҖҳforgetsвҖҷ the theory
because various situations trigger different вҖҳmemoriesвҖҷ of embodied rou-
transporting knowledge
87

tines. Mr Bakker slips back into his вҖҳold routinesвҖҷ. Situations (and the
people and devices within them) have their own memories.41
Mrs Smit: Oh, you meet so many limits in life. In the clinic, itвҖҷs easier to
protect your limits because: a) they expect you to, and b) everyone has to do
it. But back home, everybody is used to you just going on and on. That
makes it harder. People donвҖҷt realise what it means to have COPD. So itвҖҷs
harder at home than it is in the clinic.
Memories are inside and outside the body. In the clinic, many people
were practising the same routines, and seemingly indefatigable carers
kept pointing to matters of importance. To move practical knowledge
from one place to another means making it present and memorable in
new and different situations, even when those situations are not about
disease but other things (shopping, caring for children, going to work,
and so on). This means a re-organisation of practices outside the clinic to
help people perform according to what they have learnt. The contextual
expectations may stem from a situation with a healthy self, or a badly
treated diseased self, and may appeal to competences that have faded
away.42 There is a great difference between memorising a mantra and
aligning what it preaches with the demands, organisation and expecta-
tions of daily life.
In the rehabilitation clinic, the carers use space to create a different
mind-set (or would its embodied translation be a different вҖҳbody-setвҖҷ?).
Caregiver: Green parks are pure invitations to go for a walk. People move
less often because they get out of breath. But thatвҖҷs wrong. You should move
in the right way.
People with COPD remember going for walks, but now walking only
means trouble, getting hot and bothered and out of breath. So they stop
going for walks and feel threatened rather than invited by the nice green
park. The patients use the park surrounding the rehabilitation clinic to
create new embodied memories, new routines, habits or skills. They
learn to ride mobility scooters or train themselves to take breaks while
out walking. But before new learning is possible, new imaginings must
be unleashed. Scary parks must be transformed into attractive parks.
This needs translation and transportation, and patients must discover,
practise and arrange new fits.
Technologies and translation
Apart from mastering know-how and the skills to facilitate know-now and
transporting and embodying them from one practice to another, there
are also the bits of knowledge that patients get from doctors and devices.
88
knowing patients

This knowledge may not be вҖҳready to useвҖҷ to improve daily life with dis-
ease. Before patients can establish routines, they need to develop fitting
know-now, and to this end, patients need to make translations. As I made
clear in the previous chapters, what devices do is not simply hidden in-
side their function. Users put devices to work and are put to work by the
devices in turn. Remember the monitored patients in the last chapter?
They could have interpreted their own measurements, but they did not.
Instead, they left it to the nurse. The patients translate the direction that
technology provides to make it useable and relate it to the concerns of
daily life practices.
Mrs Jarmus: You see, I had to learn to walk slowly, right from the start, walk
very slowly. It doesnвҖҷt come naturally to me. And then I used the saturation
device and I noticed that after walking a minute, my saturation level goes
down, or it drops below 90, and then I have to stop. So, well... a minute is
not long.
Interviewer: So you walk a minute and then take a one-minute break?
Mrs Jarmus: Yes, thatвҖҷs it. But I find it so hard to put into practice! You have
to stop in front of every shop window, look as if youвҖҷre very interested in
something, when thereвҖҷs nothing to see! Play with your car keys or whatever.
And sometimes you just canвҖҷt do even that. I have days when I can hardly
get from the kitchen to the sofa.
Mrs Jarmus uses a device that measures the oxygen saturation level in
her blood. She was told that 90% is the clinically relevant threshold;
below that, saturation is too low to continue exercise without damaging
tissues. But it is not enough to learn this fact in itself. Mrs Jarmus has to
put this knowledge to use. She makes a first translation from oxygen
saturation to time: after one minute of very slow walking, she should
stop. The 90% saturation then becomes a directive to вҖҳrest one minuteвҖҷ.
Then another translation takes place; one minuteвҖҷs rest becomes in prac-
tice one minute of standing still. This takes place in public, in an every-
day situation where people hardly ever stand still, on the street, and that
makes it harder.
The body enacted by Mrs Jarmus is different with each translation of
the saturation meter, and each body has its own troubles and possible
solutions. The first body is a body with blood that contains oxygen that
may sink to a level that is too low to keep moving without damage to
tissues. This body becomes a body that should rest after one minute of
walking. The body needing rest becomes a body that is visible to others
and stands inexplicably inert in public places. This body needs to learn
how to rest inconspicuously in public. A body too abstract needs to be
adapted and crafted to turn it into a body that fits daily life or a body
now. There are many different ways to do this. Giving Mrs Jarmus a mo-
bility scooter would have led to a very different series of translations in
her situation.43
technologies and translation
89

Coordinating knowledge
The process of translation and embodiment opens up new sets of ques-
tions regarding know-now. For instance, Mrs JarmusвҖҷs use of the satura-
tion device shows that the translations make it irrelevant to patients to
distinguish between вҖҳmedicalвҖҷ and other matters. To call some interven-
tions вҖҳmedicalвҖҷ could mean pointing to a particular phase of translation
from the clinic to daily life. In the end, to patients, any intervention is an
intervention in their daily lives. But translations are not always success-
ful, even if they started as medical interventions. How does medical
knowledge relate to other forms of knowledge? How do people coordi-
nate knowledge from different sources?
Coordination practices, blurring distinctions
The case of Mr Hansen is a good example to show the blurring of medi-
cal and other forms of knowledge for patients. Mr Hansen used to be
admitted to hospital regularly in an emergency ride with the ambulance.
Nowadays he has a supply of prednisone and antibiotics in his medicine
cabinet at home, so he can start treatment quickly if and when he needs
it. His last hospital admittance was three years ago. вҖҳWhen you get out of
breath,вҖҷ Mr Hansen says, вҖҳthe most important thing is to deal with your
panic. That helps a long way.вҖҷ
In theories of self-management, Mr Hansen has now obtained profes-
sional knowledge and has become a proto-professional, applying the
knowledge and know-how of professionals for taking pills. And indeed,
Mr Hansen knows that antibiotics cure inflammations. From the per-
spective of practical knowledge, however, Mr Hansen had to learn to de-
velop knowledge that is practical in his situation now and in the future.
He needs know-now, to find out when he must take the antibiotics, and if
he must take them now. He must discipline himself to use his body as an
instrument to sense this: he must not panic. He must decide if he needs
to take a pill or do something else.
The distinction between medical expertise and lay knowledge loses its
salience here, though one could say that Mr Hansen possesses the prac-
tical knowledge that, in its explicit form, used to be the sole expertise of
his doctor. But as a mere proposition, it is abstract. For Mr Hansen it has
become embodied knowledge that may be used by turning it into embod-
ied, lived practical know-now that may tell him whether he needs antibio-
tics in this situation. As a mere proposition, it would be useless to Mr
Hansen. Medical propositions need translation.
To complicate things, patients need to combine various forms of
knowledge, medical and other, even if these forms of knowledge seem incon-
gruous and do not add up. There were examples of this in the previous
chapter, where Mrs Jansen and Mrs Jaspersen had to coordinate differ-
ent forms of knowledge to deal with their disease. Bad lungs do not pre-
90
knowing patients

vent walks in the park. Mobility scooters do not do away with inhalers.
Monitoring devices do not stop fluid retention. Mr Griesemer was
shocked to learn he was supposed to get better by seeing a psychologist.
Mr Griesemer: I never knew you had to see a psychologist in here [the
clinic]. I used to think, whatвҖҷs a psychologist doing here! ItвҖҷs my lungs that
are sick. But, itвҖҷs a very emotional disease. I never expected that. IвҖҷd reached
this age, and never, up until one and a half, two years ago, IвҖҷd never ever
cried, so to speak. Hardly ever. But these last months, aw, IвҖҷm howling like a
baby. You see, youвҖҷre not allowed to be jealous of healthy people, whatever.
But you see people your own age out riding their bicycles. And you canвҖҷt do
that anymore. Well, that makes you feel really bad at times. I had to stop
working. I donвҖҷt want to talk about that. Still canвҖҷt.
Mr Griesemer had a hard time dealing not only with his physical ail-
ments but also with the sadness he felt, which his carers had diagnosed
as grief at losing his past abilities. Mr Griesemer never expected this to
happen to a body with sick lungs. He needed to adopt a new repertoire of
knowledge, skills and tools to cope with this in daily life. Living with
lungs that have given up meant finding ways to deal with tears and the
sense of loss.
Besides involving knowledge and know-how from various medical dis-
ciplines, diseases tend to be entangled in practices for which no specia-
list knowledge is at hand. They are part and parcel of the daily grind.
Interviewer: What did you learn in the clinic?
Mrs Yildrim: Well, my family, ehвҖҰ [laughs] I learned how to pace my energy,
looking after the kids and the housework, too. You see, I always love my
home to be spick and span, maybe too clean and tidy at times. I know that
when I have a bad day, I should just ignore the mess. And the next day,
when I feel well again, I donвҖҷt do it all at once but keep on splitting the
housework into little chunks. And with the kids too, I make it clear to them:
this is what mum can do. And yes: mummyвҖҷs now short of breath, and
mummy just canвҖҷt play with you. Not for a little while.
Here, it is not Mrs YildrimвҖҷs body that is the object of doctoring. She
must develop knowledge, skills and know-now to cope with her love of a
spick-and-span home and her energetic children wanting to play with
her. She had to re-arrange how she did the housework and how she
looked after the children. Again, a straightforward professional or lay,
medical or non-medical distinction does not do justice to the compli-
cated mix of relevant variables to be coordinated and reorganised here.
Lungs, children and norms all play their part. And there were yet other
problems to deal with, such as relinquishing work, ways of involving the
spouse, and so on. Patients had to fit these matters and develop practical
knowledge about them, often without professional advice.44
coordinating knowledge
91

When helpful remedies occur in daily life, even if they start out as
medical interventions, they do not have to retain a medical tint or tex-
ture. Practical remedies for dealing with COPD can be as unorthodox
and varied as the problems faced.
Mr Gregorus: The really hardest part was to accept it, and back then in 2003,
IвҖҷd had enough. I didnвҖҷt see the need to go on anymore. IвҖҷd had that many
diseases, really, if there was one tiny little virus going round, IвҖҷd be sure to
get it. Really. Then one of my daughters came in with that photo [he points
to a photo on the table] of three of my four grandkids. She came in and said
if I didnвҖҷt know the meaning of life yet, IвҖҷd just have to look at that photo and
then IвҖҷd be reminded. I donвҖҷt know if it helped me through, but itвҖҷs still a
very important photo. [laughs]. ItвҖҷs holy, thatвҖҷs why itвҖҷs in pride of place!
The picture вҖҳworksвҖҷ for Mr Gregorus, enabling him to not give up on life
or succumb to despair. The photo is an вҖҳeffectiveвҖҷ intervention, although
it would be nonsense to organise a clinical trial around photos on tables,
even if it proved to be a life-saving remedy in Mr GregorusвҖҷ case. Disci-
plinary boundaries are useful for professionals and patients. Nobody
would want to be given a pill that has not been thoroughly checked or
undergo a merely experimental operation by a creative surgeon. The pa-
tient, however, faces the task of arranging input from different disci-
plines in a meaningful way, even when the input is contradictory. Is it
despair or inflammation? Will it need a pill or a photo? How to combine
written-off lungs with the attitude that allows one to keep moving? Pa-
tients do the work of coordinating this knowledge вҖ“ if all goes well, with
the help of their clinicians. The patientвҖҷs position shows incoherent
forms of knowledge, unlike within a medical discipline. Patients jumble
many different logics relevant to daily life together in finicky practices
prone to change. This demands impressive know-now and the ability to
improvise in order to find ways of making this knowledge practical and
thus supportive of living with COPD.
Unhelpful knowledge, translation failures
Translations between particular forms of knowledge and liveable daily
life are not always successful. Medical practices may be counterproduc-
tive, as Mrs Thie points out:
Mrs Thie: That doctor, the substitute doctor, he said [imitates accent], вҖҳWell
missus, it wonвҖҷt get any better than this.вҖҷ Well, that gave me the jibbers! At
Lungs [hospital department] they are so pessimistic, they donвҖҷt give you
much hope. So youвҖҷve got to be optimistic yourself. Because if you listened
to themвҖҰ Of course, I know IвҖҷm ill and my lungs are very bad. But if you
donвҖҷt get over it and think, вҖҳI will copeвҖҷ, well, if you donвҖҷt do that, youвҖҷd die of
misery.
92
knowing patients

Another patient called the lung function test вҖҳincompatible with lifeвҖҷ, as
if its message was: with this poor lung function, you are already dead.
The fact that their lungs were not going to get any better scared patients
because, in the shape of a statement of fact about their body, it gave them
no handholds to organise life sensibly. If she accepted the proposition
about her lungs, Mrs Thie would вҖҳdie from miseryвҖҷ. What did help her
was knowledge that could be made useful вҖ“ with or despite her damaged
lungs. Mrs Thie did not shy away from the truth of the diagnosis (вҖҳI
know my lungs are very badвҖҷ) but from the implied pragmatics of this
fact. As an intervention in daily life, it was counterproductive. It had no
meaningful translation and improved nothing.
LetвҖҷs now compare information on lung capacity with information that
will help you cope with the difficulty of showering when you are out of
breath, as Mrs Jacobs describes here.
Mrs Jacobs: When youвҖҷre done with the shower, well, you towel off [demon-
strates drying her body and her hair], but she [her webcam friend] said: вҖҳYou
can put on a bathrobe and wait till youвҖҷre dry, you wonвҖҷt catch a coldвҖҷ. That
takes no energy, but drying yourself does! You have to learn to think like
this. What would you do: after a shower you grab a towel. But now I take 15
minutes. The rollator is near the door, I bring the phone, in case someone
calls. I take it easy and recover with my bathrobe on. Dry up a little, then put
on a little deo, pat a little cream on my face, and then I dress. And I shower
in the afternoons. I lie down for an hour or so, and shower after that.
In contrast to the knowledge derived from lung measurements, knowl-
edge about bathrobes and towels is directly useful to daily life, even if it
means changing the drying routine and no longer showering in the
morning. The difference is not about empathy, or that towels are not
medical solutions but about pragmatics. The advice can be tested and
used at once. Instead of translation, it just needs a little rearrangement
to put into practice, and instead of a depressing interpretation, it sup-
plies positive instruction. As a form of knowledge it is provisional (it
may work for Mrs Jacobs and her friend, but not for somebody else).
But it is ready to be tested and close to everyday practice.
However, even when advice is practical, translations of various types
of knowledge do not always succeed. Sometimes, the body will just not
cooperate.
Mrs Peters: I feel too young, and that makes it extremely hard. You want to
do so many things, but you just canвҖҷt anymore. The body says, stop. I was in
good shape. Physically, I was already fit, but in the clinic I got even better.
My arms can still pull an incredible load and my legs can push tremendous
loads, and everybody working in the clinic was really happy with that. But
then IвҖҷd think: What good does it do if my lungs donвҖҷt work. WhatвҖҷs the use?
coordinating knowledge
93

Patients work on developing muscle tone in the clinic, and for many this
meant their overall condition improved. They were more capable of
walking. For Mrs Peters, however, more muscle power did not lead to
walking longer distances or less breathlessness. Cooperation between
the body of muscles and the body of breath had reached its limits.
At other times, patients did not translate practical knowledge into daily
life practices because they did not want to give up the things they found
important. For instance, in a session on self-care in the clinic, the pa-
tients had to list all the domestic activities they would normally do when
they expected visitors.
Caregiver: вҖҳHave you all chosen the things you would or wouldnвҖҷt do?вҖҷ
In reply, everyone says their home must at least be tidy when visitors come.
Mr Fransen: вҖҳIвҖҷd take the vacuum cleaner and clean up the mess, even if it
means IвҖҷd be knocked out when the visitors arrive.вҖҷ
Mrs Pietersen agrees. вҖҳThe house should be dusted, vacuumed, the dishes
done and the floor should be mopped. It is impossible to think that my
visitors would come in to a pigsty, thatвҖҷs not how it should be.вҖҷ She adds,
вҖҳAnd when IвҖҷm visiting someone else I always look to see if their house is
clean. ItвҖҷs how it is, and how it should be.вҖҷ
Mr Fransen: вҖҳIвҖҷd die of shame if my house was a mess. IвҖҷd do anything, even
if I had to crawl over the floor with the vacuum cleaner.вҖҷ
Again Mrs Pietersen agrees.
The patients in this discussion value cleanliness over fitness. To them, it
is out of the question to show visitors a house that is not clean. Dealing
with disease is one thing among many other important things in life.
People with COPD have to coordinate different problems and values in
life. In doing so, they may make decisions that do not fit a medical logic,
but they are rational from a different perspective. Concerns about chil-
dren, not wanting to stand out in social events, or taking on too many
tasks were among the reasons patients gave for neglecting their bodies.
These trade-offs were unfortunate but unavoidable in a life with chronic
disease.
Knowing patients
My analysis of bodies, medical practices and practical knowledge show
how problematic it is to simply put professionals and patients directly
opposite each other, as in expert versus lay, clinic versus home, knowers
versus believers. Nor does it make sense to equate their knowledge as
the same as in the policy on expert patients and studies of patient move-
ments. It would be a loss of potential as well as an underestimation of
the work patients have to do if scholars and patient activists would not
ask questions about their knowledge or only focus on matters of power,
94
knowing patients

such as staging patients as consumers. Instead, the analysis showed the
complexity of using and developing practical knowledge in the daily life
practices of people with COPD.
Difficulties of knowing-now and the complications arising from trans-
porting propositional knowledge and directives across situations create
this complexity. This requires embodied skills as well as a talent for im-
provisation. Patients need translation processes to turn different kinds of
knowledge вҖ“ such as knowledge from devices and specialists вҖ“ into prac-
tically useful knowledge that enables living a liveable life with disease.
There are no guarantees for success. Translations of harsh medical inter-
pretations are problematic, and there are disobedient bodies and com-
peting values. The complexity of putting medical knowledge to use helps
us to understand patient вҖҳincomplianceвҖҷ not as ruthless sabotage but as
the difficulty of translating knowledge to fit daily life practices and com-
bining it with other matters of importance. Medical directives cannot be
lived by the book, simply because lives are not books but an accumula-
tion of practices.
Added to this complexity is the variety of вҖҳlaboratoriesвҖҷ or scientific
disciplines involved. The patients must combine physiotherapy with
medication management; they need to sort out entanglements with
peak flow meters and embarrassments; tears and panic attacks need to
be treated with training in breathing techniques, with kindness or do-
mestic wisdom. The analysis pointed out that separating medical knowl-
edge from more homely forms of knowledge is not very useful in daily
life; both are interventions in daily life practices. However, the disciplin-
ary boundaries do make sense to establish the effects of treatment. Pa-
tients may exchange and test the more homely tricks for dealing with
disease far more freely. Practical solutions may not be helpful to every-
one, but the real problem is that they travel badly. They do not easily fit
medical specialisms. Nursing and physiotherapy could be the exception,
but not all people with COPD have access to these disciplines. Homely
solutions travel especially well when patients care for each other. This is
an important lesson for developing future health care practices and pol-
icy.
Practical knowledge and webcams
Patients use practical knowledge. The telecare devices may support or
hinder this use, but whichever way, they shape it together with other
technologies and medical advice. The webcam may give access to an-
other patientвҖҷs explicit knowledge. It may facilitate practices that arrange
know-now for participants, sensing and making sense of events together,
and practices that supply first aid and support. The webcams in this
practice unleashed a caring community of patients and supported their
sharing of practical knowledge. For a patient group with little вҖҳvoiceвҖҷ or
practical knowledge and webcams
95

prospect of therapeutic solutions, webcams and patients together pro-
vided each other with impressive forms of вҖҳtogether managementвҖҷ.45
96
knowing patients

Part III
Routines and
efficiencies


6 Zooming in on webcams
On the workings of a modest technology
Doing invisible work
The previous chapter discussed the important role that webcams play
when people with COPD exchange and develop their practical knowl-
edge. The webcam gave access to knowledge and directed people to devel-
op practical knowledge together. However, in contrast to the monitoring
device in Chapter 4, the webcam did not seem to do much to shape the
content of the exchanged knowledge. Instead of specifically defining, say,
deviant measurements as problems to care for, the webcams seemed to
leave the definition of problems open to the people using them.1 The
technology was behaving modestly. But just how modest is a webcam?
In this chapter I look closely at the more hidden and seemingly less
rigorous ways in which webcams do structure care and contribute to the
process of fitting. The aim is to learn how this open, unassuming tech-
nology tames and structures conversations, albeit not deterministically. I
analyse вҖҳclose-upsвҖҷ of the webcam directing routines and perceptions in
care practice, influencing what that care came to be about. I quote usersвҖҷ
experiences and analyse how both users and researcher observe the
workings of the webcam. How does the webcam help create particular
situations and experiences? How does a webcam вҖҳworkвҖҷ in the practice
of people with COPD?
Webcam practices
For the analysis I mainly use material from the rehabilitation clinic for
people with COPD or asthma. Another set of material comes from a
homecare organisation caring for patients suffering from severe COPD.
In the rehabilitation clinic, patients volunteering to participate in the
project received a computer with a webcam at home on their discharge
from the clinic. They could use the webcam to keep in touch with their
main carer in the clinic, the social worker. And, as I described before,
they could also connect to the patients they had spent time with in the
clinic as well as send email and surf the internet. The patients received
the webcam for up to three months of follow-up care.
In the homecare organisation, the specialist nurse used the webcam to
call on COPD patients every week. Here, there was no time limit on
webcam use; nurses kept an eye on their patients as long as both parties
thought it was useful. Besides contact with the nurse, patients could also
99

have webcam contact with other homecare patients if they had a webcam
too. At the time of the study, this webcam function was under discussion
because patients were not using it spontaneously. Therefore, the profes-
sionals organised social meetings to acquaint webcam users with each
other. I use the material from the homecare patients to demonstrate
what webcams do with novice users вҖ“ and the other way around.
Webcams in action
There are interesting studies on how webcams work. SГӨvenstedt, Zing-
mark & Sandman define the webcam as an invisible technology that
does not influence human communication by itself.2 They state: вҖҳTrans-
parency [in telecare via videophone] is understood [...] as a sense of pre-
sence and reality in the communication, even though it is mediated
through technical devices.вҖҷ The webcam is seen to offer a frame to com-
municate through, arranging what SГӨvenstedt and colleagues, quoting
Knudsen, call telepresence. The authors describe telepresence as вҖҳthe sub-
jective experience of being together with a person in one place when one
is geographically situated in anotherвҖҷ. The technology itself is invisible,
something to вҖҳlook throughвҖҷ as if it were a window on the world. As with
a pair of spectacles, it modulates but does not change what is there to be
seen. It merely shows вҖҳwhat is thereвҖҷ without influencing its object.
However, Chapter 4 showed that the webcam did change care and the
object of care in various ways. The webcams helped to point out where to
turn to in times of trouble. The webcam gave вҖҳdirectionsвҖҷ for discussing
both the nature and the solutions of problems with others. It changed
the content of the conversations previously held on the telephone, for
instance by helping carers and patients to вҖҳsee throughвҖҷ the embarrass-
ment of reporting problems. In a psychiatric care setting for patients
who fear social contacts, the patients see the absence of physical or ma-
terial elements вҖ“ such as smell, touch, the substance of the other person
and their physical space вҖ“ as a positive contribution to their care.3 A web-
cam is not a transparent window on the world. It creates events that were
not there before and would have been impossible to create without it.
Webcam use builds new infrastructure, and it actively shapes care, even
if the users are not aware of this.
вҖҳIt is much more personal than the telephoneвҖҷ
How does the webcam shape care yet stay invisible? In general, my in-
formants (patients and carers) used the webcam to have personal conver-
sations. Both carers and patients praised the intimate nature of personal
contact over the webcam. It outran the telephone by far, and people said
it resembled вҖҳreal encountersвҖҷ far better than a telephone conversation.4
Communication partners repeatedly used the same phrase; they felt they
100
zooming in on webcams

were вҖҳtogether in the same roomвҖҷ. Indeed, it seems they achieved the
subjective experience of telepresence.
How did this close contact happen? Patients and carers often de-
scribed the successes of the webcam by pointing to the visual element it
added to the telephoneвҖҷs ability to transmit sound. They could hear and
see one another. Being able to see the other person made it easy to re-
spond and follow up on the other personвҖҷs reactions; it made taking
turns easier.
Social worker: Conversations can get quite intense. How can I explain
this...? On the phone, youвҖҷve only got words and tone of voice. You can hear
if someone is out of breath, if theyвҖҷre tense, having trouble breathing, or
trembling. You know what it means if they compose their sentences in a
certain way. ItвҖҷs different when you can see it all happening as well. Then
you are closer, as if youвҖҷre together, in the same room. Eighty percent of
communication is non-verbal anyway. You lose all that on the phone.5
Although the list of non-verbal elements this carer can hear on the
phone is impressive, he makes it clear that being able to look at your
conversation partner allows you to be a better listener as well, because
listening is a visual practice as well as an acoustic one. The non-verbal
communication that webcams enable makes conversations more perso-
nal than on the telephone. Seeing the other person allows you to вҖҳreadвҖҷ
the listener better, you can see the listener doing just that: listening.
Social worker: Take the two ladies I chat with [on the webcam]. It should be
follow-up care, but is it? No. They simply have lots of problems. And I listen
to their stories and nod understandingly. I keep quiet, IвҖҷm more of a sound-
ing board [praatpaal] for them. ThatвҖҷs quite a different effect from what the
telephone allows for.
Obviously, nodding quietly would be ineffective in a telephone conversa-
tion since it involves a gesture instead of words, something visual and
not a sound. Because both partners can see each other and react to what
they see, the webcam can tune and relate interactions. Personal conver-
sations вҖҳfitвҖҷ the way care is delivered through the webcam.
As mentioned before, the webcam helped social workers and nurses
make their care more effective. They could see if the patients were not
looking well, even if the patients were embarrassed to вҖҳconfessвҖҷ this and
said they were fine. Regular contact, strengthened by the intensity, rein-
forced the treatment. It could stimulate patients to work on their treat-
ment plans or keep the intention to вҖҳquit smokingвҖҷ on the agenda. Pa-
tients also used the webcam for chats and distraction, to get their minds
off their illness. It was important that their conversation partners knew
about COPD. Then patients were saved the judgmental stares of the ig-
norant.6 They felt recognised and respected by fellow patients, whereas
вҖҳit is much more personal than the telephoneвҖҷ
101

they felt misunderstood by people who failed to acknowledge their invis-
ible disease.
Webcams intensify concentration
Webcam users set and shaped all these tasks. Besides making conversa-
tion partners mutually visible, what did the webcam contribute to the in-
tensely personal experience of conversation? How did it help shape this
experience? The first thing to note is that the webcam seemed to concen-
trate conversation.7 Talking on the webcam demands more attention
than talking on the phone. You can do other things while you are on the
phone, with mobile phones you could be anywhere when someone
calls.8 On a webcam, it is different. You have to attend the вҖҳmeetingвҖҷ at a
specific location вҖ“ that is, at the computer. You have to prepare for the
meeting, and sit in a particular position to stay in frame. Moving out of
the camera frame cuts the contact at once. There is less distraction from
peripheral events. Participants concentrate on their task and can only do
other things as well if it is not a problem that the other witnesses this.
Interestingly, this concentration could be relieved in specific situa-
tions. For instance, two patients sometimes took up domestic work dur-
ing their webcam chats.
Mrs Van Houten: I had Jane on the webcam once. And I says to her: вҖҳJeez,
youвҖҷre putting yourself out!вҖҷ So she says to me: вҖҳYes, IвҖҷm doing the ironing as
we speak and why not? After all, you can talk and knit at the same time!вҖҷ
[This is a Dutch saying to encourage people to continue work while talking.]
All these little things are nice. ItвҖҷs different contact from when you only
phone someone every once and a while. ItвҖҷs far more cosy [gezelliger]!
It would be very impolite for a patient to do the ironing while conversing
with the carer. But it is permissible for experienced webcam users in the
informal interaction of friendship. It took place in variation to more fo-
cused and serious conversations.
The concentration in serious conversations also has to do with the way
people look at a computer screen. The screen invites fixed gazing. SГӨven-
stedt and colleagues measured the amount of time conversation partners
spent gazing at the screen during video conversations. In a care setting,
conversation partners spent 92% of the total time looking at the screen,
whereas in direct conversations the percentage spent looking at the part-
ner is around 50%.9 This is a huge difference. Staring fixedly at the
other is an artefact of webcam use. Moving out of the frame or diverting
the eyes too long would mean you are breaking the contact.
Intense gazing is tolerable because webcam users do not look each
other in the eye directly. The usual angle of a webcam makes people
watching the screen seem to be casting their eyes downward. Thus, web-
cam users can stare at each other on the screen, but not directly into the
102
zooming in on webcams

eyes. This would be intolerable in encounters in the same space. Look-
ing at someoneвҖҷs face for 92% of the time would feel very uncomforta-
ble. It would be aggressive and too intense. Encounters in the same
space contain many opportunities for participants to shift their gaze
while still staying in touch. These encounters also demand that those
present do so.
Gazing enhanced the concentration of activities, and so did the fram-
ing of the webcam shot. With the webcam mounted on the top edge of the
computer screen, the camera angle frames the face and the upper body.
The shot is steady: you cannot move much, or you would put yourself
out of the frame. Thus, the webcam creates an exemplary face-to-face en-
counter, it being even more about faces than encounters in the same
space. Apart from faces, the webcam does not present much else to look
at. The things surrounding the computer вҖ“ as well as the computer itself
вҖ“ are either invisible or irrelevant background clutter. This iconic face-to-
face-ness excludes surroundings, other body parts, scents, handshakes
and coffee cups. The frame of the webcam image sets a fixed stage for
focused personal conversations.
Breaking the intensity
Where participants were friends, the intensity was often broken by the
lightness of the chatter in webcam contacts; they showed more of their
homes or they showed objects made or deemed important. It seemed
that when the webcam partners were friends, there was no need or de-
sire for intensity in all conversations. They did not have serious talks all
the time. A chat could be just the thing to get away from your troubles. It
was okay to reveal more about yourself, your home and your private life.
Anne: One day I was chatting with Sandra [a fellow patient], and my mother
and father came in. And Sandra said: вҖҳWell, let me see them a bit!вҖҷ So my
mother sat down at the computer, and I said, вҖҳSo, this is my mumвҖҷ. You see?
That was really fun. Another really nice thing was that in the clinic IвҖҷd been
sewing a dress, for a wedding. Then the dress was ready when I was back
home. So [her social worker] said: вҖҳOh, show it to me!вҖҷ And I could, just by
holding it up to the camera.
Patients who had become friends introduced each other to their family
and friends, showed off things they had made and invited spouses to
join the conversation. Thus, the patients experienced the friendly web-
cam visit as a live visit to the home, and the better the contacts were, the
more of the home and oneвҖҷs private life could be revealed to conversation
partners. It relaxed the intensity of the initial face-to-face-ness.
However, not all webcam users felt that seeing the other made the
conversation more interesting. These two women were practising con-
versing by webcam in the clinic:
вҖҳit is much more personal than the telephoneвҖҷ
103

Greta and Miriam are sitting in the training room, each at their own compu-
ter. Greta invites Miriam to a video chat by clicking on MiriamвҖҷs address.
Miriam gets a popup menu on her computer screen, which needs a mouse
click to activate a choice. She has to choose whether she wants to accept the
invitation or not. She clicks вҖҳacceptвҖҷ and with a squeal of enthusiasm wel-
comes GretaвҖҷs image on her screen. The teacher shows them how to enlarge
or reduce the image, by clicking on buttons or dragging it with the mouse.
Both Greta and Miriam keep the image small. They are far more interested
in the option to send text messages and busily try this out. Greta comments
that she finds the image too big when it fills the screen. It distracts her from
the text messages.
Because Greta and Miriam were вҖҳsocialisedвҖҷ using MSN (real-time text
messages) вҖ“ the MSN had unleashed and tamed them вҖ“ they could
ignore the image and concentrate on typing and reading. Webcam tech-
nology may invite, seduce or facilitate certain uses, but it cannot determine
or direct them, or only specific elements of these uses.10 As such, it re-
mains a modest and open technology. However, if people can be tempted
to use a webcam properly, as a visual communication medium, its main
endeavour is to create closeness. The webcam helps to shape intimate
and personal relations.
Together in the same room
In this context of care and support, the subtle workings of the webcam
brought about and aided a typically personal conversation. The static
position of the webcam, the framing of the faces and the gazing at the
screen concentrated the conversation and gave it the characteristics of a
serious talk. Added to the feeling of closeness was the shared experience
of being together in one room вҖ“ telepresence, as SГӨvenstedt and Knud-
sen call it. The phone calls used in follow-up care prior to the webcam
could not attain this telepresence. On the phone, people were always
вҖҳfine!вҖҷ The phone gives few clues that can help a carer confirm or contra-
dict such blithe statements.
So, the webcam made both patients and carers feel as if they were in
the same room together when they werenвҖҷt in the same physical space.
What defines the space you are in when you are вҖҳtogetherвҖҷ but in geo-
graphically separate rooms?
Mrs Jones: ItвҖҷs just so much more personal [than the phone]. You can see
one another and... Yes, I have the feeling that a conversation lasts far longer;
you tell far more than you would over the phone. You are closer to each
other. ItвҖҷs like youвҖҷre visiting the social worker, as if youвҖҷre in the same
room. You really have to make time for it.
104
zooming in on webcams

Mrs Jones feels as if she were actually calling on her social worker,
whom she вҖҳwent to seeвҖҷ in the clinic. Talking to their carers on the web-
cam, patients saw the space they shared as the social workerвҖҷs office,
even if this place was not the actual place patients visited in real life. In
order to save on cost, the homecare organisation had set up one webcam
centrally for all social workers to use. The patients, however, were used
to visiting their social workerвҖҷs office, and this dynamic did not change
for them, even if the social worker initiated contact at the appointed
time. Probably, established routines defined the space as вҖҳthe social
workerвҖҷs officeвҖҷ. The place of visit was, however, different for the care-
givers.
Social worker: On the webcam you can see the cigarette smoking in the
background. If someone says вҖҳIвҖҷm fineвҖҷ, you can see from the way they hold
their body that they are not fine at all. When you can see things, itвҖҷs easier.
You can say, вҖҳYour shoulders are bunched, are you really okay? Did you really
get out of the house?вҖҷ It [the webcam] is an extra aid to check quote-unquote
on a person. You can see and talk about things.
Clearly, the social worker is observing the patient in the patientвҖҷs home.
It is as though he вҖҳwent to see the patientвҖҷ. Social workers talked about
home visits and watched out for relevant indications for treatment such as
sloppy dress or packets of cigarettes lying around. The conversation part-
ners did indeed achieve telepresence, the sense of being in the same
room together, in terms of intimacy but not in terms of space. Each con-
versation partner met the other in a different room. Patient and carer
met in the space belonging to the other. Their conversation constituted a
topologically reversed telepresence: I am at your place, and you are in mine.
Topologically reversed telepresence would be вҖҳfeeling together in one
room, while physically separated and subjectively being in the place
where the other isвҖҷ. You are indeed in two places at one time, and not
necessarily in the space where the other person thinks you are.
Figure 1 Topologically reversed telepresence
together in the same room
105

The topological mix of spaces was not fixed. It could change dramatically
if patients felt the carerвҖҷs gaze had become intrusive. Then, patients were
no longer in the caregiverвҖҷs office. They felt watched, spied on at home.
This is topologically congruent telepresence; subjectively, both partners are
in the physical space occupied by one partner.
Figure 2 Topologically congruent telepresence
As you can see in the second figure, the direction of the gaze changes.
For topologically congruent telepresence, both people are in the space
belonging to one. One is вҖҳlooking inвҖҷ from an unspecified elsewhere, the
other is fixed in their own geographical (and emotional) space. When
this space is the home, telepresence is experienced as more intrusive
than when one visits the other elsewhere. Note that placing both in the
carerвҖҷs office is rare; this would make the carer the object of observation.
Apparently important to evoking a positive feeling of telepresence is
that the space must feel safe for the task at hand. вҖҳGazing outвҖҷ provides a
position of control and activity, whereas вҖҳbeing gazed atвҖҷ is a far more
vulnerable position. The fuzziness of the space where befriended pa-
tients meet each other confirms this. It is topologically reversed,
switches between congruencies or between congruence and reversed
spaces. When showing something off or discussing one partnerвҖҷs pro-
blem, they were in the place of the person either showing or revealing
something. Chatting away, they could be anywhere. When both were
ironing, they were visiting each otherвҖҷs place. How this game with space
is enacted in different contexts is a matter for further research.
What does it reveal about the webcam? Again, the webcam does not
determine what happens but creates specific experiences that are not
usually possible when people meet in the same actual space. Mixing
spaces allows the feeling of intimacy, of being in the same room, even
while the intimacy emerges by actually meeting in different places, objec-
tively as well as subjectively. The experience of being in the same room вҖ“
that is, in the home of the patient вҖ“ could be threatening for the patient
when the one вҖҳlooking inвҖҷ was the carer. How unassuming is this for a
106
zooming in on webcams

modest technology? Even though feelings of intrusion are striking, the
webcam does not create them. It enables these feelings to arise by creat-
ing the possibility of changing space.
Trust, familiarity and intrusion
If webcam conversations created intimacy, intimacy was a precondition
for developing satisfactory webcam conversations as well. Patients re-
garded webcam contact with a strange carer who did not already know
them as useless.11
Mrs Green: That social worker has been my supervisor for 12 weeks, so she
knows all my ins and outs. She knows the plan and what went on when I
was in the clinic. If it had been somebody else, somebody I didnвҖҷt know, it
wouldnвҖҷt have worked, no way. If someone doesnвҖҷt really know you, they first
have to get into your whole story. It just doesnвҖҷt work. Only, truly, with your
own social worker. They can say: вҖҳWe decided on this, this and that in the
clinic, and you had these problems here, so how is it going for you now?вҖҷ
YouвҖҷd never get that with a social worker you donвҖҷt know.
Seeing and being seen on the webcam by an unknown person did not
make sense, because the added value of being able to see one another
did not pay off if the other did not вҖҳknow your whole storyвҖҷ. Patients had
become experts on their lives and disease and had nothing to gain from
general directions. They had plenty of that in their regular care. They
needed detailed knowledge about their lives and bodies if follow-up care
was to be of any real help. Intimacy or familiarity brought knowledge
and tools to interpret a particular individualвҖҷs situation (know-now).
Mrs Nicholson: When I go to a sports class for people with chronic disease, I
see my coaches once every two weeks. They donвҖҷt know me at all. I find [the
rehabilitation clinic] more important. You get feedback from somebody
whoвҖҷs known you a long time and who has far more knowledge about
COPD.
Patients talking to a new social worker reported that they were not happy
with their webcam contact. It had no added value. The social worker
could not вҖҳsee wellвҖҷ because they were unfamiliar with the way patients
might look and behave when in or out of trouble. Their вҖҳclinical gazeвҖҷ
was superficial, even if expert in general matters of COPD. It was tuned
to a generalised patient, not to the individual.
The patients experienced the familiarity of the carer as very positive or
even as a sine qua non for webcam contact. Familiarity had, however, its
downside as well. The informed gaze, tuned perfectly to the individual
patient, could also be experienced as especially and effectively intru-
trust, familiarity and intrusion
107

sive.12 The carer was not just an anonymous and objective observer or
вҖҳBig BrotherвҖҷ. He вҖ“ or rather, she, to continue the gendered metaphor вҖ“
was a well-informed вҖҳBig SisterвҖҷ (nursing sister) who not merely kept an
eye on the patient but also knew what to watch out for due to intimate
knowledge of her patientвҖҷs personal ins and outs. In contrast to unfami-
liar observers monitoring by camera or a monitoring device, Big SisterвҖҷs
experience and knowledge of individual traits and particularities ensured
reliable, targeted registration of what was going on. Observing her pa-
tients, Big Sister could be an even better judge of their situation than the
patients themselves.
Mrs Strand: When I talked to her [the social worker] the first time, I was
rather ill. She noticed and so she said: вҖҳReally, if I were you IвҖҷd call the hos-
pital now.вҖҷ So I did and I was admitted. So then I said to her: вҖҳThanks a lot!вҖҷ
ItвҖҷs not that I want to hide from it, but yes, maybe I hadnвҖҷt noticed how bad I
was myself, so there you go!
The observer was right to connect what she had seen to Mrs StrandвҖҷs
asthma. Although the outcome was inevitable in due course, Mrs Strand
disliked the fact that her social worker had suggested she be admitted to
hospital before she had reached same conclusion herself. Worried others
who вҖҳkeep an eye on youвҖҷ may be intrusive, especially because they know
you so well and are thus authoritative in their perceptions and sugges-
tions about what to do. Indeed, вҖҳbeing seen by the social workerвҖҷ could be
a major intervention.
But Big Sister could also be wrong in her observations.
Mrs Strand: One disadvantage [of the webcam] is that she can see you. Yes,
as far as they [social workers] are concerned, thatвҖҷs good, of course. But last
week she said: вҖҳYou look very tired.вҖҷ And then I thought: Grrr! [laughs] I had
good reason to look tired, it was because my child was ill. Over the phone
she wouldnвҖҷt have seen that!
Knowing the caregiver and being known to them may imply intimate
forms of accountability. Yet the gaze of the observer is fallible and needs
confirmation from the one observed.13 The examples clearly show how
powerful the intimate gaze is. Mostly, patients regarded the clinical eye,
with its thorough knowledge of COPD as well as their personal situation,
as very helpful. However, the webcam brought this well-informed gaze
into the home, and combined with the intense contact and a topologi-
cally congruent telepresence, it may become threatening and intrusive.
Carers with the capacity to turn indications into symptoms with scary
medical consequences stare at you in your home. A webcam has the
capacity to support and strengthen intimate relations, but the device also
permits what patients experience as abuse of this intimacy.
108
zooming in on webcams

Building on existing relations
Relations between webcam partners have to be close if webcam contacts
are to make any sense at all, and if they were not, the patients did not
experience webcam contacts as helpful. Patients strongly abhorred hav-
ing webcam conversations with people they had not met before and thus
did not know at all. They were unanimous about not wanting to connect
with people they did not know. One patient said she disliked being visi-
ble even symbolically to these strangers through the webcam system.
Mrs Munichs: What bothers me, with MSN you can be online while your
status displays вҖҳofflineвҖҷ. But with the [webcam], you canвҖҷt do that. When you
switch the computer on, anyone [on the webcam network] can see straight
away that I am online. Once I was called straight away, the very moment I
went online. I donвҖҷt like that. I didnвҖҷt know what to say to this woman, I
didnвҖҷt know her. But I couldnвҖҷt switch it off [the sign that she is online]. And
to decline an invitation [for a video chat], thatвҖҷs not easy. It sounds so mean:
вҖҳI donвҖҷt accept the invitationвҖҷ. So I talked to her anyway. I would like to see
when someone goes online, but I donвҖҷt want to be online myself the whole
day. So I leave the computer switched off.
This is a clear example of topological congruence, for Mrs Munichs feels
she is being watched from somewhere in her private space. Being visible
here means being exposed and available without being aware of who is
actually вҖҳlooking inвҖҷ.
It is possible, however, to change the rules for relating by webcam.
The webcam does not give a fixed directive that вҖҳone cannot meet stran-
gers over the webcamвҖҷ. Pappas and Seale show in their conversation ana-
lysis that, when used in care, webcam contact is a new form of commu-
nication.14 Novice users have to negotiate the rules for using the new
platform. In the homecare webcam project one woman did sponta-
neously call a stranger enrolled in the same webcam programme.
Although they set out straight away to have a neighbourly chat вҖҳover the
fenceвҖҷ, checking out mutual acquaintances and places both had visited,
they negotiated terms of use for this new way of contact.
Mrs Dantzig: Well, I thought, letвҖҷs call Mrs De Bruin, that would be really
nice!
Mrs De Bruin: Yes, it is nice. We could do it more often. ItвҖҷs a solution,
especially with this weather. [Heavy snow kept many older people at home
in the winter of 2009-10.]
Mrs Dantzig: Yes, IвҖҷve been stuck at home for four weeks already.
Mrs De Bruin: Yes, it breaks the day a little, doesnвҖҷt it?
Mrs Dantzig: Yes! You donвҖҷt have to do it for hours, but every now and then,
I think it is really nice.
Mrs De Bruin: Yes, yes, yes.
building on existing relations
109

[вҖҰ]
Mrs De Bruin [rounding off the conversation]: Anyway, I did appreciate it
very much when you called. And I will certainly call you back one of these
days.
Mrs Dantzig: I think itвҖҷs wonderful, too.
Mrs De Bruin: Not every day, though.
Mrs Dantzig: No, thatвҖҷs not necessary. But I think itвҖҷs really nice I met you.
In this first spontaneous webcam encounter, Mrs Dantzig and Mrs De
Bruin established new ground rules for how often and how long they
would chat on the webcam and to what end. However, people who were
not shy sometimes ran into trouble if they contacted people they did not
already know. One woman thought that the aim of the webcam project
was to support others by webcam. Therefore she started calling people,
under the impression that the others were expecting her call. She had
some unsettling experiences.
Mrs Sommer: ErmвҖҰ I called a woman once and she said: вҖҳI donвҖҷt know you!вҖҷ
So she cut me off real quick. And one day there was this man, apparently he
was looking for contact with somebody. IвҖҷd just spoken to the [home]carers,
so I was sitting at the computer thinking, вҖҳshall I play another game, or do
something elseвҖҷ, and then I got this man on the screen. So I said: вҖҳGood
afternoon, can I help you?вҖҷ Well, he just sat there, staring, and didnвҖҷt say a
thing. Who it was, I wouldnвҖҷt know. An old man, he was. And he had the
device [webcam]. As for the rest, I donвҖҷt know, I havenвҖҷt tried to contact the
others, because, well, I donвҖҷt know if these people would agree to it.
Some people daring to try out the new platform were scared off, but
most could not imagine what on earth they would talk about with stran-
gers. They knew others were members of the same homecare organisa-
tion, but that did not give them enough in common. You would certainly
not want to discuss your disease with a stranger.
Mrs Quest: IвҖҷm seldom in touch with the others [COPD patients, by web-
cam]. I donвҖҷt have time, I donвҖҷt really feel like doing it. What would you get?
YouвҖҷd both go: вҖҳOh, I suffer this or that, IвҖҷve got pains in my arms and legs.вҖҷ
And then IвҖҷd think: I donвҖҷt want to know, and they donвҖҷt have to know this
about me. Sounds crazy, maybe, but I donвҖҷt want to burden other people
with my ailments. These people [others in the project] have COPD too. And
if they said: вҖҳOh, IвҖҷm so out of breath and I so need my inhaler!вҖҷ Well, same
here, but why tell everybody about it? Who needs to know? ThatвҖҷs what I
think, at least. Maybe others think it is wonderful to talk about that together.
But as for me, so far, I donвҖҷt need to know about other peopleвҖҷs sufferings.
In contrast with the successful caring community that patients had es-
tablished after their discharge from the rehabilitation clinic, some pa-
110
zooming in on webcams

tients in homecare could not imagine getting anything out of a chat with
a fellow patient. They did not know the others, were not friends, and
could not imagine anything other than stilted conversations. The idea of
exchanging practical knowledge was absent in this practice. Rather than
knowledge, the patients expected to exchange вҖҳcomplaintsвҖҷ. It comes as
no surprise that they did not see this as an attractive proposition. It
shows that friendship is an important ingredient for practices in which
fellow patients may care for each other. If one shares nothing but a dis-
ease, there is no reason to become acquainted. Caring relations can only
develop after friendship and shared interests develop first.15
Magnifying relational distance
The role of the webcam is to frame the relationship between its users in
a particular way. People use webcams in situations where people who
look at and are being looked at know one another and have a friendly,
caring and understanding relationship. You may not know what space
your conversation partner is in, you do know the space you are in your-
self: this space is your own home.16 This is especially clear when stran-
gers вҖҳintrudeвҖҷ. If there is no connection between persons looking at each
other through the webcam, webcam communication does not resemble
an actual meeting anywhere. It is instead a rude intrusion on personal
privacy, or misplaced intimacy. If these visits bring about вҖҳpresence and
reality in communicationвҖҷ, they do so negatively, as an unwanted pre-
sence and reality that breaches the privacy of the home. It is awkward
and undesired telepresence.
The webcam in this context thus changes geographical distance into a
relational distance. It works best when the imposed relational distance
fits the actual relational distance, for instance when talking to a friend or
trusted carer. When relational distance diverges, the webcam seems to
add to the strangeness or indifference experienced. The distance set by
the webcam is then no longer appropriate. The stranger becomes even
stranger on entering oneвҖҷs home; uninteresting or empty topics make
contact even more meaningless.17 This may be different for different
people or different generations, or it may change if webcams become
more common. It is clear, however, that the patients in the study did not
want to invite вҖҳjust anyone from the phonebookвҖҷ into their homes.
Framing and magnifying relational distance is quite an achievement
for a webcam, even if its position in the home contributed much to this.
Although there is space for users to ignore the relational distance, it al-
most never happened in the projects studied. The webcam made it hard
to create a caring community out of members who did not know each
other. Literally, they did not care. The webcam was better at facilitating
relationships between people who did know and like each other. The
webcam therefore did not stimulate contact with new people, especially
magnifying relational distance
111

because the space in which webcam users meet is in their respective
homes. Meeting a new person would be less strange if it took place in a
more neutral space.
What webcams do
Webcam technology seems open and unassuming, yet it influences and
shapes care practices in very specific ways. It does this even if partici-
pants are unaware of the role this invisible technology plays in the
course of a conversation. The webcam was seen to concentrate the task at
hand. Because of the way a webcam conversation is set up, the way it
frames the faces projected on the computer screen, it is difficult to do
anything other than gaze at the screen. Framing makes distracting con-
texts disappear and forces conversation partners to focus on the conver-
sation вҖ“ and on the face rather than the eyes of the other. The result is
the hyper-intense face-to-face topology described in this chapter.
It also concentrated the relevant tasks of conversation partners. If they
were listening or caring, they were doing just that. Experienced webcam
users could reduce the visual intensity the webcam provoked. They could
chatter nonsense while ironing, they drew other people into the frame or
showed (off) other objects, not just their faces. They revealed more of
themselves and of their homes, but only on the condition that the rela-
tionship was intimate enough to allow this to happen.
Webcams magnified something, not merely in a visual sense, the way a
magnifying glass makes things visible by blowing up their size or bring-
ing objects closer. Instead, what the webcams magnified were the existing
characteristics of the social relationship between the webcam users. The
strange, unknown person encountered over the webcam became even
stranger, maybe even scary or intrusive. A friend or trusted carer became
even closer, as the webcam facilitated communication and support,
benefitting an already good relationship. Hovering in the background
could be вҖҳBig SisterвҖҷ and her close surveillance of the patientвҖҷs home.
Webcam conversation became indifferent and pointless when conducted
with a neutral person such as an unfamiliar caregiver or a vaguely
known fellow patient. There was nothing to talk about that demanded
the intensity of a webcam conversation. And when there is nothing to
say, the webcam mercilessly exposes this.
I described this magnification in terms of relational (instead of geo-
graphical) distance and space. Webcam-imposed relational distance
might diverge from the relational distance between the persons meeting.
This divergence relates to the location of the webcam; it was in the pa-
tientвҖҷs home or in the caregiverвҖҷs office, and this defined much of the
relational distance the webcam contact imposed. A trusted friend or
carer may visit you at home and may even let you feel a safe kind of
topological congruence. A strange person вҖҳlooking inвҖҷ may be a threat,
112
zooming in on webcams

because it places both the watcher and the patient in the patientвҖҷs home.
This space is too intimate to welcome a visit from a total stranger who
gazes into the patientвҖҷs domain from a nondescript elsewhere into which
the patient cannot look back.
Places can switch fast. Compared to a вҖҳphysicalвҖҷ home visit, webcam
visits skip the ringing of the doorbell, the hanging up of coats and other
material and physical rituals of admittance. The webcam brings the visi-
tor into the patientвҖҷs room with a click of the mouse. There are no delays,
no admission rituals. This poses no problems for a familiar person (and
could even relieve the receiver from having to deal with muddy shoes),
but for an unfamiliar person, actual relational distance would forbid the
sudden demanding presence in the home, as the stranger would be вҖҳin
webcam proximityвҖҷ.
Shaping care practices
The analysis showed the modest, unassuming but also forceful workings
of the webcam. It showed that these workings are not fixed вҖҳeffectsвҖҷ of
webcams. Webcam usage brought about a fragile network, populated by
other users who adapt the frame, co-define the space they enter when
they have webcam conversations or feel the power of defining space ta-
ken away from them. If all the elements of this fragile network are in
place, the webcam can play its part in creating intense and intimate con-
versations.
Maybe it is a bad idea to speak of webcam effects. It could suggest that
webcams have a universal functionality that is independent of place, un-
related to the specific characteristics of the user group and unconnected
to the culture of use. It overlooks the diffidence of a modest technology.
As an alternative notion, it may be better to draw out what webcams are
and are not good at in relation to humans involved in particular (care)
practices. This would both acknowledge the modesty of the webcam and
take the creativity of its users into account, without erasing the actions of
the device. A screen does not compel humans to stare at it; yet this is
what they do because it is what humans do and because the screen se-
duces them into doing it. Listing the things webcams are good and bad
at would define their potential or likely taming strategies.
Modest technology
Webcams are good at supporting вҖ“ and intensifying вҖ“ relatively close
relations and in focusing users on the specific tasks they are trying to
conduct. Webcams are unfit for tasks requiring physical touch or the
bodily presence of people. Webcams are not of much use in the case of
superficial contact, although this relates to the particular space in which
modest technology
113

people use webcams вҖ“ in this case, the home. Webcams are good for
checking on people but only in relations that permit this. However, be-
cause the webcam is a new technology in care, the ground rules for its
use are under active construction. Different forms of fitting in webcams
may well emerge. It may become feasible to establish new relations by
webcam,18 something the homecare projects will show in due course. It
is safe to say that, if this ever happens, the relations will be friendly. That
fits the context, and sustaining friendly relations is what webcams, in all
modesty, are best at.
114
zooming in on webcams

7 Economies of care
New routines, new tasks
WhatвҖҷs in a routine?
So far, this book has documented many changes associated with the in-
troduction of telecare, including changes in ideas about good care as well
as the problems to target. As discussed before, directives come with
norms and knowledge. Directives give pointers on how to establish a
problem and how to look after it best. For example: keep track of your
weight (directive) to check if your body is retaining fluid (problem), and
if this is the case, the nurse will call you (directive) to intervene quickly
(value). Directives become tacit or embodied routines when people no
longer consciously follow them as prescriptions but live them as a habit,
in ways they usually act. Knowledge and values consolidate to form the
tacit rationale for ways of doing things. They become entrenched in the
activities that enact them. In the above example, patients would routinely
measure their weight even though they are not thinking about the rea-
son for doing this.
Turning activities into routines is an efficient way of realising values
and fitting facts. Not every activity needs extensive research, deep reflec-
tion or thorough contemplation. A further step to achieving efficiency
would be to organise routines in a way that fits with their entrenched
rationale. It would mean arranging routines such that embedded goals
can be reached without wasting time and energy on matters of no (or
less) importance to that goal вҖ“ for instance, by abolishing superfluous
diagnostic tests, reducing technical disturbances in webcam connec-
tions, and so on.
In this chapter, I want to show that a change in routine вҖ“ for instance,
by implementing a telecare device вҖ“ does not always start with reflection
on what new problems these routines will address or what values they
implement. Telecare practices often show that the process has gone the
other way around: routines change first, and the consequences take
shape afterwards. This was the case, for example, when frequent mea-
surements shaped disease as a daily changing process that needed quick
attention. What it is that new routines implement may or may not be
explicit. Here I want to explore how a change of routine has implications
for notions of good care and how it impacts the organisational efficiency
of care practices.
115

Routine efficiency
How can a mere change in вҖҳdoingвҖҷ become so full of meaning and impli-
cation? A routine embodies the memory of something once learned, re-
flected upon, decided upon. As a fieldworker I have often asked myself
what I would have done in a particular situation that called for nursing
action. The answer varied between: вҖҳI donвҖҷt have a clue,вҖҷ вҖҳQuick, hide
behind something big,вҖҷ or вҖҳI might be able to answer this after a few
weeks of proper analysis, linking the singular event to notions of good
care and facts taken for granted on the ward, in comparison with other
practices.вҖҷ If nurses took such a hesitant stance and had to reflect so
deeply before engaging in activity, that would be very bad news for their
patients. Routines embody (or solidify) professional memory and experi-
ence. The nurse is skilled and knows what to do. She can reflect on her
actions at the time or in hindsight and might judge that it wasnвҖҷt the
best thing to do after all. In my experience, nurses are good judges of
their own behaviour. At the very least, they will know which course of
action to take or repertoires to choose from.
Routines link to efficiency in the sense that they make it possible to act
with economy, skipping the need for extensive reflection whenever
something needs doing. Efficiency is always part of the way in which
care is shaped and the other way around: any care practice has its own
form of efficiency. This is not a matter of mere organisation. Behaving
efficiently relates directly to the nature of the care given, because effi-
cient behaviour aims to reach a particular goal.
A recurring example demonstrates this point. It is the complaint that
homecare services are organised as discrete technical activities within a
fixed period. For instance, helping a person to put on elastic compres-
sion stockings to prevent thrombosis equals eight to ten minutes of car-
ing time. Translating care into manageable units is often criticised as a
way of reducing care to the activity of putting on stockings (rather than,
say, providing attention and signalling problems at the same time). Or-
ganising according to time units is, however, a way of creatively shaping
care. It fails because, to carers, care is more than вҖҳputting in minutesвҖҷ. It
will eventually fail for managers, too, because it is at odds with profes-
sional notions of care. Routines and efficiency are not merely about pro-
cess and organisation, because these in turn are not only about routines.
They are about specific ways of bringing about something in particular вҖ“
one thing, not another. Like the telecare devices, routines shape what
problems are and how to solve them.
This is why changing routines in care, when introducing new telecare
devices, is so complicated. Routine change is informed by the nature of
local practices (вҖҳWe have a Catholic traditionвҖҷ), the goals set by local
carers (вҖҳIt is important to visit our patients at homeвҖҷ), their managers (вҖҳI
want to put our organisation on the mapвҖҷ), the functionality of the device
(вҖҳIt cannot provide group statisticsвҖҷ), its relation to other devices (вҖҳI al-
116
economies of care

ready have a computer at homeвҖҷ), and so on. It is an interaction between
different variables, different logics even вҖ“ some unknown, some evol-
ving. Contingency and unpredictability are always elements of innova-
tive practices. Routines may seem to be practical, mundane activities
that are trivial in and of themselves. What could there be to taking a
patientвҖҷs blood pressure or sending a fax to a GP? I show in this chapter
that there is a great deal to these activities.
To explore what routines do, what changing routines implies and what
it reveals of the efficient organisation of care, I analyse material from all
the projects to show that comparable things happen in each project. In
an attempt to tame any possible confusion for readers, I start each sec-
tion by introducing the cases used in the argument.
Telecare and efficiency
To trace the workings of routines or вҖҳthings doneвҖҷ, let me discuss the
ideal of efficiency in terms of the economic implications of telecare
usage, as predicted by public discourse. Sources of the analysis come
from my field notes, from newspapers and mailing lists, notes I made
on policy developments, meetings with decision makers, and telecare
conferences. The latter are often hybrid gatherings where consumer or-
ganisations, telecare providers and care managers as well as the occa-
sional researcher meet. These happenings are often promotional events,
which makes it easy to analyse the changing promises and solutions of
telecare in context вҖ“ the latest hype.
Telecare promises efficiency. More precisely, telecare has at least two
efficiency promises with very different implications for the organisation,
the goals of care and the problems to solve. Different logics define the
two efficiencies. The first promise is that telecare will permit efficient
use of scarce health care staff. By substituting face-to-face contact with
telecare contact, the gain in travel time alone promises greater efficiency.
The associated ideal вҖ“ telecare helps patients manage themselves вҖ“ guar-
antees a reduced need for staff, with an even smaller number of profes-
sionals able to care for a growing population of elderly people with
chronic diseases. And, as is common in economic reasoning about care:
efficiency always promises to benefit a вҖҳhigher goodвҖҷ.1 Here, the higher
good is better quality of life for patients. Modern patients presumably
prefer to manage themselves.
The second promise of efficiency fits the workings of telecare prac-
tices better as far as the analyses in this book are concerned. All the
studied practices show that telecare use means an increase in the fre-
quency of contact between patients and professionals. What is won in
travel time (for patients or professionals) is immediately lost in the
added frequency of consultations. Contact frequency changes dramati-
cally from a consultation once every three to four months to daily contact
telecare and efficiency
117

and added telephone contact (health buddy, monitoring vital signs) or
weekly contact (webcam). In this second form of efficiency, more fre-
quent contact is the mechanism that makes care more efficient. This
logic of prevention argues that increased contact frequency leads to better
professional scrutiny of patients, preventing exacerbations and crises,
while promoting a healthy lifestyle at the same time. Ergo, telecare re-
duces hospital admissions. This calculation concerns health care costs
rather than the efficient use of staff, as it would demand more rather
than less nursing power. The benefit for patients is obvious: fewer or no
medical crises, and no emergency trips to hospital. The only worry is
how they might die, eventually (but see below).
Both notions of efficiency savings вҖ“ staff or costs вҖ“ have very different
implications for both the organisation and aims of care. Responsibilities
and roles of professionals and patients differ greatly. Self-management
ideals and reticent professionals compete directly with increased profes-
sional surveillance and passive patients. Moreover, both notions are
ideals when compared to the current organisation of health care. These
efficiency ideals confront health care practices in knowing yet other ways
of doing things and professionals had other reasons for doing them.
There was, for example, the importance attached to meeting patients in
the same space or being cautious with medical interventions.
Efficiency in practice
How do the efficiency promises relate to real care practices? The notion
of cost efficiency oversimplifies the flow of money between organisa-
tions. For example, it is unclear who will benefit financially. Many insti-
tutions may be involved, such as hospitals and homecare organisations.
Reducing hospital admissions is attractive and would be an easy winner
in any overall cost calculation. However, this could only happen if ac-
countants bring the costs of telecare installations and the staff to make
them work into the equation.2 The homecare organisation or the hospi-
tal must pay for telecare systems and staff. In the first case, the home-
care organisation invests but reaps no benefit from hypothetically saved
hospital costs. In the second situation, the transfer of budget is also un-
clear. Reducing admissions means less income when beds stay empty,
whereas the cost of telecare, the staff and technicians running the sys-
tem demand immediate investment.
Both staff and cost-saving economies seem to take a birdвҖҷs eye per-
spective, suggesting a household budgeting book for the nation as a
whole. This move negates the complexity of the game of supply and de-
mand played by various actors. There is no simple market with one party
for supply and one for demand.3 There are several sets of customers and
suppliers. There are the professionals who need to make demands for
telecare but do not actually make them.4 There is the telecare industry
that wants to sell devices but has difficulty accepting reluctant profes-
118
economies of care

sionals as their customers. They would much rather sell their devices
directly to patients. The patients, however, have no purchasing possibili-
ties whatsoever in this market, even though their representatives are
much in favour of telecare developments.5 Individuals may only agree to
a system if their local care organisation happens to supply it.
Many organisations are watching their pennies. The expected costs
and scarcity of health care staff is a political issue quite remote from the
reality in consultation rooms or the concerns of the nurses caring for
patients.
Nurse in homecare organisation: The higher-ups in the organisation, they
say it [the webcam project] needs to save us time and money, but we donвҖҷt
think this is the goal for us [nurses]. It could be an added benefit. As a pro-
fessional I think itвҖҷs important that people get good quality of care. Everyone
has their own objectives in this project. ItвҖҷs up to us [nurses] to show that we
can do it, at least for quality of care. You put things on track to improve care
for patients.
Another unclear facet of the cost-saving story is the assumption that pre-
vention will effectively erase disease exacerbation, but this remains spec-
ulative. An alternative chain of events is that prevention may postpone
exacerbation to a later date in the lifetime of the patients. Preventive sur-
veillance will improve their quality of life for some years and they may
live longer, but the costs would still come at the end of the patientвҖҷs life,
on top of the costs of telecare. It is an intervention in quality of care, but
an efficiency gain is unclear.
Even if the government were to attempt to reshape health care to allow
for market dynamics, which supposedly lead to efficiency, telecare does
not function like a market. The only way that one could look at telecare
as a market is if one is content with the idea that вҖҳthere is no demandвҖҷ
from health care professionals and organisations. Yet this would gloss
over the intricacies of a situation that is not really a market, and it would
not do justice to the potential of care at a distance, an issue I address in
the final chapter. For this analysis, suffice it to say that there are two
notions of telecare efficiency in the debate on its introduction, whereas
there are far more efficiencies in the implicated practices: the efficiency
of singular health care institutions, of professional groups, of local orga-
nisations working together, of ways of living with disease, and so on.
They all demand the arrangement of different routines.
Efficiency does not exist on its own and cannot be isolated from ideas
of what care should do, who should do it and with what aim. Should
patients form caring communities as they did after leaving the rehabili-
tation clinic for COPD patients? Or should they be pushed to manage
themselves, even if they are accustomed вҖ“ and prefer вҖ“ to care for
others? Efficiency alone, in the shape of savings in costs or number of
staff or other aims unrelated to care, can never be the final objective for
telecare and efficiency
119

health care reforms without the reasoning becoming absurd. If saving
costs was the only concern, one might as well give up on the whole idea
of having a health care system. Instead, it would be better to ask what
kind of care is desirable, how it would fit existing efficiencies, what roles
professionals and patients should have and how to organise it at an ac-
ceptable cost in terms of money and human resources. Managers must
formulate the goals of care first before turning to the question of how to
organise care efficiently.
The place of caring
Routines are sticky things. Different notions of what care should look
like, what it should aim for and how to do this best tend to stick to rou-
tines and interfere with other ideas of good and efficient care. The next
case moves away from policy debates and onto homecare. In this home-
care organisation, the project manager is trying to implement webcams.
The case demonstrates the difficulty of changing existing routines. The
project manager did not expect to run into the trouble he encountered.
He thought telecare would just be a new tool (webcam) that nurses
would use to achieve what they were already trying to achieve. He did
not expect the webcam to change the very nature of care.
Project manager: The nurse should join in the [telecare] system. I think she
should come to see the telecare technology as a building block in the care
process, as an extra means at her disposal to solve her care issues and reach
her care goals. No more, but, mind you, no less either. ItвҖҷs something extra,
to add to what we had before, to the care process weвҖҷve been used to for
hundreds of years.
The project manager looks at the webcam as a means towards an end,
where the end does not change if the means do. The impact of using
webcams on the working routines of the nurses, however, proved some-
thing else. The project took place in a few villages and suburbs of a city
in the south of the Netherlands. Homecare patients received a computer
with a touch screen at home. They can use it to play games online or, via
the Service Centre, to win prizes. Users can access local services on the
system, watch вҖҳchurch TVвҖҷ and contact other users (which, as I discussed
before, they rarely do). They can also contact the homecare organisation.
The idea is that embedding care in other useful and nice things to do
with the computer makes access to care easier. The system intends to
reduce the loneliness of older people in the neighbourhood and help
them stay at home safely, but with a low threshold to mobilising care if
they need it.6
Theoretically, there are two ways to contact the homecare organisa-
tion. Patients can call their local homecare team, or the Central Calling
120
economies of care

Point (CCP). CCP workers are situated elsewhere and are connected to
all users from all the locations. The CCP is important in getting patients
to use the system. CCP workers may call patients on the вҖҳGood Morning
ServiceвҖҷ. In these sessions, they discuss the patientвҖҷs plans for the day
and possible problems, but the contact can also be just a chat. The aim
is to get patients engaged in using the telecare system.
The project manager encourages the local teams of nurses to use the
telecare system in their work. And this is what my research assistant,
Esther Leuthold, interviewed him about. The first step, he explained,
was to introduce the new technology to the nurses and have them reflect
on the possibilities it might have for them.
Project manager: We [the project team] organised a workshop, so that they
got to know what it is. And then we brainstormed together on what it could
mean for the care processes weвҖҷre engaged in. Who among your people [pa-
tients] could work with it or would like to try it? Then we put the webcam
equipment in their offices for them to play with. [вҖҰ] But with one team, we
didnвҖҷt take enough time to follow up their work and keep encouraging them
to use the webcam. It seems it slowly bled to death, the device just stands
there now, gathering dust. They [the team] use it every now and then, but
only very occasionally. So we said, we should pick it up again, give some
training, do project meetings, case meetings, and bring it back to their atten-
tion. So that they donвҖҷt forget it, so to speak.
Similar to patients trying to remember their new lifestyle rules, the
neighbourhood teams also have their own memories, routines and prac-
tices. Reminding nurses to use the webcam in their daily work is, how-
ever, also a reminder that routines must change. The webcam will only
work if it gains a useful place in the work and goals of the carers. This
takes time and effort, including special training, playing, thinking to-
gether and reminding each other, according to the project manager.
Merely placing the technology in homes and offices is no guarantee that
people will use it at all or even sensibly.7 Devices only function in rela-
tion to other things вҖ“ the power supply, the internet, managers вҖ“ and
their users.
This is one of the difficulties for the manager: opportunities may
seem clear to him, but the nurses need to change their practices to apply
them. Existing practices are full of вҖҳmemoriesвҖҷ; these routines have
served their purpose for some time and are kept alive by many actors
and devices in their particular alignments. Participants rearrange old
practices to make new devices work. This is hard if the people who have
to work with the device do not perceive the need for it in the first place
and require instruction to become aware of its potential usefulness. Even
when they are convinced the technology has some good use, it is hard to
change practices and tame devices in work routines. Working routines
are material, embodied and relational.
the place of caring
121

Reshuffling space
There were various routines in the homecare practice, and some were
more easily established than others. Establishing the new Central Call-
ing Point was easy. It provided new jobs that people could apply for, and
it operated from a new office. It was different for nurses who spent their
working days out in the neighbourhood making home visits. The para-
dox is that if they used the webcam, they would have to stop going to the
patientвҖҷs home. They could care for patients from the office, making the
actual space occupied by the patient irrelevant to care. But this space was
not irrelevant to the nurses. To use the webcam they had to move away.
Project manager: They could use it to make an arrangement with a patient.
TheyвҖҷd say something like: вҖҳIвҖҷll call back later to see how it went.вҖҷ And then
theyвҖҷd continue their tour of the neighbourhood and when they got back to
the office, theyвҖҷd contact the patients they needed to reach. If they play with
the system like this, theyвҖҷd get experience. I hope that theyвҖҷll do it more
systematically, give it a steady spot in their services. That theyвҖҷll say: вҖҳBefore,
I went out there to help a person start the day, get them out of bed, get them
to wash, dress, have breakfastвҖҷ, that kind of thing. They will replace all that
with webcam contact. The nurses may not perceive this as a particularly
efficient move, considering where they usually are.
The managerвҖҷs logic of economic efficiency was about вҖҳsubstitutionвҖҷ or
вҖҳsaving staffвҖҷ. The difficulty, however, was the place where the nurses
gave their care. Moving it from the patientвҖҷs home and into the office is
a radical change that feels paradoxical when you want to care for pa-
tients. It means having to leave patients alone in order to care for them.
Moving care into the office brought another spatial difficulty. Having
the carerвҖҷs webcam located outside the patientsвҖҷ homes interfered with
the communication technology that homecare teams were accustomed
to using: the logbook in the patientвҖҷs home. Several professionals call in
on patients using homecare, including cleaners, assistants to help peo-
ple get out of bed and wash and dress, as well as the nurses who tend to
medical matters. All professionals write their reports in the logbook,
something that is not possible when giving care at a distance. The dis-
tant carer simply cannot write in the log kept at the patientвҖҷs home.
Project manager: This is really complicated. The log is our form of report-
ing. вҖҳI was here and did so and soвҖҷ. You can tick a box if you want to point
your colleagues to more information in the dossier. Say: вҖҳI prepared the
medication, but the stock will only last another three days. Can you order
more pills?вҖҷ This is the job of the First Responsible Nurse (FRN). The log is
the most reliable and complete system we have. ItвҖҷs kept in the patientвҖҷs
home. The GPs, if they come to the house, they also report that in the log.
But the CCP is at a distance, and CCP staff cannot write in the log, which
122
economies of care

means if they have something to communicate, they have to call or send an
email to the FRN. IвҖҷm dreaming of setting up an electronic record or some
other shared document system available on the internet.
The situation is indeed complex. All carers used to share their position
in the home of the patient. Take away one important set of carers, and a
communal communication system runs the risk of collapsing. Changing
the working routines not only concerns the actual use of new technology
but also the logistics of care вҖ“ in this case, of communicating with other
professionals. Nobody had foreseen this in the brainstorming sessions
on the potential role of the webcam in homecare for patients. One
change leads to another, and the chain of events is not always easy to
oversee, let alone supervise and manage. Routines are not easy to
change. They remember, they make people remember and they inter-
connect. It is not easy to swap logbooks, Stick-It notes, emails and tele-
phone calls for an electronic record that as yet does not even exist, let
alone call this efficient. The hoped-for efficiency lies somewhere in the
future, and its shape is still unclear.8 This makes it hard to create the
changes needed for the webcam to function acceptably and to inspire
the nurses. Rather than improving things, it created new problems for
which, at the time of the study, there were no solutions.9
Different technology and tasks
The policy debates on telecare efficiencies demonstrated the close rela-
tions between care routines, notions of efficiency and what care came to
mean. The project managerвҖҷs problems with implementing webcams
showed how caring routines form a network of related activities, technol-
ogy and tasks that is impossible to change without changing the entire
network. The next case analyses a phenomenon in all the projects
studied. Not only the quantity but also the quality of the nursing tasks
changed when nurses started using telecare. I will illustrate this with
material from the different practices.
A frequent complaint was that new telecare technology added extra
administrative tasks. Nurses found themselves looking after the telecare
system rather than their patients. This was also an artefact of the re-
search that accompanied the new practices. Research needed extensive
registration of patient data. The nurses conducted and collected registra-
tions, and this was yet another unanticipated change in their working
routines.
The heart failure nurses in the hospital came to вҖҳshareвҖҷ their patients
with call centre nurses who monitored the outcomes of the heart failure
patientвҖҷs daily weight and blood pressure measurements. Protocols de-
fined the tasks and responsibilities strictly, but the heart failure nurses
in the hospital felt that their patients had disappeared from their prac-
different technology and tasks
123

tice. In the meantime, they remained responsible for them and had to
keep the patient record for the call centre up to date. The record for the
call centre was a duplicate of their own administration, and the trial eval-
uating the monitoring project also used these data. Care for a telecare
system and its evaluation are quite different from care for patients, even
if the tasks are related. The hospital nurses would have preferred the
extra work of following up on the monitored values themselves. They
disliked merely doing the administrative tasks.
Heart failure nurse: Well, itвҖҷs my personal opinion butвҖҰ my colleague
agrees. In that other study, we were the ones checking the patients. This
time around [the monitoring practice study], I see nothing. So I have no
connection with [the study]. I have to tell you: I never look at the pro-
gramme, at the weights and such. We used to do that when we were in
charge of the project. But now, we get an email from [the call centre]: вҖҳPa-
tient such and such has put on 800 grams and would we please discuss this
with the cardiologist.вҖҷ Well, our cardiologist says: вҖҳI donвҖҷt want anything to
do with it anymore!вҖҷ He [the cardiologist] gets called for a patient whoвҖҷs
gained 800 grams in a day! We know these patients well. With some, youвҖҷd
think, вҖҳThatвҖҷs not okвҖҷ. But with others youвҖҷd think: вҖҳIt will be better tomor-
row.вҖҷ You see, this is a very small hospital, we know the patients really well.
At the same time, the nurses from the call centre were troubled by the
difficult route they had to take in order to induce a small change in a
patientsвҖҷ medication, particularly diuretics. The call centre nurse had to
call the responsible heart failure nurse, who in her turn may have to talk
to the cardiologist. The heart failure nurse then had to phone the call
centre nurse, who in her turn called back the patient. This demanded an
elaborate coordination and the call centre nurses felt it did not do justice
to their professional capabilities or meet the need for efficient care. They
felt they could be responsible for diuretic medication, just as the patients
themselves sometimes were. Careful, explicit task allocation made sense
in terms of liability and responsibility, but it made less sense from the
viewpoint of nurses more interested in patient care rather than in ad-
ministration.
The oncology nurse using the white box in palliative care experienced
a comparable problem with elaborate administrative tasks:
Oncology nurse: Well, you can imagine, before the white box I would say to
a patient: вҖҳIвҖҷll call you after the first chemo, and if youвҖҷre worried about
something, you can call me.вҖҷ Now I have to explain the workings of the
white box, input their data into the system, put the copies in the file, and
take the file in and out of the filing cabinet. I have to read the results of the
patientsвҖҷ answers every day, and see what is new. Call someone, do this or
that. Fax the GP. It all takes time. And the coordinator wants to know every-
thing for the research: вҖҳOh, we donвҖҷt have the diagnosis for Jansen, and here
124
economies of care

we need a little detail for Geerts, date of birth. And did you get this form for
Klaasen?вҖҷ We have a control group, they вҖҳjustвҖҷ fill in the questionnaires, but
they need to be in the system as well. And well, I have to look it all up, go to
the cabinet, take out the files. ThatвҖҷs how it goes. [...] ItвҖҷs just, itвҖҷs so much
extra work. Make a new file here, noting details there about patients and
writing timesheets. And also your research, that again costs time! ItвҖҷs all
really small things, but added up, itвҖҷs a lot. And itвҖҷs all time thatвҖҷs not spent
on your patients.
The oncology nurse did not work with a call centre. She ran the system
with the help of the technicians and the service provider maintaining the
system, and she did the administration herself. Much of this work dealt
with distributing information on the system and recording data for the
research tangled up with the project. Adding an extra device to a care
practice meant adding a new node in the information network around
the patient; it meant storing incoming information and collecting data
for the research, and keeping other professionals informed. The nurse
tacitly took on this extra burden, if only because no one else was avail-
able. No one had anticipated the effort needed to make the system
work.10
The rehabilitation clinic also had administrative problems. There was
a discussion about assigning the telekit (computers with webcam) to pa-
tients. At the start of the project, staff assigned the telekit to patients they
selected themselves, but later this changed into offering it to as many
patients as possible. The reason was the wish to do a quantitative study
that would objectify which group of patients the telekit could help.11 In
practice, the new goal resulted in many dropouts and telekit offers to
relatively healthy people whose care would not improve anyway. For in-
stance, during office hours it was hard to reach by phone, let alone by
telekit, the relatively fit people who had gone back to their jobs.
The new assignment strategy revealed many patients unwilling to par-
ticipate for a wide range of reasons: not enough space at home, no desire
to have an extra computer, about to move house or not wanting to make
the disease too central in their lives. Here the needs of a projected future
practice (evaluation research) interfered with the ways the clinicians put
the telekit to use. This changed the way of offering the telekit from a way
that fit a care practice to one that fit a research practice. The research prac-
tice tamed the telekit so differently from the way the clinicians had
tamed it that the clinicians often considered it unhelpful.
The homecare specialist nurse for COPD patients provides a last ex-
ample of the changing tasks for nurses, highlighting the complexity of
organising information flows and administration. Here, the nurses used
both the white box and a webcam.
Homecare nurse: Now we work with four screens [points at the computers].
There is one for the white box, with its own network and database. And then
different technology and tasks
125

you have one for patient records, our own information, including listings of
who we call, and the care dossiers. For the white box you need to put the info
into its own system. But if patients only use a webcam, then you have to put
it in a different patient record, because you need to put your information
somewhere. Then there is the contact screen [to talk to people] and the call-
in screen [for incoming calls].
Several systems depending on different networks and databases meant
that the nurses had to align a complicated series of devices and checks.
As the oncology nurse said, these were вҖҳall the little thingsвҖҷ. The nurses
performed these tasks for the greater good of patient care. Again, nobody
had anticipated the extra work of collecting data and distributing infor-
mation. All this comprises a new form of care in nursing practice: care
for the telecare system and its evaluation. Telecare does not in itself cre-
ate efficient work practices. Efficiency needs to be organised in and
around them.
Interpretation routines
The next case is from the rehabilitation clinic for patients with COPD
and asthma. It demonstrates how working routines around the same
technology may become confused because technology вҖ“ the computer
with webcam (telekit) вҖ“ has various identities. What the technology is
and how it is supposed to support the aims of care practice differs, as do
routines to use it efficiently. However, these differences in identity are
tacit, and routines became mixed up tacitly. At the time of the study,
managers, technicians and carers were discussing the future of the tele-
kit. Their deliberations over the potential uses of the telekit held oppos-
ing ideas on what care is and what it should be about that troubled its
terms.12
The telekit had two identities related to different treatment goals and
sets of routines for efficient use. The first identity relates to the goal of
guaranteeing the effect of the treatment. This turned out to demand very
different usage routines compared to the second notion of what the tele-
kit should do: provide a window on the world. For these different treatment
goals, the identity of the telekit became a digital umbilical cord connecting
the patient to the clinic, or an inhaler providing the вҖҳpuffвҖҷ to get on with
life. The metaphors come from the clinic staff, although they did not use
them consistently.
The telekit as an umbilical cord
When the carers formulated the purpose of the telekit as вҖҳconsolidating
the effect of the treatmentвҖҷ, proponents intended it to help patients de-
velop вҖҳadequate behaviourвҖҷ to cope with their illness. This meant that
126
economies of care

patients had to put into practice what they had learned in the clinic. The
telekit directly relates to, and stands in the service of, the work done in
the clinic. Here, the metaphor for the telekitвҖҷs identity is вҖҳthe umbilical
cordвҖҷ that attaches the patient to the clinic and allows them to be вҖҳfedвҖҷ
more of the clinicвҖҷs wisdom. In this view, contact with the principal
carers вҖ“ social workers вҖ“ was central to telekit usage. The principal carer
was supposed to check on the patient, discuss their problems with them
and encourage them to take the steps laid down in the treatment plan
they had made together in the clinic. Contact with the social worker
guaranteed the continuity of the work done in the clinic.
Contact with fellow patients would serve the same purpose: to bridge
the gap between clinic and home by giving advice on how to cope. Three
months of computer use was thought to be sufficient to reach these
goals. The use of email and internet was a more ambiguous aim in this
scenario. Patients were supposed to become independent of the clinic and
its devices, with the telekit remaining in the realm of the clinic. If pa-
tients wanted to go on using the computers after the umbilical cord was
severed, this was encouraged (and indeed trained for) in the clinic. How-
ever, the clinic would not be providing the hardware. People would have
to buy their own computers, just as they would have to join their local
sports clubs and rely on care from their вҖҳownвҖҷ specialists and home
carers. Hence, email and the internet was seen as ambiguously both
part and not part of the treatment.
In the end, the proper way to deal with umbilical cords is to cut them,
when the attached one has other, more вҖҳgrown-upвҖҷ resources and means
to feed themselves independently. This is a specific notion of treatment
as вҖҳa temporary intervention by professionalsвҖҷ. The treatment effects
must be consolidated, but ultimately the professionals are supposed to
make themselves superfluous. Treatment has to stop, and people have to
learn how to fend for themselves with the help of their local carers. They
have to cut themselves free of the clinic.
The telekit as an inhaler
When the purpose of the telekit was вҖҳto provide patients with a window
on the worldвҖҷ, the telekit mainly became a device to actively continue the
tasks set in the clinic and get on with life better. One problem patients
have, for instance, is social isolation and loss of meaningful activities;
they do not have much to do with their day. Many had trouble leaving
the house, and they learned solutions for this in the clinic. Patients could
tackle problems by establishing a more permanent social network with
fellow patients. Fellow patients could become friends or close acquain-
tances connected by webcam and provide enduring support and com-
pany.
Internet and email usage was important in this telekit framing. Pa-
tients need to employ both in their routines as structural ways of seeking
interpretation routines
127

entertainment and keeping in touch. The internet connection supported
such services as home delivery of shopping, membership of online gam-
ing, entertainment,and social media. The telekit thus became a structur-
al part of the social, practical and emotional life of patients, permitting
many different contacts after the carer from the clinic had stopped see-
ing them. The device supported patients in building their new world.
In this case, the telekit is a permanent aid rather than a temporary
lifeline to the clinic. One of my informants described this form of the
telekit as an inhaler, a device that COPD patients use continually to coun-
ter breathlessness. When the telekit is like an inhaler, patients are de-
pendent on it. That makes it rather cruel to withdraw the device after
three months. It would be like giving a person a wheelchair вҖ“ or indeed
an inhaler вҖ“ and then taking it away even if the need for it has not dis-
appeared. People should not emancipate themselves from the device but
rather use the telekit structurally, as useful and dependable technology.
Of course, as in the former scenario, the clinicвҖҷs care would not be
permanent. Here, too, patients had to cut themselves free of the profes-
sionals, even though some thought this was indeed a pity. However, the
treatment would not be limited in terms of time. It would be ongoing as
patients used the new device to reshape their world, making it part of the
everyday muddle of getting through the day and facing new problems.
The telekit functioned as an inhaler rather than as an umbilical cord.
Routines and identities
The two identities of the telekit meant two sets of routines, implying two
ways of organising care at home efficiently. The double identity of the
device and its use were not explicit. Both scenarios were present at the
same time, with the carers unaware of the differences. That they held
different views on treatment was something they had not come up
against before. The technology simultaneously materialised and sepa-
rated the different goals that the carers could accommodate before. On
the one hand, treatment should have the effect of helping people find
meaningful connections to the world. On the other hand, practising
what one has learned during treatment is a way of engaging with the
world. The telekit differentiated these aims by separating the different
sets of routines that patients needed to employ to achieve either goal.
In the daily telekit operations, the different sets of routines were ta-
citly present, with one or the other in the foreground. On a theoretical
level, the two ways of caring and using the telekit were different, but in
practice they were mixed up, muddling discussions and complicating
practices. The case shows that planning routines is complex because
people may have different tacit understandings of how they should use a
technology and how to use it efficiently. Implementing a device has un-
predictable consequences for working routines. But even if the telekit
complicated the different goals of treatment, both goals are still valid.
128
economies of care

Both treatment effects вҖ“ consolidation as well as adding meaning to life
вҖ“ are important and overlapping assignments for patients. Efficient or-
ganisation of care practices, particularly innovative practices, needs to
accommodate and coordinate different logics of care and thus align dif-
ferent sets of efficient working routines.
Old or new routines?
My last example is from the practices using the white box in the care
practices for people with heart failure and in palliative care. This exam-
ple shows how people use old and new logics of interpreting situations
to make a device work. The old logic involved routines for interpreting
information delivered by patients face-to-face, relating information to
the patientвҖҷs individual situation. In contrast, the new logic involved
new routines of interpretation through coding, according to general pro-
tocols for heart failure or palliative cancer patients. In Chapter 4, I dis-
cussed the coding in the context of patients and nurses making individ-
ual exceptions to the rules imposed by the white box. Here I analyse the
nursesвҖҷ interpretation routines.
Even if the patientвҖҷs answers were coded, nurses still made sense of
this information by using their clinical routine of relating information to
the situation of individual patients. They did this to make the informa-
tion meaningful to them in terms of knowing what the matter is with
patients вҖ“ in particular, how they should respond to the information pro-
vided.
Field note
I am looking over the shoulder of the oncology nurse to see the data she has
received from patients on the white box. The red, amber and green alerts are
listed on top. There is a red mark for a woman who hasnвҖҷt slept well for
three nights running. We discuss what this might mean. вҖҳYou donвҖҷt know
what it means,вҖҷ the nurse explains, вҖҳso you have to look for clues on whether
to call the patient to ask, whatвҖҷs up?вҖҷ
Another patient has a red mark registering the lack of sleep, and there is yet
another bad sleeper on the list. Now this is a pattern! We realise that the
previous nights have been extremely hot for Dutch standards. This is a good
enough reason for not sleeping well. The nurse has discussed the remaining
alerts with the patients concerned. She knows what it means if a particular
patient feels вҖҳa bit less well than yesterdayвҖҷ.
A lot of data, still in the nurseвҖҷs head, is related to the situation of individual
patients. One patient reports that he is using different medication from the
prescribed one, and this gets a red alert. The nurse knows he uses homeo-
pathic meds that are not relevant to the treatment in the hospital.
old or new routines?
129

The white box generates a lot of information, but what does it all mean?
The heart failure nurses tackled this problem by reading all the answers
and establishing their own evaluation criteria, calling up patients when
they were in doubt. This meant an impressive multiplication of the
amount of information the nurses received, compared to the four visits
a year that used to be the standard. Answers came in every day, taking
approximately 2 minutes per patient per day to read, not counting the
follow-up calls.
The two logics for assigning clinical relevance, following codes or re-
lating answers to the remembered context of individuals clash here. If
the nurses followed the code logic, they would have to make many un-
necessary calls. If, however, they had to contextualise data, the workload
of the nurses would expand even more than it already had. The codes
would be efficient if they provided fewer вҖҳfalse-positiveвҖҷ alarms. In the
palliative oncology practice, the team tackled this problem by continuing
to tinker with the question protocol to remove any ambiguities. They
also added a question asking patients whether they would like the nurses
to call them if a coded answer signalled an alarm, mobilising the judg-
ment of the patients. Keeping samples of patients small also facilitated
the use of contextual information.
This example shows that new routines do not simply replace old ones.
Carers needed old routines of interpretation to make the new ones func-
tion at all. Thus, new routines are not necessarily better than old ones,
and the new ones may even depend on the old. In terms of efficiency,
the extra new work is again obvious. How these tensions are resolved
once telecare becomes routine is a question that the developers of these
projects will need to show in due time. So far, telecare has established a
change in the quality of care rather than a reduction in cost or improve-
ment in efficiency by saving staff.
Treacherous routines
Routines are not isolated acts. They are consolidated values and knowl-
edge. Routines are a prime way of enabling efficiency; they make it un-
necessary to think about every act. Routines or devices tacitly embed
values and knowledge, and time revealed the implications of changing
them. Because of their inconspicuous and tacit nature, the вҖҳdensityвҖҷ of
routines may remain hidden for a long time. Routines tend to link to
other routines and devices, enacting different notions of good care and
types of problems to care for. Sets of routines enact particular logics of
good care, fitting notions of efficiency. The analysis showed this when
analysing the notions of efficiency in the public debate on telecare and
the different use practices of the telekit.
The interdependencies of routines made it difficult to change them:
changing one element in their organisation вҖ“ for instance giving home-
130
economies of care

care nurses webcam tasks in the office вҖ“ had implications for the organi-
sation of care and communication between different carers. The task of
the carers changed, but not always in a way that suited their wish to care
for patients rather than the telecare system. The nurses performed the
administrative tasks that were needed to make the telecare system work,
to align the telecare administration to their own and that of other profes-
sionals and researchers. Nobody had foreseen this extra workload when
the implementation of telecare was under consideration.
Unpredictability was a recurrent characteristic of implementation
practices. Differences in tacit understandings of the purpose of a device
explained this unpredictability, as did the clashes between sets of work-
ing routines, as was the case with the interpretation routines of the
nurses using the white box and the nurses collaborating with call centre
nurses. An efficient organisation of care practices needs to create space
for this unpredictability as well as for the differences between sets of
routines needed in care. Chapters 4 and 5 illustrated the different rou-
tines patients could run into, because they had to enact the advice of
different medical specialists and combine this with other things that
were important to them. These chapters also stressed the importance of
improvisations in reacting to new situations. Care cannot exist as a rou-
tine practice only.
Efficiently organising messy practices
A more efficient organisation of care practices is thus not merely a mat-
ter of organising routines more tightly but also of aligning different
forms of efficiency. Efficiency is a concept that is as variable as notions
of good care or terms framing what is wrong with patients. Attempts at
rationalisation may interfere with efficiencies in current practices, creat-
ing a mess rather than efficiency. This mess will eventually result in new
working routines and improvisation strategies, but what shape they will
take is hard to predict. This analysis demands more respect for existing
routines than is common in innovation practices. New routines are not
always better, and sometimes new routines only work with the support
of the old ones. Whichever way, new routines need to build on the old by
gradually translating, adapting or aligning old and new routines. De-
signers of telecare can never anticipate the complexity of care practices,
which involve many norms, contingencies and forms of knowledge, nor
can they build it into the technology. The slate for the design of devices is
blank, whereas practices are not.13
efficiently organising messy practices
131


Conclusions
On studying
innovation


8 Innovating care innovation
The politics of innovation
By way of conclusion, this chapter draws out the lessons of my analysis
for innovation practices in care and suggests ways to study them and
argue about them. The general conclusions about the workings of the
telecare practices are embedded in this chapter. The last section entitled
вҖҳDiscussions unleashed by an uncontrolled field studyвҖҷ draws out some
general lines on the use of telecare in health care.
Back in the introduction, I described innovation in telecare as a pro-
cess occurring between the market and the soapbox. The Dutch govern-
mentвҖҷs idea was to place care in a market context where competition
among care providers вҖ“ reinforced by assertive care consumers and rival
health care insurance companies вҖ“ would lead to efficiency and quality
improvement. Active consumers (patients) will not buy care they do not
want, and they are unwilling to pay too much for the care they do want.
Hence the market provides a new political arena separate from parlia-
ment. Instead of voting, participants in the market state their opinions
by (not) buying health insurance and care services. The consumer pa-
tient has become a political actor.
However, the dialectic of quality and efficiency has not emerged in
telecare developments. Although the government, national patient and
consumer organisations and health insurance companies all promote
telecare for its assumed quality and efficiency, the market seems to have
run into a brick wall on this issue, with all participants pointing at each
other to make the next move or accusing each other of preventing the
next move from taking place. Random projects survived, while many
others did not. Project survival rates said more about business, market-
ing and prestige than about how the public1 вҖ“ especially (potential) pa-
tients and professionals вҖ“ would define good quality care or living a good
life with chronic disease. Knowledge on the workings of telecare was
virtually absent.
What did emerge was a lot of soapbox posturing, with those for and
against telecare spouting forth either unsubstantiated promises or im-
aginary hell holes in an attempt to move telecare development forward
or stop it. Proponents pushed the telecare hype to create a demand for
sales, while opponents warned of the dangers of cold mechanical care.
Besides the telecare industry, however, it remained unclear who stood to
gain from telecare вҖ“ patients, professionals, care organisations or finan-
cers? вҖ“ and who should pay for it all. If all the concerned parties are
potential customers, all have diverse interests that do not always fit har-
moniously together. The development of telecare in the Netherlands has
135

come to a standstill despite a number of pioneering projects and a few
spectacular failures.
In this final chapter, I explore a policy development method for inno-
vation in care, including telecare, that takes a different stance from the
soapbox or market approach, although it may accommodate both. My
method looks for ways of bringing knowledge into the debate, rather than
settling on wild hopes or dire warnings of how telecare will or will not
work. I reflect on a different sort of research that actually delivers useful
knowledge on novel telecare practices, that engages the parties con-
cerned and their practical knowledge while granting more space to the
actual telecare users вҖ“ patients and professionals. By identifying con-
cerns that emerge in practice rather than imaginary ones, this research
considers normative issues more productively than the market or the
soapbox permit. The research design aims to fit innovative telecare prac-
tices better than conventional research does.
Before outlining this вҖҳfitting researchвҖҷ, I shall recapitulate on the object
it should establish better fits with: innovative telecare practices. I show
why traditional quantitative research methods вҖ“ the randomised con-
trolled trial (RCT) and, more common in this context, its less robust fa-
mily of related research designs вҖ“ do not fit this object. I analyse three
misfits and one more general concern about conducting research.
The object of research: innovative telecare practices
What innovative care practices have I described?2 The three parts of the
book showed that implementing telecare changed the type of problems
that participants addressed. For example, telecare could shape problems
as deviations in weight and blood pressure or as indistinct worries de-
manding further inquiry. Telecare also changed the ways of addressing
problems. While patients measured their vital signs daily at home,
nurses supervised their interpretation. Previously, both the organisation
of measurements as well as their interpretation had been the responsi-
bility of the patient. Another example of how telecare changed the way
problems were addressed is the webcam. Patients used webcams to
name and frame possible remedies, mobilising the experience of other
patients rather than professionals. The webcam allowed an exchange of
practical knowledge that had been mostly absent in patientsвҖҷ practices.
Besides defining problems and the remedies to address them, the tel-
ecare devices influenced the values that participants pursued in order to
make care good. Prevention by early intervention became a value of mon-
itoring practices, replacing the values of medical caution, self-help and
patientsвҖҷ initiative. Webcams stimulated not only the exchange of pa-
tientsвҖҷ practical knowledge but also the potential for mutual support,
shifting responsibility from local professionals to patient communities.
Care aims to improve daily life with disease, and devices aim to achieve
136
innovating care innovation

this goal as well, even when notions of improvement differ greatly. If a
device is to be helpful, patients, nurses and devices have to establish fits
between them, shaping problems as well as good care. My analysis
showed that these changes were often tacit, as they began with a change
in caring routines. A change in the frequency of contact, for instance, had
great consequences for understanding a problem and the best response
to it. Moreover, the new routines needed to relate to the old ones and
interacted with them in various ways. For instance, the old practice of
meeting patients in the same space continued alongside new telecare
practices.
These changes and interferences as well as the ways users behaved
made the nature of the established fits unpredictable.3 Innovative tele-
care practices вҖ“ the object of the research in this book вҖ“ were complex
practices still under construction. Building plans changed along the way
as a necessary part of fitting in new devices. Seemingly sensible theories
about care and the workings of technology were proven wrong, again
and again.
Unpredictable results were a core characteristic of innovative prac-
tices. Whether certain devices in care practices lead to self-management,
to supportive social networks or to the neglect of a device depends on
many contingencies. This is a matter that the participants and their de-
vices are still busily working out between them, in circumstances they
may or may not be able to influence. Spelling out these contingencies
provides insights into how to possibly influence future practices. Yet,
however different they were, the outcomes contradicted both the pro-
mise of improved efficiency and self-management as well as the night-
mare of alienated patients.
Research that does not fit
Fixed variables and unpredictable outcomes
If innovative care practices involve the process of crafting new outcomes,
research designs that need predefined fixed outcome variables will not
fit. Such research designs gloss over the most important characteristic of
innovative care practices. This means that RCTs and their family of re-
search designs are not particularly fit to study innovative practices. State-
of-the-art evaluation research does define its variables at the start of the
study, to evaluate the effects of well-defined interventions on well-
defined outcome measures. Quantitative researchers recognise the pro-
blem of evaluating telecare practices because interventions are difficult
to stabilise, involving activities of devices and users. Researchers com-
plain about suboptimal designs of telecare studies that make it hard to
assess the effects (see Chapter 1). This is a first misfit between quantita-
tive evaluation research and innovative care practices. A more fitting de-
research that does not fit
137

sign should permit insight into the processes that (re)name and (re)-
frame goals and problem definitions.
Subjectivity and practical knowledge
Patients and carers develop practical knowledge in innovative care prac-
tices, including knowledge about normative problems and ways of deal-
ing with them. Quantitative evaluation studies, however, cannot use this
knowledge. This is the second characteristic of innovative telecare prac-
tices that does not fit classic evaluation studies. Learning how to fit in
their devices, users engage with the ups and downs of doing so and in
the process reflect upon normative issues that unexpectedly emerge
along the way. Classic evaluation studies, however, cannot tap produc-
tively into this experience. Fitting research might well do this, but how?
The norms of the RCT family of research designs consider practical
knowledge and normativity suspect. Classic research does not use prac-
tical knowledge because RCT methods are supposed to provide knowl-
edge that is more reliable. These researchers regard practical knowledge
as subjective and as providing disturbing factors rather than helpful in-
sights. A basic value in the foundation of RCT and related designs is to
strive for objectivity to replace subjectivity, and to use procedures that
guarantee it, such as double-blind research and the random selection of
patients.4
But is practical knowledge subjective? To answer this question, I take a
closer look at how subjectivity is understood in the context of research.
In twentieth-century research, subjectivity has two influential meanings.
The first is interests. RCTs were designed to control the pharmaceutical
industry.5 New drugs should not be given to patients without satisfacto-
rily establishing their workings and possible adverse side effects. The
RCT guarantees that industry interests will not influence the outcome of
research.6 The methods employed should make it impossible to influ-
ence results, even for вҖҳinterestedвҖҷ researchers.
The second meaning of subjectivity relates to the use of scientific
knowledge. Quantitative research designs aim to ban the arbitrary (sub-
jective) administration of treatment. This stems from the tradition of
evidence-based medicine (EBM). The motivation for EBM is to guaran-
tee that patients will not get a particular treatment only because their
doctor has a particular liking for a particular course of treatment, but
because there is evidence that this treatment worked in an acceptable per-
centage of comparable cases. EBM puts objective knowledge in the place
of doctors following their own fads or hobbies, treating their patients
with favourite therapies. RCT results thus correct the doctorвҖҷs practical
knowledge and provide ways to discipline it. Research-derived knowl-
edge is free of self interest, fads or any other subjective factor related to
individual doctors.7
138
innovating care innovation

Interestingly, and quite contrary to the idea of banning subjectivity, as
I discussed in Chapter 5, there is a recent trend to improve medical re-
search by engaging patients. Both goals вҖ“ objective research and patient
involvement вҖ“ were reconciled by assuming that successful patient en-
gagement depends on the agreement of both patients and medical scien-
tists on what medical knowledge they should look for and what methods
scientists should use to obtain this knowledge.8 Unsuccessful participa-
tion, on the other hand, is attributed to the patientsвҖҷ lack of medical ex-
pertise.9 Patients and doctors cooperate in their shared quest for scienti-
fic medical knowledge. Again, this does not put practical knowledge to
use, and it is difficult to see how it could be done in a paradigm of re-
search that aims to ban knowledge that is different from вҖҳevidenceвҖҷ
(probability) of effectiveness.
My analysis, however, showed the differences between practical and
scientific knowledge, both for patients and for professionals.10 These dif-
ferences were not about subjectivity or interests in contrast to objectivity.
The differences were, first, between the aims of practical and scientific
knowledge. Practical knowledge aims to help treat individual patients,
whereas scientific knowledge attempts to create and accumulate knowl-
edge based on probability calculations.11 Second, there were differences
in developing and accounting for practical and scientific knowledge. This is
the difference between RCTs and meta-analyses, on the one hand, and
the hands-on work of treating this patient on the other. In the hands-on
case, carers must apply their experience in comparable cases and inte-
grate it with the technology they use while translating medical knowl-
edge and concerns about what is good in this particular case. In the
meantime, clinicians keep track of the patientвҖҷs response and adapt the
treatment if it does not have the desired effect. Practical (hands-on)
knowledge and scientific (theoretical) knowledge have different prag-
matics, different time frames and different relations to truth or certainty.
Placing subjectivity and objectivity in opposition does not describe the
differences between scientific knowledge and practical knowledge. This
becomes particularly clear when one considers ways and possibilities of
developing and transporting practical knowledge, making it more robust
by sharing it in critical analysis. It might be worth trying to explicate
practical knowledge and critically assessing it, instead of banning it.
This seems worth the effort when there is no other knowledge available
because state-of-the-art scientific knowledge is unhelpful or uninforma-
tive. I will discuss the possibility of using and improving practical knowl-
edge below and come back to the question of вҖҳinterestsвҖҷ and the truth
claims of practical knowledge. But before I do, I need to discuss a third
characteristic of innovative practices and a third misfit with state-of-the-
art quantitative research.12
research that does not fit
139

Interference with construction sites
A third characteristic of innovative telecare practices is that they are sites
under construction. Ideally, fitting research would not hinder, disturb, or
harm the construction of the innovations. This is difficult in state-of-the-
art quantitative research because these designs need researchers to con-
struct their own workplace to create the conditions for good research.
Conditions need to be standardised, patients need to be randomly as-
signed to experimental and control groups, and questionnaires need to
be filled in by carers and patients, and so on. In Chapter 7, I discussed
the work the nurses did to collect data for research. Instead of caring for
their patients or tinkering with the devices, the nurses were taking care
of telecare administration and evaluation. Chapter 7 also provided the
example of carers who had to offer a telecare device to all patients in the
clinic, even when they knew the device would not apply to some patients.
They had to include these patients anyway to allow research methods to
establish objectively who would benefit from telecare and who would
not. This directly hindered daily care.
Another example of research creating a competing construction site
was the case of the white box in palliative care. There was no attempt at
randomisation for ethical reasons and because of the small number of
patients and the difficulties in recruiting them. This meant the results
from the accompanying study were shaky, even with a control group in
place. Here, good care was valued more than good research. The rigor-
ous design of the RCT to evaluate the monitoring device led to nurses
signalling mismatches between patients and research conditions (вҖҳIt
would have been something for Mrs Franken, but sheвҖҷs in the control
conditionвҖҷ). The videos under construction during the study made it dif-
ficult to evaluate them. Researchers nonetheless collected data and ana-
lysed them.
The introduction (Chapter 1) gave another example of interference in
construction sites in the discussion of the interdependence of research
practices and the telecare projects they evaluate. The idea, of course, is to
base continuation of the telecare project on the results of research. How-
ever, this scenario never unfolded. The telecare project depended on the
infrastructure of the research so that it stopped when the research
stopped. Researchers and nurses did not collect data anymore and the
budget for the telecare project ran out when the budget for research did.
In the long wait for the proper bureaucracies to process the results вҖ“
bureaucracies that, indeed, found conclusions indecisive to warrant
further investments вҖ“ the telecare practice came to a halt as well.13
Hence, there are two construction sites вҖ“ innovative care practice and
research practice вҖ“ that obstruct one another. Both sites aim to construct
different edifices that sometimes support each other. At other times, one
construction site emerges at the expense of the other. For instance, in
the research construction site, carers should not tinker with interventions,
140
innovating care innovation

or Mrs JansenвҖҷs intervention would have been different from Mrs Pieter-
senвҖҷs. Otherwise, the research would evaluate different interventions
and thus become useless. In care practices, however, adaptations were
improvements вҖ“ for instance, they softened the overly confrontational
questions asked on the white box or adapted alarms that were not useful.
The construction sites of care and research collide because of their dif-
ferent objectives, making it hard to combine state-of-the-art quantitative
research with state-of-the-art care.14, 15
From subjectivity to normativity
So there are three misfits between RCTs and innovative care practices.
RCTs cannot deal with unanticipated outcomes; RCTs ignore practical
knowledge rather than use, develop and substantiate it; and the con-
struction of randomised trials interferes on a practical level with the con-
struction of innovative practices. I should point out a fourth interference
that applies in general to any form of research. The discourse on objec-
tivity obscures the fact that research designs interfere with their object in
theoretical or conceptual ways. The designs themselves are fit to ask
some questions but not others.16, 17 Standard evaluation research can
never ask how outcomes shift and change вҖ“ variability can only be dealt
with quantitatively, on scales of fixed variables. Scales measuring вҖҳself-
managementвҖҷ will never uncover вҖҳfeelings of safetyвҖҷ, while the meaning
of both terms вҖ“ and their relations вҖ“ cannot be clarified by quantifica-
tion. Standard quantitative research designs are fit to evaluate relatively
simple stable interventions in a context that can be controlled and stan-
dardised, such as for a drug trial.
You can trace the theoretical interference of research designs by ana-
lysing how the instruments and concepts used in the research shape the
possible questions and outcomes. To be clear: interference is unavoid-
able and not wrong; no research is possible without tools and concepts.
However, I would not frame interference as gradually encroaching sub-
jectivity. That would suggest that researchers could and should avoid it,
and that вҖҳnon-interferenceвҖҷ is possible. Instead, I suggest opening this
idea up to reflection and analysing it as the inherent normativity needed
to say something about the world in research.18 Here normativity refers
to the articulation, the search for tools and concepts, or the naming and
framing of the object of research, practically and discursively, fore-
grounding some facts rather than others. For instance, research may ad-
dress vital signs rather than loneliness, may allow variables to change
value or not, may ask open or closed questions, or create probabilities or
develop practical knowledge.
It may be more constructive to argue about the normativity of scientific
articulations than about interests or subjectivity. The latter two have a
history of being вҖҳbadвҖҷ regardless of context. Instead, researchers could
argue about fitting research methods and objects. How does the method
research that does not fit
141

shape the object of research and why is this acceptable? Does the meth-
od make relevant aspects of this object visible (for example: does it not
learn about self-management when safety is the relevant variable in prac-
tice or does it help to understand the intricacies and different meanings
of self-management)? Does the research not disturb the phenomenon it
wants to study in such a way that the research studies a different object
altogether (for example by lumping different use practices for the same
devices together)? When is it best to count and when is it better to ana-
lyse practices?
One problem might be that the way the research names and frames its
object belongs to the practical, tacit knowledge of researchers, since it is
embedded in the machines and tools (questionnaires, interviews, blood
tests, concepts) that are commonly applied in their discipline.19 It may
inexplicitly shape their practices as a tacit part of the history and routines
of a discipline. Others вҖ“ observers вҖ“ may be better at articulating this.
But even if researchers are not always aware, they can be asked to ac-
count for their ways of fitting in research methods and for the validity of
their articulations.
Fitting research
So far, I have dealt with three misfits between quantitative evaluation
research and innovative practices, and one concern with the normative
interference any form of research makes in the way it frames or articu-
lates its object, and whether or not a particular interference may fit with
what you actually want to know. What does fitting research to innovative
practices entail? Here is my list of norms needed for fitting research to
innovative practices:
1.
The research describes the processes that shape and shift the goals
and outcomes of innovative practices.
2.
The research mobilises practical knowledge, including practical nor-
mativity, without obscuring the situated and contestable nature of
this knowledge.
3.
The research observes and describes the practices concerned but
does not disrupt the innovative work.
4.
The research is sensitive to ways of вҖҳnaming and framingвҖҷ or articu-
lating its object and the consequences and вҖҳfitnessвҖҷ of these articula-
tions in relation to the aim of the research (in other words: aims and
methods should be made to fit).
In discussing the ways of fitting research вҖ“ I dub them uncontrolled field
studies вҖ“ I pay particular attention to the matter of вҖҳinterested partiesвҖҷ, the
status of practical knowledge and the potential to make uncontrolled
field studies relevant for policy.
142
innovating care innovation

Uncontrolled field studies
Uncontrolled field studies are flexible forms of research that describe
actual, innovative care practices where processes of taming and unleash-
ing new devices (or new standards, new guidelines, etc.) have begun tak-
ing place with a minimum of disturbance.20 The innovative practices
may resemble the case studies in this book, even if calling them вҖҳuncon-
trolled field studiesвҖҷ was never considered at the time of the study. Un-
controlled field studies in care are uncontrolled because it is not the scien-
tists but the carers, the cared for and the other care participants who
construct the research site by (re)constructing the site of care. They
work with the devices and are the sources of relevant knowledge on
what the devices do and what they do with the devices. Participants and
their practices also shape the normative issues that are particular to their
practice, even if one does not agree with the ways participants choose to
deal with them. The participants of innovative practices are encouraged
to interact with the telecare devices (by those in the innovative practice
who find reason to do this), opening up their practices to research that
describes the ways they do things and what that implies for living and
working with a particular device. Innovative practices exist вҖҳin the wildвҖҷ.
They already exist and do not depend on research projects that define
their beginnings and endings.
How do uncontrolled field studies work? The researcherвҖҷs task is to
not disturb or change the work of participants and, by extension, the
innovation. The researcher should record and analyse this work by ask-
ing open questions, observing practices, interviewing participants and
asking them to observe their own practices. Then, researchers may com-
pare results with: a) previously formulated goals, and b) the results of
other innovative practices. Other involved and interested parties may
then discuss these results.
Now I move on to discuss how uncontrolled field studies engage tele-
care users and the status of the knowledge these studies develop. By way
of example, I describe some of my analytical results as a means of feed-
ing knowledge on the workings of telecare into the debate on what forms
of telecare are fit for whom and for what reason.
The influence of users
Uncontrolled field study can include concerned parties in several ways.
On the first level, the concerned are identified because they are involved
in the innovative practices, not by having a voice or a budget but by get-
ting the вҖҳspace to actвҖҷ.21 On a second level, rather than merely asking for
their opinions, the uncontrolled field study engages users by an analysis
of their positions in the innovative care practices. What positions for
the influence of users
143

nurses and patients emerge, what are their possibilities, problems and
responsibilities, and what should we think of them?
From buying, selling and voting to enacting innovations
Uncontrolled field studies analyse innovative practices as situated and
creative practices rather than deliberative practices such as those of demo-
cratically chosen spokespersons in parliament or the consumer practices
of buyers and sellers on the market. All involved in the practice act, and
in doing so, all try to tame the others to fit their goals; they experiment
with devices and the other participants to see if they can achieve produc-
tive ways of fitting. For instance, patients may try to nudge nurses into
calling them rather than having to make a call themselves. Patients may
refuse to use devices they do not like. They had already done this in the
practices I studied, even when they were eager to вҖҳhelp the nurseвҖҷ. Old
women who enjoy reading in peace and quiet did switch off a noisy de-
vice.
Telecare producers do not have the actual power to push their technol-
ogy onto actual users (hence their anger and frustration), but they may
try out their ability to seduce actors into working with their devices. They
can do this by making promises, but it would be even more convincing if
they tried to argue and demonstrate how their devices could be helpful.
They could participate by adapting the devices to their usersвҖҷ needs. This
would enrich rather than disturb the uncontrolled field study. Interests
do not have to be banned; they are named and analysed in the study. If
they are part of the reality of the innovative practices, it may indeed be a
good idea to keep an eye on them.
Nurses and other professionals working with telecare devices are im-
portant actors in uncontrolled field studies. They are the co-constructors
of the innovative practices, and researchers should not hinder them in
this work. If they subvert the device used in the experiment, this should
not be seen as a breach of protocol but rather as a creative attempt to
improve care which deserves reflection. Tinkering could be encouraged
by involving designers and technicians in the innovative practices, to
adapt the devices to make them fit better with the aims and interests of
the practices in which they are used. They may explore new uses for the
devices together with the nurses, to make the devices work better.
This turns innovation into creative experiments rather than standardi-
sation exercises, unleashing rather than taming devices and users, de-
manding curiosity rather than pointing at protocols and user manuals
or making accusations of вҖҳresistanceвҖҷ to вҖҳproperвҖҷ innovation or imple-
mentation. The study should take usersвҖҷ objections very seriously and
explore them вҖ“ if possible in comparison to other practices. One exam-
ple is the nursesвҖҷ desire not to replace visits to patients entirely with tele-
care. The merits of this claim deserve careful study rather than gratui-
tous appeasement acceptable to nobody. The logic of the uncontrolled
144
innovating care innovation

field study is as follows: if translations, tamings and unleashings must
take place anyway to make things fit, why not encourage these activities
and explore where they might lead?
Deliberations do not shape innovative practices. In innovative prac-
tices, actors craft their preferred positions by exerting their influence
and trying to have things their own way. Patients beg to keep devices
longer than intended, hand them in sooner or refuse to use them at all.
Nurses find new uses for the devices and call their patients when they
are in doubt. Instead of arguing about fit, the participants create specific
forms of it. New interdependencies arise which can be described and
which then enter the discussion on their desirability.22
Rest assured, innovative care practices are not totally anarchistic prac-
tices that go in just any direction as long as the innovation runs. In prac-
tice, this does not happen. The studies in this book show that routines,
normativities and knowledge practices already fill care practice. It is hard
work to establish the needed fits. Carers cannot do it any old way. вҖҳOldвҖҷ
routines are never entirely abandoned but are used as foundations to
build on. The device fits вҖҳsomewhereвҖҷ; this and its history make care
practices inert and resistant to change rather than prone to revolution.23
Articulating positions
What is crucial, then, is the articulation of the shape of the innovative
practice. The uncontrolled field study does this by asking what practices
the participants created and what they learned from them. What were
the aims and what are they now? Did different practices emerge than
was expected, promised or hoped for? For instance, what are the implica-
tions of replacing professional control with self-management? What
works, what does not, and why?
The next question is who should articulate all this. Modern researchers
engaging patients in medical research as well as researchers conducting
disability studies suggest that patients and nurses should be the re-
searchers of their own practices. They can explicate the knowledge they
have gained as well as the knowledge embedded in their practices and
devices. There are, however, good reasons for inviting others to help
them do this. First, very practical: caring and conducting research are
entirely different tasks with different aims, each demanding time and
specialist skill. I have shown some of the problems of combining care
and research, such as the extra workload for nurses, and at worst, con-
ducting bad research while giving suboptimal care. It would be wasteful
to make good carers spend time on research. Patients may be just too ill
to permit this. On the other hand, uncontrolled field studies are much
closer to the nursesвҖҷ and patientsвҖҷ own practical knowledge and may be
more fun to do than administrative tasks or filling in questionnaires.
A more fundamental problem is that much of the participantsвҖҷ knowl-
edge is embodied and tacit, embedded in routines and devices, which
the influence of users
145

makes observation from a third-person perspective necessary to articulate
it. People are not always consciously aware of routines that have already
proven their value or changed tacitly. The technology may have quietly
changed the definition of a problem by a change in routine. Difficult
situations or shy patients may have urged participants to change plans.
In addition, people may not always be in a condition that allows them to
give accounts of their own practices.
Uncontrolled field studies involve participants in two ways: as the
creative innovators described above and as positions вҖ“ the (good) patient
and the (good) nurse вҖ“ in the practice under scrutiny. It is not merely
their opinion or preferences the uncontrolled field study is after (this
would fit the consumer patient described in chapter 5) but also the way
they enact the position of being a nurse or a patient in the different con-
figurations of devices, carers, patients and others.24 It is not a contrast
between вҖҳinterest groupsвҖҷ but an articulation of the practices and inter-
dependent positions of nurses, patients, devices and others. Active
nurses fitted specialised devices and passive patients; active patients
fitted other active patients and more modest devices, and so on. Actual
participants need not be physically present in the discussions on their
practices, but the research should represent their positions in order to
reflect upon their desirability.25 Because carers and cared for have to live
and work with the devices, their positions are crucial. Their positions
stand for possibilities of what care could look like and for possible ways
of living with chronic disease.
The status of articulations: comparisons and involving
others
The articulations in the uncontrolled field study consist of the descrip-
tion of possibilities for caring, the knowledge and values embedded in
care practices and the position of participants. Should everyone take
these articulations at face value and automatically accept the вҖҳgoodвҖҷ en-
acted by a practice? Should everyone assume the truth of practical knowl-
edge or celebrate invented positions?
No. The uncontrolled field study then goes on to question the findings вҖ“
first, by comparing innovative practices and the knowledge developed in
them. Uncontrolled field studies are, preferably, multi-site ethnogra-
phies of innovative practices. The comparisons show alternatives and
variations. They show the complexities of having people with different
diseases and devices, having the same disease in different stages, having
different disease combinations, or different uses of the same devices.
Different practices all define problems and ways to deal with them dif-
ferently. An example is the comparison of the monitoring device and the
webcam in chapter 4.
146
innovating care innovation

Bringing in even more variables, understanding and contrasting alter-
native outcomes, makes the relevant issues easier to discern. The happi-
ness and security that patients felt because they knew professionals clo-
sely monitored them deserve serious analysis, but these values may be
related to other values and practices in care such as the webcam practice
that gave patients the means to support each other. The uncontrolled
field study compares the various positions of nurses, patients, devices
and diseases to help in weighing and arguing which practices fit whom
best.
The uncontrolled field study then feeds the findings of the partici-
pants and the comparisons back into innovative practices but also into
broader debates on innovation in care. This is a second way of question-
ing findings, and this works best after the comparisons. Reports on the
proceedings of innovations could feed the discussion on telecare ethics
and efficiency. The debate could substantiate promises and speculations
by reflecting on the intricacies of actual care events and the interpretation
of these events. How should we understand the results of the uncon-
trolled field study? Is care developed in innovative practices good, and if
so, is it preferable to other types of goodness? Is it workable, liveable and
affordable? How does the telecare intervention relate to the practical
knowledge and normative sensitivities of the practice, and does it devel-
op and strengthen them? How does technological innovation improve
care practice, for whom and at what cost, and how does one improve-
ment relate to other ways of improving practice?
These matters concern others not directly involved in the innovative
practices studied: potential patients, carers, families, caring politicians,
industries, and so on. The shaping of health care is a matter of public
concern, precisely because it deals with the organisation of patientsвҖҷ lives
and the lives of those around them. I bet that you, the reader, will have a
lot to say about telecare after reading this book. Your reflections, along
with those of all concerned others, should also be welcome.
The status of practical knowledge
The practical knowledge and normativities articulated by uncontrolled
field studies are suggestions and possibilities for discussion rather than
directives or probabilities. They are local rather than universal facts, food
for thought rather than final conclusions. As a form of knowledge, un-
controlled field studies relate closely to the practical knowledge applied
in the field, not taking it for granted but opening it up to argument and
debate, hence improving it. Researchers and field parties need not be
trusted but should encourage debate and welcome disagreement on what
health care could or should be.
The big difference with classic research methods is that uncontrolled
field studies do not keep the kitchen doors closed but instead wide open
the status of practical knowledge
147

to involve witnesses to promote collective learning. Researchers are in-
dependent of the participants and organisations involved in the innova-
tion, or at least some of the researchers should be.26 They are indepen-
dent yet must be involved in care practices. They should relinquish rigid
surveys and fixed variables to observe the unpredictable outcomes en-
acted and explicated by the practices in action. In an uncontrolled field
study, researchers need to ask open questions and be interested in the
intricacies and specificities of the innovative care practices and those liv-
ing them. They have to assess the possibilities and problems of very dif-
ferent care practices carefully. Instead of sticking to вҖҳpureвҖҷ methods and
rigid designs, researchers need to adapt their methods to make their
field inform them. Researchers should articulate and add to the practical
knowledge of their field, employing know-now strategies, comparative
analysis and discussion.
This set-up does not fit the demands of a market where knowledge is a
closely guarded good exploited only to stay ahead of the competition.
Making innovators keep the doors open to allow collective learning may
well be a task for a cautious government that does not want to impose
too many decisions on the field. At least it would allow the field and
citizens to become interested and involved, to learn from and reflect on
local experiences. The telecare industry might also see the sense of open-
ing doors and pursuing shared goals: as it is now, telecare is still a risky
business.
Discussions unleashed by an uncontrolled field study
By way of illustration, here is the researcherвҖҷs view of several themes that
emerged from the case studies and warrant discussion. What did the
study of these practices show?
Promises, practices and close patients
On the soapbox, telecare promised more efficient use of human re-
sources and/or cost reduction in care. It promised improved quality by
helping patients engage in self-management. This would enhance effi-
ciency, support the patientsвҖҷ own wish to be actively involved in their
own care, and help keep them living at home rather than in an institu-
tion. Professionals could become less active, which would allow for effi-
cient management of staff shortage, or they could become more active to
prevent crises and induce security in patients. The normative threat was
that implementing cold technology would make care devoid of human
contact.
The experimental practices showed that care at a distance is often more
intense than otherwise because contact between patients and carers be-
comes more frequent. Professionals often initiated the frequent contact,
148
innovating care innovation

particularly when monitoring symptoms. Patients contacted each other
more frequently as well in order to exchange practical knowledge.
There is much to say in favour of care at a distance that intensifies
contact between patients: it implies interesting roles for people with
chronic diseases without making them so dependent on professional
care that they have to stay at home to get the care they want. This type of
care also takes seriously the need for social contact and the hazards of
loneliness, particularly in old age.27 I would expect this type of care to be
helpful and relatively cheap. Befriended patients are great вҖҳlow-thresh-
oldвҖҷ carers for their peers, and their friendship and shared needs provide
reciprocal relations and continuity in care as well as advice for daily life
problems, advice that professional carers do not always provide. The in-
vestment required would be for equipment and organisation of patients,
demanding a rather more coaching and initiating role for professional
carers. The potential of patients to become each othersвҖҷ carers may lead
to interesting new social roles, such as becoming professional carers
trained in using their experiential knowledge.28
But there are problems as well. It is hard to fit innovative systems of
patients caring for patients into the current system of health care fund-
ing in the Netherlands, between central care funding through health in-
surance companies and the government versus social welfare funding
through local municipalities. Chronic patients coaching other chronic
patients as a health care practice does not fit this two-tiered organisation,
although there are local exceptions (often funded by health care organi-
sations). However, the situation may change if health insurers see the
effect of improvements in quality of care and efficiency reflected by a
reduced demand for the services of professional carers.
This form of care is in an especially fresh experimental phase. The
flourishing community of caring patients in this book arose from em-
bedding webcams in practices where patients knew each other inti-
mately. This allowed patients to decide whom they wanted to stay in
touch with. To organise new caring communities among people who do
not know each other demands creativity, as the homecare organisationвҖҷs
webcam experiment showed. As an alternative, care for people with
chronic diseases could be organised partly in groups, for instance in
general practices. Uncontrolled field studies could follow up on the re-
sults.
Close professionals
There are situations where more intense professional care might be le-
gitimate, such as in the practice of palliative care for the oncology pa-
tients. The telecare system fits the situation of patients who suffer in
silence instead of turning to the doctor for timely treatment. It also fits
the aims of this practice: patients are not trained to become self-man-
agers but need instead to come to terms with their changed prospects in
discussions unleashed by an uncontrolled field study
149

life and their imminent death. The professionals take care of symptoms
or side effects. The participants achieved the goals of this practice with-
out criticism, bar solving the problem of who cares for the administra-
tion of the system or the research.
For the COPD and heart failure patients, this was different. It seems
that intensified professional control could keep patients out of the hospi-
tal, at least for a while. Yet there were worries, too: about the desirability
of professional surveillance, the sense and feasibility of daily measure-
ments, the relation between telecare and other forms of self-care and the
reduced responsibility of the patients. Increased control by professionals
would give patients no other opportunities to develop their practical
knowledge, whereas their condition demands that they do this anyway.
Telecare devices cannot take disease away. They do not cook or carry peo-
ple from one place to another. For people with COPD or heart failure, it
is never an option to вҖҳleave it all to the professionalsвҖҷ or to their devices.
To place вҖҳcare for symptomsвҖҷ in the foreground, as happened in the
monitoring practices, runs the risk of framing only one version of prob-
lems as the most relevant, and this may frustrate the capacity for self-
care that patients have to engage in anyway. The daily battles with salt-
free diet and reduced fluid intake melted into the background in the ver-
sion of the trouble defined by the monitoring devices, even when it was
still central to patients. For the COPD patients, crises were also relevant,
and they found it particularly hard to decide when to go to the doctor or
take medication. Yet their daily worries were about how to keep moving
and do meaningful things when short of breath. These problems have a
huge impact on daily life, even though they may fall outside narrow
medical definitions of treatment.
Close technologies
Whatever type of (tele)care analysed, вҖҳself-managementвҖҷ turned out to be
a misleading term. There was always some form of вҖҳtogether manage-
mentвҖҷ, even if the caring partners varied at times. They could be profes-
sional carers, telecare devices or fellow patients. Family members, where
present, were always involved in one way or another. Rather than under-
standing care as a practice for treating individuals, it makes sense to look
at care in its various configurations, including the place of technology
and the relations made with and through it. This gives a better idea of
which configurations are worth arguing for or against.
Close research
Uncontrolled field studies fit innovative care practices where not much
knowledge is at hand and where the stakes are high. These studies use
and develop the practical knowledge of participants in the innovative
150
innovating care innovation

practices. It shows how practices shape problems, how participants deal
with them and why this would be good. Uncontrolled field studies help
to reflect upon normative matters that are not imaginary but actually
emerge in practice. A well-known complaint about conventional research
is that its outcomes are clear but nobody knows what they mean or what
to do with them. Classic research is far too remote from the practices it
studies to provide the answers to the thorny questions of how to under-
stand innovations. Uncontrolled field studies are not. Results of uncon-
trolled field studies are directly relevant to the question of whether and
which telecare devices improve care practices, even if they provide no
simple answer. Uncontrolled field studies support the improvement of
care practices rather than prove the effectiveness of machines.29
Fitting research does not harm the object of research in the widest
sense of the term вҖҳharmвҖҷ. Scientific research may damage the organisa-
tion of innovative practices or even damage care when research methods
are blind to its important characteristics. The knowledge created in un-
controlled field studies is analytic and traceable; it explicates how it
names and frames its object. The ethics of scientific research does not
define the conditions for research but forms the core of conducting re-
search. Research that fits is caring research; it can be used to improve the
practices it studies. Ironically, the efficiency gains of uncontrolled field
studies concern the better organisation of research practices. Telecare in-
novation is managing to take place against the odds, but so far there is
an abundance of evaluation that fits neither the requirements of classic
evaluation research nor the innovative care practices. Employing flexibly
designed uncontrolled field studies could prevent these misfits.
However, after finishing this book, even the least suspicious reader will
no longer take promises or changes in routines at face value. It is high
time to organise some uncontrolled field studies and study their work-
ings вҖ“ in uncontrolled field studies.
close research
151


Acknowledgements
There are many people to thank for their help with the research and the
writing of this book. It has been said before: doing research is a collec-
tive effort. To acknowledge this, I have written these notes of thanks in
the shape of movie credits. The credits mean to say вҖҳthank youвҖҷ but in-
stead show what everybody has contributed so that the reader can be
properly impressed.
The cast
It is good custom to start with the cast, the people who move around on
the pages. I cannot name them, because I guaranteed them anonymity.
The stars вҖҳact naturallyвҖҷ in this book that is not a work of fiction. The
book is also not a mere reportage, because of the structuring work of the
concepts and comparisons, and the choices I made about what to tell and
how to tell it. But it is documentary in the sense that this book is about
real people, real concerns and real practices. The book makes use of the
practical knowledge and normative findings of the informants, the peo-
ple who have lived and worked with the telecare technologies. In this
sense, this book is a true co-production, telling a story that none of us
could have told separately. For this, I cannot thank them enough.
The crew
Executive production
The research started in 2005 with a grant from NWO, The Netherlands
Organisation for Scientific Research, from the Ethics, Research and Pol-
icy programme: Care at a distance. A normative investigation into tele-
care. The book was written during the EFORTT research programme
funded by the European CommunityвҖҷs seventh Framework programme:
Ethical Frameworks for Telecare Technologies for older people at home.
Production manager
Margo Trappenburg, editor of the Care and Welfare series
Without Margo, this book would never have been written.
Location management, props and grips
AMC, department of General Practice, Section of Medical Ethics
Proofreaders and focus pullers
Amade MвҖҷcharek, Annemarie Mol, Jan Pols and Dick Willems
153

Indispensable for the first draft of a manuscript (вҖҳdone!вҖҷ) are the proof-
readers (вҖҳвҖҰ but not yetвҖҰвҖҷ). Amade seems to always know what I am try-
ing to get at, even in my most premature philosophical gropings; she
always helps me to articulate my thoughts better вҖ“ and isnвҖҷt that what
thinking is all about! Amade also gave me the idea for the final framing
of the book and celebrated the вҖҳbirth of the manuscriptвҖҷ with me. Anne-
marie, leaving her eating bodies for a while, chewed on many little flaws
in the text and urged me to re-write it to make it easier to swallow and
digest for the reader. She seasoned her comments by adding a hand of
little вҖҳ+++вҖҷ sometimes with a delicious added вҖҳ!вҖҷ These gave the revision
of the manuscript real zest. Jan proudly volunteered as вҖҳthe educated lay
readerвҖҷ, pointing out incomprehensible sections, sloppy arguments and
places where diplomacy might just be more suitable than irony. I think
that is quite something for a dad! Dick has a very specific way of com-
menting on drafts; there are not many notes, but those that are there
truly lift oneвҖҷs thinking to a higher level. I hope there will be many texts
and crucial notes to follow!
Advice, support, colleagues and co-researchers
* My colleagues from the NWO project:
Maartje Schermer and Corrette Ploem
I will never forget how Maartje and I went for our first interview in
this field that was new to us. Nobody answered the door, the telecare
company seemed to have disappeared. We later learnt that it had gone
bankrupt, a phenomenon that turned out not to be uncommon in this
field. It was great to do interviews together in projects that did survive.
* The advisory board
Daan Dohmen, Sjef Gevers, Arie Hasman, Medard Hilhorst, Annemarie
van Hout, Ellen Maat, Jan Thie and Jelle van der Weijde
After this bewildering start, we were supported by an advisory board
that helped us understand what was going on and suggested new angles
and visions.
* My colleagues from the EFORTT (EC) project
From Lancaster University: Maggie Mort, Christine Milligan and Celia
Roberts
From the Autonomous University in Barcelona: Blanca CallГ©n, Miquel
DomenГЁch, DaniГ«l LГіpez, ThomГЎs SГЎnchez-Criado, Francisco Tirado
From the Diakonhjemmet in Oslo: Ingunn Moser and Hilde Thygesen
I warmly recommend a European project to any researcher. Not only
are the local differences extremely enriching for the research, they also
learn much about habits of diet and sports. Imagine dinner at 11.00 pm
in Barcelona, with the slight wind still warm and the wine seductively
redвҖҰ Potato chips are essential for lunch in England, preferably in Lan-
casterвҖҷs Butterfly House or while chewing on the thoughts of Emanuel
154
acknowledgements

Swedenborg in his beautiful former residence in London. And imagine
Nordic skiing and sleighing in the all-white mountains of Norway! I
really enjoyed our sessions together and I hope we will find ways to con-
tinue our research (and outings!) in the future.
* My colleagues from the AMCвҖҷs philosophy of care
Annemarie van Hout, Antje Seeber , Beate Giebner, Ben de Bock, Erik
Olsman, Esther Leuthold, Jean Philipe de Jong, Mirjam Broerse, Myra
van Zwieten, Sabine Ootes, Susanne de Kort, Trudie Gerrits and Yolande
Witman
It is great to be infected by your enthusiasm and it is a privilege to
work together with some of you closely.
* My colleague in all of the above
Dick Willems
Dick is the manager of the Section of Medical Ethics, with its atmo-
sphere of possibility and trying out new ideas вҖ“ ideas that seem to suit
him quite naturally. Dick has been essential for the course my work has
taken. He is great fun to be with and a tremendously generous reader of
drafts. I look forward to our explorations of the aesthetics of daily life
and care!
Interviewer
Ether Leuthold
Esther patiently interviewed telecare users of the PAL4 project as well as
project leaders for the EFORTT study. It was great working together with
Esther as a sparring partner and wonderful to have her as a companion
in fieldwork вҖ“ and in walks during lunchhour.
Intellectual support, Dutch summers, jamu and skype
Hans Pols
Script editor
Ragini Werner, Needser (Native English Editing Service)
вҖҳSpring cleaningвҖҷ was the word that came to my mind when I got the
manuscript back from Ragini; I am sure she would have picked a better
word!
Cover photography and visual effects
Ruud Mast
Life is barren without art. Ruud makes life more beautiful.
Artefact and aartivark philosophy
Auke Pols
care at a distance
155

True love, sine-qua-nons, grounding, fun, travel and animals
Bertus Eskes
Flo
Very special thanks
Ingunn Moser
For providing ever more pieces of the expanding jigsaw of our research
with work, comments and friendship.
Amade MвҖҷcharek
Institutional academic life may sometimes feel like swimming against
the tide. However, any fatigue instantly changes into inspiration and
flow during the theoretical explorations, the sharing of fascinations and
the вҖҳpushing of conceptsвҖҷ with wonderful Amade. The combination of
friendship and intellectual work moves me more than I can say.
Inspirational thought sharing
Vicky Singleton, Henriette Langstrup, Brit Ross Winthereik, Hans Har-
bers, Myriam Winance, Kristin Asdal, Estrid SГ¶rensen, Thomas Schef-
fer, Wilma Boevink, Rosemarie Buikema, Dorine Bauduin, Antoinette
de Bont, Iris Wallenburg, Jolanda Habraken, Jacqueline Kool, Detlef
Petry, Carolien Smits, Evelien Tonkens, John Law, Jannelle Taylor,
Geertje Boschma, Ant Lettinga, Rob Hagendijk, Maureen McNeil, Car-
men Romero Bachiller, Marjo Rauhalla, Sjaak van der Geest, Ingrid
Baart
Continuing on-line support
HanneLore Modderkolk
Dinners
Robert Jan Both, Irma Roose, Marja Depla, Jet Isarin, Karen Wegner
156
acknowledgements

Appendix: Projects studied for this book
1
Oncology & COPD patients
Telecare practice
Palliative care for
people with cancer
Homecare for people
with COPD/long-
term illnesses
Rehabilitation clinic
for COPD & asthma
Project/permanent
Project
Permanent, but
pending financial ar-
rangements
Permanent
Type of device
Health Buddy
Health Buddy/white
box (for COPD only),
webcam, touch
screen and computer
Webcam and compu-
ter
Period of use by pa-
tients/implemented?
3 months/no
Permanent
3 months/yes
Fieldwork
16 home visits;
Interviews with 14 pa-
tients, including
6 with partner
1 widow
1 specialist nurse:
several times;
Project group meet-
ings
13 home visits & in-
terviews with pa-
tients;
Interviews with 4
nurses, the general
project manager (sev-
eral times),
2 local project man-
agers
6 months in clinic;
Interviews with 9 pa-
tients at home;
2 volunteers;
2 central carers;
2 technicians, 1 man-
ager;
1 project manager;
Project coordinator:
several times
Organisation
General hospital
3 home care organi-
sations
National clinic
Demographics
North NL
Middle & South NL
Central NL
Patients involved
64 (58 in control
condition retrospec-
tively)
No information (pro-
jects in starting
phase)
About 20 in any given
period
Professionals involved
4 oncology nurses
COPD nurses
social workers
157

2
Cardiac patients
Telecare practice
Care for people with
heart failure
Care for people with
heart failure
Project/permanent
Project, longstanding
Project
Type of device
Health Buddy/white
box
Monitoring blood
pressure, weight,
pulse. Informative vi-
deos. Call centre.
Period of use by pa-
tients/implemented?
3 months/longstand-
ing use, ever new
research
Permanent/stopped
in most hospitals
after RCT
Fieldwork
Interviews:
1 heart failure nurse
3 patients
2 telephone inter-
views with producers
of device
Interviews:
3 heart failure nurses
5 patients visiting the
hospital
1 representative of in-
dustry
1 cardiologist
1 interview with call
centre staff: doctor,
nurse, coordinator.
1 technician installing
devices at home
Observation of work
of call centre nurse.
2 home visits to pa-
tients
Organisation
Hospital
5 hospitals, 1 studied.
Call centre
Demographics
South NL
All over NL
Patients involved
66
98 (113 in control
condition)
Professionals involved
4 heart failure nurses,
1 cardiologist
Many heart failure
nurses, cardiologists
158
appendix: projects studied for this book

3
Projects studied in less detail
Telecare practice
Webcam project in
homecare, east NL
Webcam project
homecare and hospi-
tal
Diabetes care general
practice and hospital
Project/permanent
No information after
bankruptcy of organi-
sation
Project
Project
Type of device
Webcam
Webcam
Health Buddy/white
box
Period of use by pa-
tients/implemented?
Variable/ yes
Variable/ no
3 months/yes
Fieldwork
Interview with project
coordinator
Interview with service
organisation, innova-
tion manager, insur-
ance company
(funding the project)
Interview with dia-
betes nurse and pro-
ject coordinator
Organisation
Homecare
General practice,
hospital
Demographics
East NL
North NL
West NL
Patients involved
No information
No information
No information
Professionals involved
Homecare nurses
Internal doctors, dia-
betes nurses
Other projects
One homecare project went bankrupt before we could interview staff
(hence not listed in table). Two homecare projects failed when homecare
organisations went bankrupt.
Conferences and meetings
We attended conferences as well as demonstrations and presentations by
the industry, e-health presentations from national patient organisations,
and so on. We studied project documentation and followed public dis-
cussions.
Citizen panels
We organised five panels for the EU study, three in 2008, two in 2010.
We invited telecare users, potential users and people caring for their el-
ders to discuss their views on telecare developments.
care at a distance
159

The first three panels discussed the participantsвҖҷ notions of good care
and problems they feared or wanted to see solved. We introduced tele-
care technology in the second part of the meeting: a monitoring device
for heart failure; webcam communication with a professional carer or
informal carer; internet & email; alarms & sensors; robot pets.
We organised a meeting to discuss preliminary findings from the
ethnographic studies. Also, the findings from the first round of citizen
panels was fed back to participants, and some results from other coun-
tries were also presented.
EU partners
Ethnographic material, analyses and papers from the European partners
participating in the European study were also used as a background for
the Dutch case studies. Participating countries were Great Britain, Spain
and Norway.
160
appendix: projects studied for this book

Notes
Notes Chapter 1
1.
See Currell et al. 2000.
2.
Examples of вҖҳoldвҖҷ telecare technology, in use for some time in the Nether-
lands but not part of the hype (this differs from country to country) include
thrombosis monitoring at a distance and the use of personal alarms. These
are both quite вҖҳnormalisedвҖҷ, as Carl May and colleagues (2007) would put it,
meaning that the technology is routinely embedded and taken for granted in
everyday practice.
3.
For the dreams of the national Dutch health care consumer organisation,
see Tjalsma 2007.
4.
In the Netherlands, telecare did not promise that patients would have better
access to health care services, as was the case with the first developments in
telemedicine in countries like Canada and the US (see Mort, May & Wil-
liams 2003). Cartwright (2000) gives a fascinating critical analysis of the
politics of telemedicine, where vulnerable poor populations are used to test
technology for the army and space travel. She also points to the hegemony of
dominant medical centres over local knowledge and health care practices.
For this argument, see also Miscione 2007. For examples of telemedicine in
remote places in Canada, see Roberge et al. 1982 and Dunn et al. 1980. For
critical notes on utopian thinking by decision makers see Berg 2002.
5.
See Onor & Misan 2005; Sparrow 2002; Sparrow & Sparrow 2006 for some
vivid nightmares, and for an overview of nightmarish positions: Pols & Mo-
ser 2009.
6.
The вҖҳsociology of expectationsвҖҷ is a branch of STS concerned with the way
the sciences generate hope вҖ“ and money вҖ“ besides facts. It shows that public
promises in the short term always overrate the practical possibilities of tech-
nology, whereas in the long term they are usually completely wrong. The
behaviour of technology users seems very hard to predict, and large sums of
money may turn out to have been wasted. See Brown 2003; Brown & Mi-
chael 2003; Borup et al. 2006.
7.
Interestingly, notions of what telecare promises to do, what the exact pro-
blem of an aging population is and how telecare would help to solve the
problems differs greatly across EU countries. For instance, the Netherlands
is targeting telecare solutions at elderly people with chronic diseases,
whereas in Spain and England the target group is the general aging popula-
tion. The concern is that the elderly will live alone, away from their children.
The ways in which the actors take telecare promises seriously also differs:
the Dutch government is positive, but leaves it to вҖҳthe fieldвҖҷ and the market
to develop telecare solutions; the English NHS is actively implementing tele-
care in the homes of older people. See for the UK situation: May, Finch,
Mair & Mort 2005; Milligan, Mort & Roberts 2010; Milligan Roberts & Mort
2010. For Spain: LГіpez 2010 and Norway: Thygesen & Moser (2010). Schill-
maier and DomГЁnech (2010) collects most of these papers.
8.
See Barbot 2006 for different types of вҖҳactive patientsвҖҷ.
161

9.
More about the promises in Chapters 4, 6 & 7. Promises are typical in policy
literature and in communications from the industry. In the Netherlands a
recent report from the board advising the government on matters of health
care organisation (Raad voor de Volksgezondheid en Zorg, RVZ, 2010), has
put reasoning about telecare and more efficient use of working capacity
firmly on the health care policy agenda.
10. More about the nightmares in Chapters 2 & 3. The literature on the ethics of
technology often hosts the nightmares, see note 4.
11.
See
www.euractiv.com/en/health/doctors-unconvinced-ehealth-policy/arti-
cle-170213, published 8 February 2008, last accessed 22 August 2010.
12. LГіpez & DomГЁnech (2009) beautifully analyse how wearing pendant alarms
(necklace holding a personal alarm button) evokes an ambivalent identity of
being both vulnerable (one runs the risk of falling and needing help at any
time, even in the space always thought of as safe: the home) and, more her-
oically, autonomous, capable of living independently at home. LГіpez de-
scribes how these personal alarms must try to optimise and combine the
effect of each of these identities on health and well-being (LГіpez 2010). See
Thygesen (2009) for an analysis of the workings of smart home technology
in sheltered housing for people with dementia.
13.
This is very different from the situation in Great Britain, where the NHS
actively directs telecare development by setting targets for the implementa-
tion of telecare projects (see Milligan, Roberts & Mort 2010; Roberts, Mort &
Milligan 2010). The Dutch health care market is not a вҖҳfreeвҖҷ market, but the
government defines the conditions under which it allows it to work.
14. Trappenburg (2008) and Van de Bovenkamp & Trappenburg (2010) show
that the national patient organisation (NPCF) is organised and financed by
the government, who needed the patients as a party (the consumers) on the
health care market to be constructed. Hence, the organisation is less about
representing patients and their concerns, and more about the desire to cre-
ate health care as a market with critical consumers who want value for
money. This may explain why this organisation took sides in the telecare
debate so quickly.
15.
A concern in offering telecare devices to patients that studies rarely address
is what it means if telecare organisations take devices away after a pilot or
pre-fixed time slot. Many projects in this study started to offer telecare for a
restricted period, but many patients (and so far: successfully) objected to
their device being taken away at the appointed date. The setting of a period
of use often had an economic background but has great implications for
patients.
16. See Finch et al. 2003.
17. The 1950s saw the design of quantitative studies, within the paradigm of
evidence-based medicine since the 1980s, with the randomised controlled
trial (RCT) as the gold standard of good research. See for example Sehon &
Stanley (2003) for an explanation, or Timmermans and Berg 2003 for a
study of the rise of evidence-based medicine. The pharmaceutical industry
became legally obliged to use RCTs before they could think of marketing
new drugs: RCTs should prove them effective.
18. EminoviГ§ et al. 2007 complain about this in the context of telemedicine
projects they have been evaluating in a meta-analysis, an aggregation of trial
results.
162
notes

19. There is some useful literature with comparable demonstrations about the
use of standards in care (Berg 1997; Timmermans, Bowker & Star 1998).
These authors stress that systems and standards do indeed change health
care practice but that the effects differ greatly because people using them
negotiate and change the standards when they use them. How protocols
work out is hard to predict; it needs empirical and local studies to show
what their effects are, before their acceptability can be discussed (Mol &
Berg 1998).
20. See Pols & Willems (2011) for this argument. John Law (1994) uses the term
вҖҳprojectnessвҖҷ for conceptions of interventions as discrete events, with a clear
beginning and ending and a linear way of discerning cause and effect.
21. See Lettinga 2000; Lettinga & Mol 1999. The word вҖҳeffectвҖҷ is somewhat mis-
leading here because, strictly speaking, there is no linearity where a cause
produces an effect that one may consequently identify. See also chapter 8.
22. Scholars often make the same argument about pharmaceutical industries.
See, for example, Healey 2002. The debate in the Netherlands about these
kind of issues was stirred up after the publication of a book by Dehue (2008)
evoking heated debates involving many angry psychiatrists.
23. The short history of telecare shows the frequent collapse of telecare projects
after a project has finished. See Langstrup-Nielsen 2005; Finch et al. 2003.
See Mort, May & Williams (2003) for different ways in which RCTs and their
ending interfered with dermatology telemedicine practices.
24. The term articulation is from Dona Haraway (1991) and signifies that sto-
ries, scientific analyses or other articulations are never вҖҳneutralвҖҷ but always
specific, highlighting some matters rather than others. I take it as the nor-
mative contribution of researchers to consider carefully why they use these
concepts rather than others. This normativity is about sensitivity for con-
cepts. See Pols 2008 and the final chapter of this book.
25. WittgensteinвҖҷs parallel to the вҖҳlanguage gameвҖҷ may be instructive here. Ac-
cording to Wittgenstein, a word does not merely refer to an вҖҳobject out thereвҖҷ
but to other words within a particular language game. The language game is
the order that produces the specific meaning of a term rather than its dic-
tionary meaning. See e.g. Wittgenstein 1953.
26. That objects may have вҖҳversionsвҖҷ points to a notion of вҖҳmultiplicityвҖҷ that is
part of the naming and framing theories informing this study. The exemp-
lary work here is Annemarie Mol (2002). Multiplicity of objects means that
people enact objects in different ways within different practices. As Mol
shows, atherosclerosis is a different object in epidemiology, pathology or
the clinic. This is not a matter of different interpretations of the object but of
ontological differences: the object is different things in different practices.
See also: Law & Mol 2007. See Moreira (2006) for different вҖҳblood-pres-
suresвҖҷ.
27. For empirical analyses of how ideals of good care are embedded in practices
and technology, see Thygesen & Moser 2010; Mol 2010; Willems 2010,
2003; Pols 2008. Different from an ethics of care, where ethicists mostly
define care as inherently good or a normative framework for good care is
developed (Joan Tronto 1993 is the exemplary philosopher here), an analysis
of care practices may show that well-intended activities may turn out to be
undesirable practices. Such analyses are attentive to care practicesвҖҷ orienta-
care at a distance
163

tion towards doing good but make the result of this orientation the object of
empirical study.
28. To think about the normative sides of these modes of ordering, I have been
inspired by Boltanski and ThГ©venot (1991). Boltanski and ThГ©venot framed
a theoretical vocabulary that allows one to study how ordinary people justify
their actions. They discerned different вҖҳrepertoires of justificationвҖҷ. People
draw upon these repertoires in varied ways, using different types of justifica-
tion in the same situation. Nevertheless, each repertoire, in and of itself, is
internally consistent and has its own hierarchy of values and its own concep-
tion of the world.
29. There is a parallel to WittgensteinвҖҷs language games, explicitly including
material objects in them. Michel Foucault and Georges Canguilhem also in-
spire my particular position, where the object brought into being in knowl-
edge practices is analysed as a position within particular relations. I draw
upon studies in ANT using the notion of вҖҳenactmentвҖҷ, see e.g. Mol 1998;
2002. The best description of material semiotics is given by John Law,
where he describes the need to study reality as it takes shape within вҖҳmateri-
al semiotic networksвҖҷ. In a material semiotic network, вҖҳentities take their
form and acquire their attributes as a result of their relations to other enti-
tiesвҖҷ (Law 1999, p. 3). вҖҳThingsвҖҷ and humans are not something solid in and
of themselves, but their identities come into being within their local connec-
tions to other things and humans.
30. See Pols & Willems 2011. We were building on the work on domestication
theory of Lie & SГёrensen 1996; Silverstone 2005; Silverstone et al. 1992;
Berker et al. 2006. However, see also Webster (2002) and CallГ©n et al.
(2009) for a discussion that Health Technology assessment involving delib-
erations on the design process with (potential) users is not enough to cap-
ture the creative engagements of users who subvert, appropriate, refuse or
adopt new technology. See Anestad (2003) for an analysis of what she calls
вҖҳdesign of configurationsвҖҷ, this being the creation of a well-working mix of
people, practices and artefacts, a process in which the introduced technology
produces changes and is also changed itself. For the domestication of ani-
mals and plants, see Haraway 2008 and Clutton-Brock 1998.
31.
Studies reflecting on material semiotics use other terms as well: ANT, after-
ANT (see Gad & Bruun Jensen 2010), empirical philosophy (Mol 2000) and
praxiography (Mol 2002). This re-naming serves the freedom to build on as
well as subvert and re-invent a theoretical вҖҳtraditionвҖҷ that aims to constantly
innovate its own terms and conditions. Scholars argue for this with more or
even more irony: see, for example, Pickering 1992; Law 1997; Latour 1991.
32. See e.g. Lichtenstein 2010.
33. See Fisher 1992.
34. The example is from Bruno Latour 1999. See Verbeek 2009 for ethical con-
siderations on persuasive technology.
35. Foucault 1971.
164
notes

Notes Chapter 2
1.
See Habermas 1985. See Mol (2008) for a critique of distinguishing вҖҳcareвҖҷ as
a space next to other spaces.
2.
This is common in an ethics of care, with Joan Tronto (1993) as the exemp-
lary philosopher. Ethicists of care often pursue universal definitions. See
Pols 2006 and Brown 2010 for an empirical approach to what care and
goodness are in particular situations.
3.
Foucault 1973; Osborne 1992; Struhkamp et al. 2008.
4.
The development of the power/ knowledge metaphor seems to derive from a
mix of вҖҳBirth of the clinicвҖҷ (1973) and вҖҳDiscipline and punishвҖҷ (1977).
5.
See Pols & Moser 2009 for a critical discussion.
6.
See e.g. Ihde 1991 for an image of a non-technological utopia. Although it is
difficult to take his image of pristine beaches seriously, the underlying fear
of alienation is present in many discussions about the social effects of inter-
net use.
7.
Telecare devices form a strange set of devices here. They are not medical
technologies because they are brought in from outside medical practice. Yet
they can only function within medical practices and, to that end, need to
become medical devices.
8.
Dick Willems (2010) shows a case where a family considered a dead per-
sonвҖҷs spectacles acceptable technology for him to wear in the coffin, whereas
nasal cannula were removed even though the deceased used to wear them
daily. Apparently, boundaries of which technology вҖҳbelongsвҖҷ to us shift.
9.
The assumed functionality of medical technology is also an example of the
idea that technology determines what will happen when people start using it.
See, for instance, Wyatt 2008. Interestingly, both the promises and night-
mares of telecare development assume that technology is the determining
factor, see Chapter 1.
10. See Mol 2008 for the way in which industries design blood sugar measur-
ing devices to target different user groups.
11.
Sparrow & Sparrow 2006; 2002; Gamon et al. 1998.
12. This is a widespread fear: it was prominent in the citizensвҖҷ panels we orga-
nised to discuss telecare in care with (potential) elderly users; see also: Milli-
gan, Mort & Roberts, 2010. Roberts & Mort (2009) and Oudshoorn (2009)
point to the tendency of telecare technology (and discourses on this technol-
ogy) to fragment care and favour reductionist images of вҖҳtelepatientsвҖҷ (Mort,
Finch & May 2009). The more subjective aspects in care may be threatened
or may become separated from вҖҳhands-onвҖҷ care work.
13.
There have been many discussions on the socialising versus the de-socialis-
ing effects of the internet and other new media. In the Netherlands, even the
queen interfered in this debate in her 2009 Christmas speech by warning of
the superficiality of electronic contacts. This sparked off much debate in the
newspapers.
14. A fifth argument that Sparrow & Sparrow address does not return in this
paper: this is the objection of having oneself or others (like frail elderly) be
cheated by thinking that machines do things they are not capable of, such as
loving their owners. Instead of judging deception beforehand, however, in
this chapter I will look at the perceptions expressed by those participating in
these practices, and cheating was not among them.
care at a distance
165

15.
Unpredictability may, however, be programmed, as AIBO the robot dog
shows. This indeed makes it much more interesting than devices with a
high degree of predictability, creating a good fit as a companion. See Pols &
Moser 2009.
16. Implicitly, this seems to imply that a вҖҳwillingness to sacrifice somethingвҖҷ is a
test to see if a relation is caring or not: only a friend in need is a friend
indeed. One could, however, also argue that it may be valuable to be engaged
in less demanding relations, such as with robot dogs that may be loved but
do not urinate on the carpet or need to be walked (see Pols & Moser 2009).
17. There is some dispute about the meaning of the term вҖҳpalliative careвҖҷ. On
the one hand, it seems to refer to вҖҳa kind of careвҖҷ where вҖҳquality of lifeвҖҷ rather
than a вҖҳcureвҖҷ is the goal. As such, palliative care seems to best fit cancer
patients; professionals worry about comfort and pain, and the patient does
not have to be active in care but has to come to terms with the end of life.
Other patients, like COPD and heart failure patients, cannot be that passive
in their own care. They will have to take care of themselves until they die, as
professionals cannot take over. The idea of palliative care as a kind of care
seems to be behind the palliative care programme of the Dutch financer of
health research, ZonMw (swww.zonmw.nl/nl/onderwerpen/alle-program-
ma-s/palliatieve-zorg/) when they speak about вҖҳthe new care modelвҖҷ. On the
other hand, when palliative care is used to denote a particular phase in care вҖ“
i.e., care in the final stages of life вҖ“ phrases such as вҖҳpalliative care should be
started earlierвҖҷ are meaningless. Would this imply that we have to start fa-
cing death at an earlier point? Or that quality of care should be the aim of
care along with curative aspects? In the latter situation, the opposition be-
tween care and cure is unclear. The WHO definition is not conclusive here
(WHO 1998).
18. I made 15 home visits. I talked to seven male and seven female patients,
including six patients and their partners (three female, three male), and one
recent widow.
19. All names in this book are fictitious.
20. The term is from Kleinman & Van der Geest 2009. For studies that take
daily life as a starting point, see: Mol 2008; Willems et al. 2006; Winance
2007; Moser 2005 Nijhof 2001; Corbin & Strauss 1988.
21. Of course, real art may just do this. The point here is the practical function-
ality that is part of the aesthetics.
22. For the concept of tinkering, referring to the process of caring by adapting to
changing situations, see chapter 5. The notion of fitting brings out the nor-
mative or successful moments within this process of tinkering.
23. 64 patients participated in the project (Korsten 2010). The project manager
said that вҖҳthere werenвҖҷt many refusers, about five, but those who were there
handed their white box back in the first week they had it.вҖҷ Others [among my
informants] stopped when the chemotherapy ended. The project manager
told me that so far, they had been very flexible as to how long people could
have the device. This had to do with the budget that could afford more pa-
tients than were actually included [Minutes of project group meeting, 4 De-
cember 2009].
24. Reference to вҖҳtoo muchвҖҷ care exists elsewhere as well when concerning the
independence of patients or the goal of care to make people independent or
not make them dependent (see e.g. Pols 2008; Struhkamp et al. 2009).
166
notes

Although professional carers do not mention independence as an ideal or
goal in palliative care, it returns in the shape of care that is вҖҳgood enoughвҖҷ вҖ“
not too little and not in excess.
25. See Suchman 2007; Turkle 1984; Wilson 2005; Haraway 1991.
Notes Chapter 3
1.
Part of this analysis is published as Pols 2009.
2.
That technology sets norms is also put forward in the idea that technology
has a script (Akrich 1992; Latour 1992). As in movies and plays, technology
can be seen as containing scripts that direct their users/players as to what
characters they are, what they should do when and how to do it well.
3.
See Mol 2002; Willems 2003; Pols 2008. The term enactment signifies that
the participants are not always aware of the norms they enact. Devices and
taken-for-granted routines may tacitly hide these norms.
4.
вҖҳGood nursingвҖҷ is obviously not static or ahistorical; it is related to many
local developments, the introduction of new technology, buildings, different
types of patients, organisations and changing notions of what is вҖҳgood careвҖҷ
and вҖҳgood knowledgeвҖҷ in both nursing and other disciplines (Nicolini 2006;
Greatbatch et al. 2005; Lehoux et al. 2002; May et al. 2001).
5.
The name of the conference was вҖҳTelecare: Dialogue and Debate вҖ“ The emer-
gence of new technologies and responsibilities for healthcare at home in
EuropeвҖҷ and took place in Utrecht, Netherlands, 20-21 September 2007. It
is well documented: see http://www.csi.ensmp.fr/WebCSI/MEDUSE/, last
accessed: 28 July 2008
6.
Van Kammen, 2002; Willems 2004.
7.
Norman 2006; Gammon et al. 1998; SГӨvenstedt al. 2005.
8.
Bauer 2004; Onor & Misan 2005; Milligan et al. 2006.
9.
Miller 2006; Greatbatch et al. 2005; Smith & Godfrey 2002; Tuckett 2002.
10. In the horror image of the abandoned, technologically mediated patient, no-
body is looking after the patient. Implicit in the nightmare of coldness is that
there are no other people around the patient to provide embodied relations,
only the nurse.
11.
Maartje Schermer was my fellow researcher on the first telecare project.
12. Personal communication on a presentation by the author at a conference,
September 2010.
13.
Soon, the idea of preventing crises was linked to notions of cost reduction.
There has been a shift in public notions of the benefits of telecare: prevent-
ing disease exacerbation will lead to cost reduction in health care because it
saves money by not having to admit patients to (expensive) hospitals. These
notions only appeared in nursing talk when enthusiastic carers looked for
ways to make their telecare practice financially viable. They never trusted
that quality of care and patient satisfaction were good enough reasons to
have telecare financed by insurance companies or by the government
(AWBZ).
care at a distance
167

Notes Chapter 4
1.
This is termed multiplicity when it concerns several problems that go by the
same name. See Annemarie Mol (2002) for different enactments of athero-
sclerosis.
2.
вҖҳEnactmentвҖҷ includes activities embedded in devices as well as activities that
are possibly outside the conscious awareness of participants. My use of the
term highlights another aspect вҖ“ i.e. that the identity of a patientвҖҷs problem
may come about through the way it is вҖҳdoneвҖҷ in relation to activities and
routines, devices and talk in particular practices.
3.
See Winance 2010 for an elegant analysis of how person and wheelchair
work together in a meticulous mutual adaptation. See Ross Winthereik &
Langstrup (2010) for an unexpected outcome of the new configurations of
patients and carers in the practice of using a web-based patient record.
4.
For the argument that self-management technology helps construct a вҖҳselfвҖҷ,
see Willems 2000.
5.
Dutch patients tend to find American patientsвҖҷ expressions too exaggerated
and sentimental.
6.
Maartje Schermer (2009) argues that an aspect of self-management imply-
ing compliance to a medical regime complements an idea of self-manage-
ment needing concordance and collaborative elements. In the latter case, pa-
tients can utter their concerns and thus be empowered rather than вҖҳtaughtвҖҷ.
My analysis proves her point but also complicates it by placing вҖҳmedical ad-
viceвҖҷ and вҖҳinterventionsвҖҷ on different levels. Home use of medication needs
more work by patients than just carrying out measurements for the nurse.
See Chapter 5 for an elaboration.
7.
Kivits (2004) points out that people looking for health information on the
internet вҖ“ often a prototype for the idea of patient self-management вҖ“ are
actually not ill themselves but look up information for sick relatives or try to
make their lifestyles even healthier than they already were.
8.
LГіpez (discussing personal alarms, 2010) argues that we can understand
telecare developments best within a move from a governance regime of dis-
ciplining patients towards a regime of security. A disciplining regime
moulds an ideal subject, whereas a regime of security deals with possible
emerging events, good or bad. My analysis identifies both disciplinary and
security moments, but the latter are a very specific kind, depending on the
kind of device used. One may live with the risk of weight or blood pressure
increase, or with the possibility of chatting to other people. The kind of secu-
rity regime or the type of risks one expects to have to deal with varies greatly.
9.
See Oudshoorn & Pinch (2003) for an analysis of the invisible work of
home-care nurses and physicians to help enact the patient as a вҖҳcompetent
diagnostic agentвҖҷ.
10. Moreira (2004), borrowing the term from Callon & RabГ©harisoa, prefers to
speak of the вҖҳpatient collectiveвҖҷ instead of вҖҳthe patientвҖҷ; hence there can be no
misunderstanding that вҖҳthe patientвҖҷ is not merely the individual, but is al-
ways mediated by things, others, devices, and so on. Moreira demonstrates
how, within surgical post-operative practices, the relational dynamics of so-
cial and material components may re-institute patientsвҖҷ sense of themselves
and re-organise their relationship with the world and other people. The out-
168
notes

come of this dynamic process is the reorganisation of forms of agency for
the patient.
11.
The process of caring or tinkering is, in addition to being a normative pro-
cess, also a creative process. For tinkering, see chapter 5.
Notes Chapter 5
1.
The relation between biomedicine and patients has always been ambivalent.
On the one hand, there are the growing demands for and great public trust
in medical practices and treatment, shown by growing investments in Wes-
tern health care practices. On the other, there are many measures taken to
protect patients and strengthen their position, particularly to protect them
from research that may hurt the test persons. These measures include
guidelines, codes of conduct and new laws. The critical position stems from
the gross abuse of medical practices, especially in research that occurred in
the 20th century (see e.g. Lederer 1995), during and after World War II (eu-
genics programmes, see e.g. Proctor 1988; Weindling 1989), but also after
that, for instance the Tuskegee syphilis trials. The Tuskegee study aimed to
study the course of syphilis infection in humans. The scientists did not in-
form the subjects in the study about its real purpose. Treatment was avail-
able, but the researchers withheld it from their subjects, leading to certain
death for most of them. See Reverby 2000; 2009; Brandt 1978. Today, du-
bious medical research practices are those that recruit poor people from de-
veloping countries as research subjects. See Petryna 2007; 2009; Petryna,
Lakoff & Kleinman 2006; Cooley 2001; Benatar 2001.
2.
See Barbot 2006 for the different ways in which вҖҳactive patientsвҖҷ take shape.
3.
Books by doctors who have fallen ill and thus finally understand their pa-
tients underline this difference. See e.g. Sacks 1984. Experiential knowledge
is then only accessible to sufferers, excluding professionals who may be ex-
perts in practical knowledge, such as nurses or physiotherapists.
4.
See CallГ©n et al. 2009. In medical anthropology, the distinction between
disease and illness, where the disease is the biomedical variant of the illness
that patients experience, runs the same risk of turning patientsвҖҷ knowledge
into matters of culture or beliefs, needing an explanatory model to under-
stand what is by definition different from a biomedical model. See e.g.
Eisenberg 1977; Kleinman 1980; Cohen et al. 1994. For a critical analysis of
opposing nature and culture and naturalising the body, see Mol & Law
2004; Suyata 2009; MвҖҷcharek 2010a,b; Mol 2002. For a critique from the
disability studies perspective, see Zola 1991; Hughes & Paterson 1997;
Shakespeare 2006; Hughes 2009; Moser 2009; Pols 2010a, d Pols &
MвҖҷcharek 2010a, b.
5.
See Prior 2003.
6.
See also Akrich 2010.
7.
See Whelan (2007) on endometriosis, Arksey (1994) on RSI. Whelan re-in-
troduces the term вҖҳepistemic communityвҖҷ (coined by Haas 1992, see Akrich
2010) to refer to the group of people who orient themselves to a particular
kind of knowledge by experience. This knowledge includes the experience of
dealing with doctors.
care at a distance
169

8.
The term вҖҳorphan diseaseвҖҷ comes from Callon & RabГ©harisoa (2003) and
their orphan disease is muscular dystrophy. AIDS is another example.
When it emerged, patients effectively influenced research practices (Epstein
1996).
9.
This is the case in the recovery movement in mental health care (see Mow-
bray et al. 1998). One debate is, for instance, on the necessity and effects of
lifelong use of anti-psychotic medication (see Lehman 2004). Long-term ef-
fects of these drugs are unknown, even when psychiatrists prescribe these
drugs for a lifetime.
10. Epstein 1995.
11.
I simplify here. The term вҖҳresearch in the wildвҖҷ comes from Callon & RabГ©-
harisoa (2002; 2003; 2008). See also Callon (1999; 2005). It is, however,
ambiguous in their work what the difference between вҖҳresearch in the wildвҖҷ
вҖ“ i.e. knowledge from patient groups вҖ“ and laboratory science is. They need
to assume there are differences or there would not be a dynamic between
the concerned groups and the scientists. What these differences are, how-
ever, is unclear. Are there different contents of knowledge, yet comparable вҖ“
if primitive вҖ“ methods? Do researchers in the wild ask different questions,
leading to knowledge that is equally valued? Or do they ask the same ques-
tions but in different ways and spaces of production?
12. Van de Bovenkamp & Trappenburg (2010) show how patients engaged in
guideline development can only participate if they can converse with the
medical expert in terms of evidence-based knowledge. Scientists often dis-
qualify the knowledge patients bring to the table. If anything, this shows the
need for a better understanding of what it is that patients may contribute.
13.
See Department of Health 2001. See also Edgar, 2005; Greenhalgh 2009;
Barbot 2006; Mol 2008.
14. See Henwood et al. 2003; Hart et al. 2004; Kivits 2004; Lupton 1997.
15.
There are different ways of looking for symmetries between medical knowl-
edge and knowledge of lay persons or patients. The classic study of Evans-
Pritchard (1937) is an example of a symmetrical treatment of local and global
rationalities in a non-medical context where he shows the rationality of the
AzandesвҖҷ ways of dealing with rain and rain dances. In his anthropology
study of medical anthropologists studying kuru, Anderson (2008) also cre-
ates a symmetry but, maybe even more intriguingly, he shows that white-
manвҖҷs scientific practices may resemble kuru notions of sorcery and even
practices of cannibalism more than the scientists would have realised.
16. For the concept of translation or its precursor вҖҳinteressementвҖҷ, see Callon
1985; Law 1987; Latour 1987; Callon & Law 1982. For examples in the con-
text of telecare, see Langstrup (2008).
17. In her important analysis of health care, Deborah Lupton relates consumer-
ism to a self that is a general, Giddensian, late modern вҖҳreflexive project of
the selfвҖҷ. In this project, people constantly evaluate the self to maximise en-
trepreneurially the benefits for the self (see also Nettleton 2004). In my ana-
lyses, the types of selves and their вҖҳrationalitiesвҖҷ may vary: they may be
medical, juridical, liberal, relate to different policy aims or may collude with
a medical rationality. I try to be sensitive to the various situated configura-
tions of patients and rationalities.
18. See Van de Bovenkamp, Trappenburg & Grit (2010).
170
notes

19. For a nuanced discussion on how the ideas of evidence-based medicine and
patient centeredness compete to organise clinical practice, and the role that
modern technology plays, see May, Rapley et al. 2006; May 2006.
20. An interesting example here is вҖҳcomplementary medicineвҖҷ, a term hiding the
fact that many doctors do not see it as complementary at all but as quackery,
or at best as вҖҳplaceboвҖҷ. Health insurances, however, pay for complementary
medicine. It is an example of valuing patient preferences or demands more
than medical rationality.
21. This explains some of the problems in Dutch mental health care, where
patient autonomy is protected by the BOPZ law that allows patientsвҖҷ beha-
viour that their carers would rate as вҖҳnot in their interestвҖҷ, e.g. electing not to
take anti-psychotic medication and allowing their condition to deteriorate. A
juridical notion of вҖҳthe patientвҖҷs interestвҖҷ collides with a care notion of this
interest. See Pols 2003.
22. Canguilhem 1966.
23. For this distinction, see also Struhkamp et al. 2009; Mol 1998; 2010.
24. There are multiple medical logics or rationalities (see Mol 2002). Scientific
knowledge is generated in various genres, e.g., epidemiology, pathology,
physiology, genetics, and so on. In Canguilhem terms: there is more than
one type of laboratory.
25. Osborne 2002, Barry 1995.
26. There are similarities between the medical scientist and the clinician as
well. Both the scientist in the lab and the clinician in the outpatient clinic
use implicit and explicit knowledge that is embedded in devices and rou-
tines in addition to knowledge that is explicitly articulated in language. Both
the scientist and the clinician draw upon different, heterogeneous re-
sources. The scientist may, for instance, use lab values as well as clinical
outcomes. The clinician may juggle with parameters such as checking if a
patientвҖҷs wheelchair permits the necessary exercises, and if not, how individ-
ual exercises could be changed while fitting the exercise programme in with
the patientвҖҷs effort to keep his job. The biggest difference is that scientists
ideally write up the knowledge derived from scientific practices in academic
papers that publishers include in databases and make accessible to peers
and colleagues. Clinicians articulate clinical knowledge in patient files, case
reports and medical education, but this often remains implicit.
27. Tinkering comes from the French term вҖҳbricolageвҖҷ, coined by LГ©vi-Strauss
1966. See also Prior 2003; Barbot & Dodier 2002; Hester 2005; Mol, Moser
& Pols 2010.
28. Mol 2006, Mol & Karayalcin 2008; Moser 2010.
29. The clinical knowledge of professionals is under-studied and needs more
articulation to make it transportable for sharing and thus improvement.
There is the tradition of writing case reports and transferring clinical knowl-
edge through medical education, but scholars seldom reflect upon clinical
experience as a form of knowledge. Exceptions are, for instance, Foucault
(1973), Toulmin 1976, Jonssen & Toulmin (1988) and Struhkamp et al.
(2009). Evidence-based medicine (EBM) has worsened the status of clinical
knowledge. EBM aims to correct the subjective judgements of individual
doctors in the clinic. See Chapter 8 for a discussion of this point.
30. The situation is even worse for the practical knowledge of patients. This
knowledge is rarely studied. There are, of course, exceptions where daily
care at a distance
171

practices, including medical practices, are analysed, even though knowledge
is not explicitly stressed everywhere: Corbin & Strauss 1988; Hendriks
1998; Nijhof 2001; Winance 2001; 2006; 2007; 2010; Moser 2006; Moser
& Law 1999; Struhkamp 2004; Pols 2005; Callon & RabГ©harisoa 2004;
Willems 1995; Mol 2008; Willems et al. 2006.
31.
Polanyi 1966. There are many debates in the literature on the interpretation
of tacit knowledge. I do not engage in these debates here directly but articu-
late my take in following the patients around. See Gourlay 2002; 2006;
Henry, 2010; Hunter 1991. Examples of questions include: is tacit knowl-
edge individual or collective, can it be articulated, is it an activity of knowing
rather than substantive вҖҳknowledgeвҖҷ, and is it accessible to the individual
using the tacit knowledge?
32. Willems 1992.
33. The expertise embodied in professional know-how may vary according to
disciplines (nurses and GPs may demonstrate inhaler use) and the profes-
sionalвҖҷs own experience as a patient or carer of patients.
34. It is important to note that my results are a reduction that relates to the
researched context of COPD patients. Other situations and diseases may
need other kinds of knowledge; see e.g. the impressive interpretational
work that must be done by trauma victims suffering from psychosis (Boe-
vink 2006b).
35. Note that propositions are organised according to certain logics, sets of state-
ments or theories, as became clear in the previous chapter. Propositions fit
into scientific disciplines or other orderings.
36. One may or may not make this knowledge explicit.
37. As an educational device, it provides propositions, e.g. вҖҳexercise is good for
people with heart failure.вҖҷ
38. Patients need skills for measuring blood pressure. Embedded notions of
underlying disease are propositional.
39. See Charmaz, 2003. вҖҳSensitising concepts offer ways of seeing, organising,
and understanding experience; they are embedded in our disciplinary em-
phases and perspectival proclivities. Although sensitising concepts may
deepen perception, they provide starting points for building analysis, not
ending points for evading it. We may use sensitising concepts only as points
of departure from which to study the dataвҖҷ (p. 259l). Blumer (1954) coined
the term sensitising concept, as opposed to definitive concept. вҖҳA definitive
concept refers вҖҰ to what is common to a class of objects, by the aid of a clear
definition in terms of attributes or fixed bench marks. [вҖҰ] A sensitising con-
cept lacks such specification of attributes or benchmarks and consequently
it does not enable the user to move directly to the instance and its relevant
content. Instead, it gives the user a general sense of reference and guidance
in approaching empirical instances. Whereas definitive concepts provide
prescriptions of what to see, sensitising concepts merely suggest directions
along which to lookвҖҷ (p. 7), quoted in Bowen 2006.
40. Suchman 2007.
41. For more on the idea of distributing cognition between heads and instru-
ments, see the classic study of Hutchins 1995. For material ways of organis-
ing memory, see Bowker 2006.
172
notes

42. Annie Cohen-Solal gives a moving example of how things remember when
she quotes poor demented Sartre wailing about having to quit smoking.
This was so hard because, he said, вҖҳobjects expect to meet me smokingвҖҷ.
43. See Pols 2010a for the use of mobility scooters.
44. Habraken et al. (2008) found out that many Dutch COPD patients do not
get help with these kinds of daily life questions. They see the pneumonolgist
once a year and, when they are lucky, a COPD nurse every four months. It
depends on the GP whether he or she will be of assistance here, because the
patients usually do not ask for help. GPs may feel they have little to offer,
looking at medical solutions that are lacking rather than coaching them in
daily life problems.
45. See the previous note.
Notes Chapter 6
1.
LГіpez and DomГЁnech (2008) argue that immediacy and therefore determi-
nacy with which the telecare device leads to care delivery (say, instant help
the moment people need it) is an element that may distinguish one (tele-)
care practice from another. The authors argue that the way telecare devices
permit the management of unexpected or undetermined events (ex-inscrip-
tion) deserves more analysis, as it is somewhat neglected by the attention to
standardisation processes (inscription) discussed in Actor Network Theory
to explain immediacy. My question about the openness of devices concen-
trates on the determinacy or openness in the actions set in motion rather
than the time (immediacy) in which help may be organised. The two are
obviously related but address different concerns. The telecare devices dis-
cussed in this book aim to promote some forms of immediacy, but these are
never emergencies needing instantaneous responses. In my comparative
perspective, I highlight the way these devices help shape specific forms of
care in relation to the way the users put these devices to use, requiring both
inscriptions and ex-inscriptions as modes of producing action and вҖҳfitвҖҷ.
2.
SГӨvenstedt et al. 2004. See also Wakefield et al. 2004. In Pols 2010c I ana-
lyse how the metaphor or activity of вҖҳseeingвҖҷ underlies the discussions on
webcams. Seeing can be thought of as вҖҳmirroring natureвҖҷ (Ihde, Heidegger),
but it is also analysed as structured and structuring, following the insights of
philosophers as varied as Wittgenstein, Foucault and Haraway. My conclu-
sion here was that вҖҳseeingвҖҷ (like вҖҳbeingвҖҷ) does not add much to our under-
standing of particular situations, because seeing is always embedded in a
particular activity that structures what is looked at. There is no natural or
pre-theoretical way of seeing.
3.
See Johnson 2006; Sluiter 2007.
4.
Others describe this too; see e.g. Norman (2006), who reports that the ma-
jority of users in telepsychiatry rate videoconferencing as вҖҳalmost as goodвҖҷ or
вҖҳas goodвҖҷ as face-to-face contacts.
5.
The exact percentage of communication that is non-verbal varies according
to authors and seems impossible to establish. Onor and Misan (2005) state
that only 7% of emotional communication takes place verbally. LetвҖҷs agree
that lots of communication is non-verbal.
care at a distance
173

6.
See Pols 2010c for a more detailed description.
7.
SГӨvenstedt et al. (2005) describe this. Non-verbal communication on web-
cams is thought to be impoverished when compared to face-to-face conver-
sation, but it is enriched when compared to the telephone; see Cukor & Baer
1994; Gammon et al. 1998; SГӨvenstedt et al. 2005.
8.
Gammon et al. (1998) report that users of videoconferencing feel they were
вҖҳmore prepared and structuredвҖҷ. One respondent also reported that he had to
вҖҳkeep staring at the screen, so as not to lose contactвҖҷ.
9.
The latter number is from Argyle 1990, quoted in SГӨvenstedt et al. 2005.
10. They are, of course, far more dictatorial technologies than webcams. See for
instance LatourвҖҷs stories about the speed bump that leaves cars no choice
but to slow down or the Aramis subway tunnels that allow low trains to pass
but not the higher models the competition uses (Latour 1999; 1996). Maybe
the panopticon is the most famous oppressive technology that works partly
by the вҖҳsubjectionвҖҷ of the people enclosed in it (see Foucault 1977). Technol-
ogy intervening in complex practices mostly lacks this authority. It helps to
shape practices but cannot do this on its own.
11.
Gammon et al. (1998) also found that participants stated that вҖҳa working
alliance characterised by mutual respect and trustвҖҷ was a prerequisite to
starting a successful psychotherapy supervision relation by webcam (p. 414).
12. For a discussion of the issues of intrusiveness and control, see Fisk 1997;
1998; Milligan, Mort & Roberts 2010.
13.
Andrew Barry (1995) argues with Foucault interpreters who turn the clinical
gaze into something deterministic, oppressive and disciplining. Barry ar-
gues that the gaze in the clinic is essentially fallible and hence not by defini-
tion oppressive.
14. Pappas & Seale 2009.
15.
Boonstra et al. (2008) report on an ambitious homecare webcam project in
the north of the Netherlands. They report that the implementation of the
webcams failed because there was no clear goal described for the end-users:
the nurses and the patients at home. In many cases, professionals and pa-
tients did not even use the webcam once. The assumed users simply did not
know what to use it for.
16. For a subtle analysis of the meanings attached to the home and the way care
and technology may interfere with this, see Milligan, Mort & Roberts 2010;
Milligan 2009.
17. It would be interesting to know if relational distance could also be вҖҳtoo closeвҖҷ
for the webcam to be of any help. To find this out, research could be done
among long-distance lovers using a webcam to keep in (and yet rather вҖҳout
ofвҖҷ) touch.
18. This may be a variety of the вҖҳpen friendвҖҷ or вҖҳpen palвҖҷ, someone with whom to
exchange letters without ever meeting them.
Notes Chapter 7
1.
How decision makers always relate economic reasoning to some kind of
good merits a study in itself. Relating efficiency to goodness might be a
heritage of Adam SmithвҖҷs philosophy of the invisible hand, the mechanism
174
notes

that turns individual strivings for oneвҖҷs own benefit into a higher, common
good. However, this notion is to be preferred to the recent climate of ruth-
less budget cuts that do not take into account the kind of care that decision-
makers are after. From an ethical perspective, it is not enough to account for
the abolishment of certain care practices with cost arguments only, unless
one is ready to accept a cynical politics in health care. Decision makers
should always account for the nature and acceptability of the care practices
they are trying to create, by budget cuts or in other ways.
2.
For instance, Boonstra et al. (2008) do not do this. They present a tentative
cost efficiency analysis with many caveats, calculating efficiency by relating
the nursesвҖҷ rating of the frequency that telecare contacts could be substituted
for actual home visits.
3.
This is what Zuiderent-Jerak and Van der Grinten (2009) seem to think,
even if they suggest a multiplication of markets. However, they construct a
market with only two players: the government and producers. Astonishingly,
they do not bring professionals into the calculation. Likewise, an analysis of
the position of patients would not have hurt the validity of their analysis.
Apparently, in their attempt to make the idea of markets more complex, the
authors have dramatically reduced the notion of what politics consists of.
4.
The reason for this varies depending on whom one is speaking to. Doctors
argue that many ICT interventions are not evidence-based and that studies
need to show whether quality improvements for patients take place. They
accuse busy producers of вҖҳcowboyismвҖҷ because of the impact of telecare on
working processes without a proper outlook on desirable effects. Producers
and health care professionals pioneering in telecare accuse doctors of arro-
gance and conservatism, serving their own happiness rather than their pa-
tients. These discussions can become quite ugly. I once witnessed a sort of
celebratory вҖҳdoctor bashingвҖҷ at a conference вҖ“ hardly a hopeful customer-
supplier relationship. The government does not want to take the lead and
tries to stimulate professionals and producers to do so themselves. The pa-
tient has, so far, no вҖҳvoiceвҖҷ in this market (Pols 2010b; Pols, Schermer &
Willems 2008).
5.
The national patient and consumer organisation is organised by the govern-
ment in the Netherlands. See Trappenburg 2008; Bovenkamp & Trappen-
burg 2010.
6.
Note that this idea of efficiency is to make access to care easier, not to reduce
the nursesвҖҷ workload. The municipality and the homecare organisations fi-
nance these projects, without using health care budgets or health insurance.
7.
See Boonstra et al. 2008; LГіpez & DomГЁnech 2009.
8.
Analyses in the literature demonstrating the difficulty of rearranging work
practices include May & Ellis 2001; Nicolini 2006; Lehoux et al. 2002.
9.
The way a comparable project solved the problem of вҖҳgoing into the neigh-
bourhoodвҖҷ versus webcamming is by doing all the hands-on care in the
morning when people need quick help to start their day, and taking time in
the afternoon to do the social chats over the webcam.
10. Note that there is extra work for patients, too. They need to fill in question-
naires that aim to show if there is a change in their quality of life. The pa-
tients often see this as part of their treatment.
11.
http://www.onderzoekinformatie.nl/nl/oi/nod/onderzoek/OND1298070/.
12. See Pols & Willems 2011 for an extensive discussion of this case.
care at a distance
175

13.
This downplays the importance of вҖҳethical designвҖҷ that is promoted in the
Netherlands. If devices change when they are put into practice, this should
be an area of concern for the ethics of technology as well. For an ethics of
design, see Verbeek 2006.
Notes Chapter 8
1.
See Marres (2005) for ways in which particular events create particular вҖҳpub-
licsвҖҷ. Professionals and people with chronic disease are an important public
for telecare, but they do not have a strong influence on the market.
2.
In a personal communication, Amade MвҖҷCharek suggested that all care
practices should be conceived of as innovative, as they are constantly chang-
ing and made to change. I agree with her because, fundamentally, a practice
that treats new вҖҳcasesвҖҷ on a daily basis should always improvise. In theory,
however, there are rather sleepy care practices as well, where care is given
more routinely than elsewhere and outcomes are less вҖҳunder constructionвҖҷ.
Hence I stick to the term вҖҳinnovative care practicesвҖҷ for analytical reasons.
3.
For analyses of interactions and unexpected pathways, see Mol 2002; Pols
2003; 2006; MвҖҷCharek 2010.
4.
This idea of attaining objectivity by excluding human beliefs also existed in
the first experimental practices. Boyle undertook his air pump experiments
so that вҖҳnature could speak for itselfвҖҷ by producing вҖҳmachine-made factsвҖҷ un-
contaminated by any human interest in the outcome of the experiment. Sha-
pin & Schaffer 1985.
5.
See Timmermans & Berg 2003.
6.
Critical voices argue that this does not work. Results written up by interested
industries present the same research more favourably than independent re-
searchers. In the Netherlands this led to critical discussions on the responsi-
bility of the government to control the pharmaceutical industry. See the dis-
cussion set in motion after an article in a leading Dutch newspaper, NRC
Handelsblad, on 21 February 2009 by Trudy Dehue, Professor of Theory and
History of Psychology, University of Groningen: вҖҳOnderzoekers die afhankelijk
zijn van de farmaceutische industrie ruГҜneren onze gezondheid (Researchers de-
pendent on the pharmaceutical industry are ruining our health)вҖҷ.
7.
This puts the doctors in the place of the exotic patients discussed in Chapter
5. They are seen as people with experiential knowledge that is unreliable and
often wrong.
8.
See Chapter 5, where successful patient participation in medical research
was attributed to the context of orphan diseases (Callon & RabГ©harisoa
2003), diseases that had not yet gained medical scientistsвҖҷ attention.
9.
See Van de Bovenkamp & Trappenburg 2009.
10. See also Struhkamp et al. 2009; Mol 1998; 2010; Moser 2010.
11.
Mol 2006, 2008 and Moser 2010 usefully describe this for professionals as
a difference between improving and proving.
12. The use of the term вҖҳstate-of-the-artвҖҷ is intentional. There are creative quanti-
tative designs and descriptive statistics that provide useful knowledge for
care practices, even if it would wrinkle the вҖҳpureвҖҷ scientistsвҖҷ noses. It is not
176
notes

quantification per se that is hard to fit but rather the strict designsвҖҷ useful
quantification demands.
13.
See also Langstrup-Nielsen 2005; Finch et al. 2003.
14. For an analysis of how the clinical trial is an intervention, see Dehue 2002;
2004; 2005. Rather than вҖҳmirror natureвҖҷ to present the вҖҳfactsвҖҷ, it is an inter-
vention in a practice. For a critique on the metaphor of mirroring, see Rorty
1979. An innovative technology вҖ“ e.g. telecare вҖ“ is not a finite вҖҳinterventionвҖҷ
that has predetermined effects that may be assessed in standard research.
See May et al. 2001; Lehoux et al. 2002; Nicolini, 2006.
15.
Francis Bacon argued that nature should be вҖҳtorturedвҖҷ to give away her se-
crets. Not being subjective does not mean not shaping oneвҖҷs object. See e.g.
Pesic 1999 for an argument against the notion of torture and an idea of
mutual wrestling between nature and the scientist, which is still a metaphor
of violence. Even so, the practice of moulding care practices is problematic
when it damages care practices.
16. Moser (2010) shows how methods such as video registration of care and
ethnography might make visible things that are impossible to articulate by
means of clinical trials. May (2006) also shows that the content of the
knowledge produced with the help of RCTs is not always helpful for deci-
sions about telecare systems. Together with Finch et al. (2003); they recom-
mend ethnographic studies as suitable for evaluating tele-health care. See
also May et al. 2003; CallГ©n et al. 2009. For an impressive demonstration of
the use of auto-ethnography that articulates yet different matters of concern
in care, see Taylor 2010.
17. That research practices interfere with studied practices is nothing new, and
researchers are well aware of this. There is literature on placebo and Haw-
thorn effects (effects brought about by doing research). In quantum physics
it is common knowledge that oneвҖҷs observations influence the object ob-
served; physicists live with this because the deviations are small enough to
be able to ignore them. When comparing measurements in Euclidean space
with those that include time, as in relativity theory, physicists deem the er-
rors too small to complicate calculations. See Barad 2007. The conse-
quences do not seem to be keeping medical practice researchers awake; it
has not changed research practices yet. This may be because the self-under-
standing of research practices does not highlight these matters. They are
anomalies or negligible measuring errors that they do not have to take into
account.
18. See Pols 2008. My suggestion is not to contrast subjectivity and objectivity
but rather norms and facts. As the book demonstrates, there is a harmo-
nious relation between facts and values. Scientists can make endless vari-
eties in their articulations of any situation. They can talk about a situation
on a molecular level, a socio-political level, analyse it in terms of gender
relations, pinpoint the historical events that lead up to it, and so on. These
articulations are all true, yet all different. What articulation works where is
the normative question.
19. See KuhnвҖҷs notion of вҖҳnormal scienceвҖҷ, where methods and questions are
taken for granted (Kuhn 1962).
20. There is always some disturbance when doing research. However, ethno-
graphic methods do not directly interfere with the telecare practice as a pro-
cess. The research takes only the nurseвҖҷs time; they do not need to collect
care at a distance
177

data, just tell about their experiences with the project and/or allow the re-
searcher to look on while they are working. These unobtrusive methods do
not rigorously shape the object of research but try to trace them in their
вҖҳnatural habitatвҖҷ.
21. This is a reference to the idea of вҖҳontological politicsвҖҷ and LawвҖҷs ideas on
performativity (Mol 1991; Law 2004) or the statement that вҖҳscience is poli-
tics pursued by other meansвҖҷ (see e.g. Harbers 2005; Latour 1983). In the
version suggested here, not only scientists or texts create worlds and subjec-
tivities, care practices also do so. See Moser (2011) for moving theory to new
practices.
22. MachiavelliвҖҷs political philosophy would be a fitting model here. See the ana-
lysis by Pitkin 1994.
23. This is a complaint from people who try to вҖҳimplementвҖҷ: things do not go
nearly as fast as they like and they meet a lot of what they call вҖҳresistanceвҖҷ
from the field. My articulation is that the new gadget bumps into existing
norms and routines, and people need time to tinker with them or have good
reasons to stick to their old ways of doing things. See also Pols 2004, Chap-
ter 7.
24. Note that the work is to describe practices and articulate knowledge from
them. This is different from asking opinions of participants, which re-
searchers who measure patient satisfaction often do. Asking for opinions
fits the consumer patient I described in Chapter 5. It is obviously easier to
measure what people want than to articulate what they know or what values
are embedded in their routines. See Pols 2005 for the way in which a poli-
tics of positions instead of perspectives may draw in вҖҳpatients who do not
speakвҖҷ in research into care. For the work needed to create a perspective, see
Velpry 2008.
25. In their wonderful reflections on telecare policy, CallГ©n et al. (2009) analyse
the possibilities for users to influence telecare developments through health
technology assessment (HTA). First, it is unclear who may represent whom
in deliberations about good telecare design. Second, HTA is concerned with
design rather than domestication processes and is limited in scope. Third,
the differences between expert and lay person are not resolved. As a solution
to these dilemmas, CallГ©n and her colleagues propose participatory action
research (PAR). PAR implies that users are involved in designing the re-
search, including formulation of research questions, selection of the meth-
odologies and interpretation of the results. This is a great suggestion,
although it would not solve the matter of representation completely. I am
concerned about the new expertise this demands from users: it demands
the expertise of a researcher who is expert at juggling different methodolo-
gies and translating them into different questions. The task for users is not
only to keep their practice going and вҖҳdo the innovative careвҖҷ besides reflect-
ing on the values and forms of care that are generated. They have to learn
how to do multi-method research. In my alternative вҖ“ uncontrolled field stu-
dies вҖ“ participants may delegate the task of doing research to involved eth-
nographers. The explicit discussion of the specific position created for the
users of these practices should guarantee that they are not вҖҳforgottenвҖҷ. CallГ©n
et al. argue for вҖҳgiving earsвҖҷ instead of вҖҳgiving voiceвҖҷ; my alternative would be
вҖҳmaking voiceвҖҷ by articulating embodied knowledge. See Finch, Mort, May &
178
notes

Mair (2005) for an analysis of the (absence of the) influence of patients on
the introduction of health care technology.
26. Of course, researchers are not вҖҳindependentвҖҷ in and of themselves. Rather,
their dependencies lie elsewhere, for instance in the way research is funded
and results get published. In the example, their independence is from the
organisations participating in the experiment, including the industry.
27. See e.g. Milligan, Mort & Roberts 2010.
28. This practice is more common in mental health care, at least in the Nether-
lands, England and the US. See Dixon et al. 1997; Mead et al. 2001; Mow-
bray et al. 1998; Boevink 2006a. Patients in mental health care have orga-
nised themselves as professionals using experiential knowledge. They
organise education and training for these professionals-to-be. Any self-re-
specting long-term mental health care facility employs a couple of these
new professionals.
29. To study the effectiveness of a telecare device departs from a deterministic
idea of what technology is, making the part of users and contexts invisible
because of their assumed irrelevance.
care at a distance
179


References
Aanestad, M. (2003) The camera as an actor: Design-in-Use of telemedicine in-
frastructure in surgery. Computer supported cooperative work, 12, 1-20.
Akrich, M. (2010) From Communities of Practice to Epistemic Communities:
Health Mobilizations on the Internet. Sociological Research Online, 15, 2, 10
http://www.socresonline.org.uk/15/2/10.html
Akrich, M. (1992) The De-Scription of technical objects. In: W.E. Bijker & J. Law,
Shaping technology/ building society. Studies in sociotechnical change. Cambridge
(MS), London (GB): The MIT Press, 205-224.
Anderson, W. (2008) The Collectors of Lost Souls: Turning Kuru Scientists into
Whitemen. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Argyle, M. (1990) Bodily communication. London: Routledge.
Arksey, H. (1994) Expert and Lay Participation in the Construction of Medical
Knowledge, Sociology of Health and Illness, 16, 4, 448-468.
Barad, K. (2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entangle-
ment of Matter and Meaning, Durham: Duke University Press.
Barbot J. (2006) How to build an 'active' patient'. Social Science & Medicine, 3,
538-51.
Barbot, J. & N. Dodier (2002). Multiplicity in scientific medicine: the experience
of HIV-positive patients, Science, Technology & Human Values, 27, 404-40.
Barry, A. (1995) Reporting and visualising. In: Jenks, C. (ed.) Visual culture. Lon-
don: Routledge, 42-57.
Bauer, K. (2004) Cyber medicine and the moral integrity of the physician-patient
relationship. Ethics and information technology, 6, 83-91.
Benatar, S.R. (2001) Distributive Justice and Clinical Trials in the Third World.
Theoretical Medicine 22, 169-76.
Berg, M. (2002) Patients and professionals in the information society: what
might keep us awake in 2013. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 66,
31-7.
Berg, M. (1997). Rationalizing Medical Work. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Berker, T., Hartmann, M., Punie, Y. & Ward, K.J. (2006) Domestication of media
and technology. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Blumer, H. (1954). What is wrong with social theory? American Sociological Re-
view, 18, 3-10.
Boevink, W. (2006b) From being a disorder to dealing with life. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 1, 2.
Boevink, W. (ed.) (2006a). Stories of recovery. Working together towards experiential
knowledge in mental health care. Utrecht: Trimbos-instituut.
Boltanski L. & ThГ©venot L. (1991) De la justifications. Les Г©conomies de la grandeur.
Editions Gallimard.
Boonstra, A., Broekhuis, M., Offenbeek, M. van, Westerman, W. Wijngaard, J.
Wortman, H. (2008) Kijken op afstand. Op zoek naar de effectiviteit en efficiency
van Koala telecare en telecare. Publieksversie van het eindrapport RuG/RHO:
вҖҳKijken op afstand, een leerzaam alternatiefвҖҷ Groningen: RuG/RHO. http://
www.zorginnovatieforum.nl/projecten/ZoA/Koala eindrapport.pdf, last con-
sulted 29 oktober 2009.
181

Borup, M. Brown, N., Konrad, K. & Van Lente, H. (2006) The sociology of expec-
tations in science and technology. Technology analysis & strategic management,
18, 285-98.
Bovenkamp, H.M. Van de, & Trappenburg, M.J. (2010) Government Influence
on Patient Organizations, Health Care Analysis, DOI 10.1007/s10728-010-
0155-7
Bovenkamp, H.M. Van de, Trappenburg, M.J. & Grit, K.J. (2010) Patient partici-
pation in collective health care decision making: The Dutch model. Health
Expectations, 13, 73-85.
Bovenkamp, H.M. van de & Trappenburg, M.J. (2009) Reconsidering patient
participation in guideline development. Health Care Analysis, 17, 198-216.
Bowen, G.A. (2006) Grounded Theory and Sensitizing Concept. International
Journal of Qualitative Methods, 5 (3), www.ualberta.ca/~iiqm/backissues/5_3/
pdf/bowen.pdf
Bowker, G.C. (2006) Memory practices in the sciences (inside technology). Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brandt, A.M. (1978) Racism and Research: The Case of the Tuskegee Syphilis
Study вҲ’The Hastings Center Report, Vol. 8, No. 6 (Dec., 1978), pp. 21-29
Brown, H. (2010) вҖҳIf we sympathise with them, theyвҖҷll relaxвҖҷ Fear/respect and
medical care in a Kenyan hospital. Medische Antropologie. Special issue: вҖҳCare
and Health CareвҖҷ, in: Hiddinga, A., Pols, J., Trakas, D. & Van der Geest, S.
(theme editors) 22,1, 125-42.
Brown, N. & Michael, M. (2003) A sociology of expectations. Retrospecting pros-
pects and prospecting retrospects. Technology Analysis & Strategic Manage-
ment, 15, 3-18.
Brown, N. (2003). Hope against hype - accountability in biopasts, presents and
futures. Science Studies, 16(2), 3-21
CallГ©n, B., DomenГЁch, M., LГіpez, D. & Tirado, F. (2009) Telecare research: (cos-
mo)politicizing methodology. Alter. European Journal of Disability Research, 3,
110-22.
Callon, M. & Rabeharisoa, V. (2008) The growing engagement of emergent con-
cerned groups in political and economic life. Lessons from the French Asso-
ciation of Neuromuscular Disease Patients. Science, Technology & Human
Values, 33, 230-61.
Callon, M. & Rabeharisoa, V. (2004) Articulating bodies: The case of muscular
dystrophies, (unpublished paper).
Callon, M., Rabeharisoa, V. (2003), Research вҖҳin the wildвҖҷ and the shaping of new
social identities, Technology in Society, Studies in Science, Technology, and Society
(STS) North and South, 2, 193-204.
Callon, M. & Rabeharisoa V. (2002) The involvement of patientsвҖҷ associations in
research. Unesco, Blackwell publishers, 57-65.
Callon, M. (2005) Disabled persons of all countries, unite! In: Latour, B. & Wie-
bel, P. Making things public. Atmospheres of Democracy, Karlsruhe: ZKM, Cen-
ter for Art and Media, Cambridge (Mass) and London: The MIT Press, 308-13.
Callon, M. (1999) The role of lay people in the production and dissemination of
scientific knowledge. Science, Technology & Society, 4, 81-94.
Callon, M. (1985) Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of
the scallops and the fishermen of St. Brieu Bay, In Law, J. (ed.) Power, Action
182
references

and Belief. Sociological Review Monograph. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
196-223.
Callon, M. and Law, J. (1982) On interests and their transformation: enrollment
and counter enrollment, Social Studies of Science, 12, 615-25.
Canguilhem, G. (1966) The normal and the pathological. New York: Zone Books
1989.
Cartwright, L. (2000). Reach out and heal someone: telemedicine and the globa-
lization of health care. Health, 4, 3, 347-77.
Charmaz, K. (2003). Grounded theory: Objectivist and constructivist methods.
In N.K. Denzin & Y.S. Lincoln (Eds.), Strategies for qualitative inquiry. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: Sage, 249-291.
Charmaz, K. (2000). Experiencing chronic illness. Fitzpatrick R. & Scrimshaw,
SC, Handbook of social studies in health and medicine, London: Sage, 277-92.
Clutton-Brock, J. (ed) (1988) The Walking Larder: Patterns of Domestication, Pastor-
alism, and Predation, London: Unwin Hyam.
Cohen, M.Z., Tripp-Reimer, T., Smith, C., Sorofman, B., and Lively, S. (1994)
Explanatory Models of Diabetes: Patient Practitioner Variation. Social Science
and Medicine, 38, 1, 59-66.
Cooley, D.R. (2001) Distributive Justice and Clinical Trials in the Third World.
Theoretical Medicine, 22, 151-67.
Corbin, J. & A. Strauss (1988) Unending work and care: Managing chronic illness at
home. San Francisco: Jossey Bass University Press.
Cukor, P. and Baer, L. (1994) Human factors issues in telemedicine: a practical
guide with particular attention to psychiatry. Telemedicine Today, 29, 16-18.
Currell R., C. Urquhart, P. Wainwright P. et al. (2000) Telemedicine versus face tot
face patient care: effects on professional practice and health care outcomes. Chiche-
ster: John Wiley & Sons, The Cochrane Library.
Dehue, T. (2008) De depressie-epidemie. De geschiedenis van neerslachtigheid. Am-
sterdam: Augustus.
Dehue, T. (2005). History of the Control Group. In: Everitt, B. and Howell, D.
(eds) Encyclopedia of Statistics in the Behavioral Science, Chichester, UK: Wiley,
2, 829-836
Dehue, T. (2004). Historiography taking issue. Analyzing an experiment with
heroin maintenance. Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 40, 3,
247-265.
Dehue, T. (2002). A Dutch treat. Randomized controlled experimentation and
the case of heroin-maintenance in the Netherlands. History of the Human
Sciences, 15, 2, 75-98.
Department of Health (2001) The Expert Patient: A New Approach to Chronic Dis-
ease Management for the 21st Century, Department of Health, London.
Dixon L., A. Hackman & A. Lehman (1997) Consumers as Staff in Assertive
Community Treatment Program, Administration and Policy in Mental Health,
25, 199-208.
Donner, J. The Rules of Beeping: Exchanging Messages Using Missed Calls on
Mobile Phones in sub-Saharan Africa. Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the International Communication Association, Sheraton New York, New
York City, NY, 2009-05-25
care at a distance
183

Dunn, E., Conrath, D., Acton, H., Higgins, C. Matha, M. & Bain, H. (1980) Tele-
medicine links patients in Sioux Lookout with doctors in Toronto. Canadian
Medical Association Journal, 122, 23, 484-487.
Edgar, A. (2005) The expert patient. Illness as practice. Medicine, Health Care &
Philosophy, 8, 165-71.
Eisenberg L. (1977) Disease and illness. Distinctions between professional and
popular ideas of sickness. Culture, Medicine & Psychiatry, 1, 1, 9-23
Eminovic, N., De Keizer, N.F., Bindels, P.J.E. & Hasman, A. (2007) Maturity of
teledermatology evaluation research: a systematic literature review. British
Journal of Dermatology, 156, 412-9.
Epstein, S. (1996) Impure Science. Aids, activism and the politics of knowledge, Ber-
keley: University of California Press.
Epstein, S. (2008) Patient groups and Health movements. in: Hacket, E.J., Am-
sterdamska, O., Lynch, M., Wajcman, J. (eds) The Handbook of science and
technology studies. Cambridge: MIT press.499-539.
Epstein, S. (1995) The construction of lay expertise: AIDS activism and the for-
ging of credibility in the reform of clinical trials, Science, Technology & Human
Values, 20, 4, 408-37.
Estrada, M., Balasch, M. & Vayreda, A. (in preparation), вҖҳFollow the treatment
and get as much information as you canвҖҷ: A qualitative study of information
management in a virtual patient community.
Evans-Pritchard, E.E. 1937. Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande. Clar-
endon Press.
Finch, T., Mort, M., May, C. & Mair, F. (2005) Telecare; perspectives on the
changing role of patients and citizens. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 11,
Supplement 1, S1:51-3.
Finch, T., May, C., Mair, F., Mort, M. & Gask, L. (2003) Integrating service devel-
opment with evaluation in telehealthcare: an ethnographic study. British
Medical Journal, 327, 1205-9.
Fischer, C.S. (1992) America Calling: A Social History of the Telephone to 1940.
Berkeley, LA: University of California Press.
Fisk, M.J. (1997) Telecare equipment in the home. Issues of intrusiveness and
control. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 3, Supplement 1, 30-2.
Fisk, M.J. (1998) Telecare at home: factors influencing technology choices and
user acceptance. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 4, 80-3.
Foucault, M. (1973) The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception.
London: Tavistock publications.
Foucault, M. (1971). LвҖҷordre du Discourse. Paris: Gallimard.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Ran-
dom House.
Gad, C. & Bruun-Jensen, C. (2010) On the Consequences of Post-ANT. Science,
Technology, & Human Values, 36, 5, 55-80
Gammon, D, SГ¶rlie, T., Bergvik, S., & SГ¶rensen HГ¶ifГ¶dt, T. (1998) Psychother-
apy supervision conducted via videoconferencing: a qualitative study of usersвҖҷ
experiences. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 52, 411-21.
184
references

Gourlay, S. (2002) Tacit knowledge, tacit knowing or behaving? Paper presented
at the 3rd European Organizational Knowledge, Learning, and Capabilities
Conference, Athens, 5-6 April.
Gourlay, S. (2006) Towards conceptual clarity for вҖҳtacit knowledgeвҖҷ: a review of
empirical studies, Knowledge Management Research & Practice, 4, 60-69
Greatbatch, D. Hanlon, G. Goode, J. OвҖҷCathain, A. Strangleman, D. Luff, D.
(2005) Telephone triage, expert systems and clinical expertise. Sociology of
Health & Illness, 27, 6, 802-830
Greenhalgh, T. (2009) Patient and public involvement in chronic illness: beyond
the expert patient. BMJ, 338, 629-31.
Haas, P.M. (1992) 'Banning Chlorofluorocarbons: Epistemic Community Efforts
to Protect Stratospheric Ozone', International Organization, 46, 1, 187-244.
Habermas, J. (1985) Theorie des Kommunikativen Handelns. HandlungsrationalitГӨt
und gesellschaftliche Rationalisierung. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp Verlag.
Habraken, J.M., Pols, J., Bindels, P.J.E. & Willems, D.L. (2008) The silence of
patients with end-stage COPD: an qualitative study. British Journal of General
Practice, 58, 844-9.
Haraway, D. (1991) Simians, cyborgs, and women. The reinvention of nature. Lon-
don: Free Association Books.
Haraway, D. (1991). Situated Knowledges: The science question in feminism and
the privilege of partial perspective. In: Simians, cyborgs and women. The re-
invention of nature. New York: Routledge.
Haraway, D. (2008) When species meet. University of Minnesota Press.
Harbers, H. (2005) Epilogue: Political Materials вҖ“ Material politics. In: Harbers,
H. (ed.) Inside the politics of technology. Agency and normativity in the co-produc-
tion of technology and society. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 257-
272.
Hart, A. Henwood, F. & Wyatt, S. (2004) The Role of the Internet in Patient-
Practitioner Relationships: Findings from a Qualitative Research Study. Jour-
nal of Medical Internet Research, 6, 3, e36.
Healy, D. (2002) The Creation of Psychopharmacology. Cambridge, Mass: Har-
vard University Press.
Hendriks, R (1998) Egg timers, human values and the care of autistic youths.
Science, Technology & Human Values, 23, 4, 399-424.
Henry, S.G. (2010) PolanyiвҖҷs tacit knowing and the relevance of epistemology to
clinical medicine. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 16, 292-7.
Henwood, F., Wyatt, S., Hart, A. & Smith, J. (2003) вҖҳIgnorance is bliss some-
timesвҖҷ: constraints on the emergence of the вҖҳinformed patientвҖҷ in the chang-
ing landscapes of health information. Sociology of Health & Illness, 25, 6, 589-
607.
Hester, J.S. (2005) Bricolage and bodies of knowledge: exploring consumer re-
sponses to controversies about the third generation oral contraceptive pill.
Body & Society, 11, 77-95
Hughes, B. & Paterson, K. The social model of disability and the disappearing
body. Towards a sociology op impairment. Disability & Society, 12, 3, 325-40.
Hughes, B. (2009) Wounded/ monstrous /abject: a critique of the disabled body
in the sociological imaginary. Disability & Society, 24, 4, 399-410.
Hunter, K.M. (1991) DoctorsвҖҷ stories: the narrative structure of medical knowledge.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
care at a distance
185

Hutchins, E. (1995) Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Ihde, D. (1990) Technology and the Lifeworld. Bloomington/ Minneapolis: Indi-
ana University Press.
Johnson, K. (2006) TV Screen, Not Couch, Is Required for This Session, New
York Times, 8 June 2006.
Jonssen, A.R. & S. Toulmin, (1988) The Abuse of Casuistry: A History of Moral
Reasoning. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kammen, J. van (ed.) (2002) Zorgtechnologie, kansen voor innovatie en gebruik.
(Care technology, chances for innnovation and use) Den Haag: Stichting Toe-
komstbeeld der Techniek (STT).
Kivits, J. (2004) Researching the вҖҳinformed patientвҖҷ. The case of online health
information seekers. Information, Communication & Society, 7, 4, 510-30.
Kleinman, A. (1980) Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press.
Kleinman, A. & Van der Geest, S. (2009) Care in healthcare: Remaking the mor-
al world of medicine. Medische Antropologie, 21: 159-68.
Knudsen, C. (2002).Video mediated communication: Producing a sense of pre-
sence between individuals in shared virtual reality. In: J. Baggaley, P. Fahy &
C. OвҖҷHagan (Eds.), Educational Conferencing: Video and text traditions. Pro-
ceedings of the First International Symposium on Educational Conferencing
(ISEC), Banff, Alberta, co-sponsored by Athabasca University and the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Retrieved May 12,
2004, from http://cde.athabascau.ca/ISEC2002/
Korsten, J.P.A.M. (2010) Impact of Remote Support on Patients receiving Pallia-
tive Care. вҖҳInvestigation into the impact of the Health Buddy on patients re-
ceiving palliative chemotherapy who have a prognosis of at least six monthsвҖҷ
Masters thesis for Health Services Innovation, Faculty of Health, Medicine
and Life Sciences, Maastricht University.
Kuhn, T.S. (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, Chicago: Univ. of Chica-
go Press.
Langstrup, H. (2008) Making connections through online asthma monitoring.
Chronic Illness, 4, 118-126.
Langstrup-Nielsen, H.L. (2005): Linking Healthcare вҲ’An inquiry into the chang-
ing performances of web-based technology for asthma monitoring. PhD the-
sis, Copenhagen Business School.
Latour, B. (1992) Where are the missing masses? The sociology of a few mun-
dane artifacts. In: W.E. Bijker & J. Law, Shaping technology/ building society.
Studies in sociotechnical change. Cambridge (MS), London (GB): The MIT
Press, 225-258.
Latour, B. (1999) Pandora's Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies, Cam-
bridge, Mass., Harvard University Press.
Latour, B. (1996) Aramis or the love of technology. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1996.
Latour, B. (1991) On recalling ANT. In: In: Law, J., Hassard J. (eds). Actor Net-
work Theory and After. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 15-24.
Latour, B. (1987) The Pasteurization of French Society. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
186
references

Latour, B. (1983) Give me a laboratory and I will raise the world. in: Knorr-Cetina,
K. & Mulkay, M. (eds) Science observed. Perspectives on the social studies of
Science. London: Sage, 141-70.
Law, J. (1994) Organising Modernity. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Law, J. (1999). After ANT: complexity, naming and topology. In: Law, J., Hassard
J. (eds). Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1-14.
Law, J. (2004) After Method: Mess in Social Science Research. Durham & London:
Duke University Press.
Law, J. and Mol, A. (2008). The Actor-Enacted: Cumbrian Sheep in 2001. in:
Knappet, C. & Malafouris L. (eds) Material Agency: Towards a Non-Anthropo-
centric Approach. New York, Springer, 57-77.
Law, J. (1997) Traduction/ trahison: notes on ANT. Published by the Department
of
Sociology,
Lancaster
University
at:
http://lancaster.ac.uk/sociology/
stslaw2.html.
Law, J. (1987) Technology, closure and heterogeous engineering: the case of the
Portugese expansion. In Bijker, W. Pinch, T. and Hughes, T.P. (eds) The Social
Construction of Technological Systems, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Lederer, S. E. (1995) Subjected to Science: Human Experimentation in America
before the Second World War. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Lehman, P. (ed.) (2004) Coming off Psychiatric Drugs. Successful Withdrawal from
Neuroleptics,
Antidepressants,
Lithium,
Carbamazepine
and
Tranquilizers.
Shrewsbury: Peter Lehman Publishing.
Lehoux, P. Sicotte, C. Denis, J.L., Berg, M. & Lacroix, A. (2002) The theory of use
behind telemedicine: how compatible with physiciansвҖҷ clinical routines? So-
cial Science & Medicine, 54, 889-904.
Lettinga, A., & Mol, A. (1999). Clinical specificity and the non-generalities of
science: On innovation strategies for neurological physical therapy. Theoreti-
cal Medicine and Bioethics, 10, 6, 517-535.
Lettinga, A. (2000) Diversity in neurological physiotherapy. A comparative analy-
sis of clinical and scientific practices. Groningen: Northern Centre for
Healthcare Research.
LГ©vi-Strauss, C. (1966) The Savage mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lichtenstein, G. (2010) VicuГұa conservation and poverty alleviation? Andean
communities and international fibre markets, International journal of the com-
mons. 4, 1, available at: . Date accessed: 11 Oct. 2011.
Lie, M. & SГ¶rensen, K.H. (1996) Making Technology our own? Domesticating tech-
nology into everyday life. Oslo: Scandinavian University Press.
LГіpez, D. & DomГЁnech, M. (2008) On inscriptions and ex-inscriptions: the pro-
duction of immedicacy in a home telecare service. Environment and Planning
D: Society and Space, 26, 663-75.
LГіpez, D. & DomГЁnech, M. (2009) Embodying autonomy in a Home Telecare
Service. The Sociological Review, 56, 181-95.
LГіpez, D., CallГ©n, B., Tirado, F. y DomГЁnech, M. (2010) How to become a guar-
dian angel. Providing Safety in a Home Telecare Service. In: Mol, A., Moser, I.
& Pols, J. (eds.) Care in Practice. On Tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. Bie-
lefeld: Transcript Verlag, 73-92.
LГіpez, D. (2010) The Securitzation of Care Spaces: Lessons from telecare. In: M.
Schillmeier and DomГЁnech (eds), New Technologies and Emerging Spaces of
Care. Farnham: Ashgate, 40-55.
care at a distance
187

Lupton, D. (1997) Consumerism, reflexivity and the medical encounter, Social
Science & Medicine, 24, 3, 373-81.
Marres, N. (2005) No Issue, No Public: Democratic Deficits after the Displace-
ment of Politics, PhD dissertation, University of Amsterdam, 2005, http://
dare.uva.nl/document/17061
May, C., Rapley, T., Moreira, T., Finch, T. & Heaven, B. (2006) Technogover-
nance: evidence, subjectivity and the clinical encounter in primary care
medicine. Social Science & Medicine, 62, 1022-30.
May, C., Finch, T., Mair, F., Ballini, L., Dowrick, C., Eccles, M., Gask, L., Mac-
Farlane, A., Murray, E. Rapley, T., Rogers, A., Treweek, S., Wallace, P., Ander-
son, G., Burns, J., & Heaven, B. (2007). Understanding the implementation
of complex interventions in health care: the normalization process model.
BMC Health Services Research. 19, 7, 148.
May, C. (2006) Mobilising modern facts: health technology assessment and the
politics of evidence. Sociology of Health & Illness, 28, 5, 513-532.
May, C. Finch, T. Mair, F. & Mort, M. (2005) Towards a wireless patient. Chronic
illness, scarce care and technological innovation in the United Kingdom. So-
cial Science & Medicine, 61, 7, 1485-94.
May, C., Mort, M., Williams, T., Mair, F. & Gask, L. (2003) Health technology
assessment in its local contexts: studies of telehealthcare. Social Science &
Medicine, 57, 4, 697-710.
May, C., Gask, L., Atkinson, T., Ellis, N., Mair, F. & Esmail, A. (2001) Resisting
and promoting new technologies in clinical practice: the case of telepsychia-
try. Social Science & Medicine, 52, 12, 1889-1901.
May, C. & Ellis, N.T. (2001) When protocols fail: technical evaluation, biomedical
knowledge and the social productions of вҖҳfactsвҖҷ about a telemedicine clinic.
Social Science and Medicine, 53, 989-1002.
MвҖҷcharek, A. (2010a) Fragile Differences, Relational Effects: Stories about the
Materiality of Race and Sex, European Journal of Women's Studies, 17, 4, 1-16.
MвҖҷcharek, A. (2010b) When whiteness becomes a problem. (Un)doing differ-
ences in the case of DownвҖҷs Syndrome. Medische Antropologie, 22, 263-76.
Mead, S., Hilton, D. & Curtis, L. (2001) Peer support: a theoretical perspective.
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, 25,2, 134-41.
Miller, J.F. (2006) Opportunities and obstacles for good work in nursing. Nursing
Ethics, 13, 5, 471-87.
Milligan, C. (2009) ThereвҖҷs No Place like Home: People, Place and Care in an ageing
society. Aldershot: Ashgate Geographies Health Book Series.
Milligan, C., Roberts, C., Mort, M. & Moser, I. (2006) MEDUSE Policy Paper: the
Emergence of New Technologies and Responsibilities for Health Care at
Home in Europe, www.csi.ensmp.fr/WebCSI/MEDUSE/.
Milligan, C., Roberts, C. & Mort, M. (2010) Telecare and older people: Who cares
where? Social Science & Medicine, doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.08.014.
Milligan, C, Mort, M. & Roberts, C. (2010) Cracks in the door? Technology and
the shifting topology of care. In: Schillmeier, M. and DomГЁnech, M. (Eds.)
New Technologies and Emerging Spaces of Care. Farnham: Ashgate, 19-37 .
Miscione, G. (2007) Telemedicine in the upper amazon: interplay with local
health care practices. MIS Quarterly, 31, 2, 403-425.
188
references

Mol, A., Moser, I. & Pols, J. (2010) Care: Putting practice into theory. In: Mol, A.
Moser, I. & Pols, J. (eds) Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and
farms. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag. 7-26.
Mol, A. (2010) Care and its values. Good food in the nursing home. In: Mol, A.,
Moser, I. & Pols, J. (eds) Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and
farms. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag, 215-34.
Mol, A. (2008) The logic of care. London: Routledge.
Mol, A. & Karayalcin, C. (2008) вҖҳEvidenceвҖҷ is niet genoeg; kanttekeningen uit de
praktijk van de acute psychiatrie, Tijdschrift Voor Psychiatrie, 50, 359-364.
Mol, A. (2006) Proving or improving: On health care research as a form of self-
reflection. Qualitative Health Research, 16, 405-414.
Mol A. & Law, J. (2004) Embodied action, enacted bodies. The example hypogly-
caemia. Body & Society, 10, 43-62.
Mol, A. (2002) The body multiple. Ontology in medical practice. Durham and Lon-
don: Duke University Press.
Mol, A. (2000) Dit is geen programma. Over empirische filosofie. (This is not a
program. On empirical Philosopy) Krisis, 1, 1, 6-26. www.krisis.eu/content/
2000-1/2000-1-03-mol.pdf
Mol, A. and Berg M. (1998). An Introduction. In: Mol A. and Berg M. (eds) Dif-
ferences in Medicine: Unravelling Practices, Techniques and Bodies. Durham,
NCa. and London: Duke University Press, 1-12.
Mol, A. (1998) Missing Links, Making Links. The Performance of some Athero-
scleroses, in: Berg, M. and Mol, A. (eds) Differences in Medicine: Unraveling
Practices, Techniques and Bodies. Durham, London: Duke University Press,
144-65.
Mol, A. (1991) Ontological politics. A word and some questions. In: Law, J., Has-
sard J. (eds) Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 74-
89.
Moreira, T. (2006) Heterogeneity and Coordination of Blood Pressure in Neuro-
surgery. Social Studies of Science, 36, 1, 69-97.
Moreira, T. (2004) Self, Agency and the Surgical Collective: detachment. Sociol-
ogy of Health & Illness, 26, 1, 32-49.
Mort, M., May, C. & Williams, T. (2003). Remote doctors and absent patients:
Acting at a distance in telemedicine? Science, Technology and Human Values,
28, 2, pp. 274-295.
Mort, M., Finch, T. & May, C. (2009) Making and unmaking telepatients. Iden-
tity and governance in new health technologies. Science, Technology & Human
Values, 34, 9-33.
Moser, I. (2011) Dementia and the Limits to Life: Anthropological Sensibilities,
STS Interferences, and Possibilities for Action in Care, Science, Technology &
Human Values, DOI: 10.1177/0162243910396349.
Moser, I. (2009) A body that matters? The role of embodiment in the recomposi-
tion of life after a road traffic accident. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Re-
search, 11, 2, 81-96
Moser, I. (2010) Perhaps tears should not be counted but wiped away. On quality
and improvement in dementia care. In: Mol, A.Moser, I. & Pols, J. (eds) Care
in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. Bielefeld: Transcript verlag,
277-300.
care at a distance
189

Moser, I. (2006) Disability and the promise of technology: Technology, subjectiv-
ity and embodiment within an order of the normal. Information, Communica-
tion and Society, 9, 3, 373-95.
Moser, I. (2005) On becoming disabled and articulating alternatives: the multiple
modes of ordering disability and their interferences, Cultural Studies, 19,
667-700.
Moser, I. & Law, J. (1999) Good passages, bad passages. In Law, J., Hassard J.
(eds) Actor Network Theory and After. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 196-219.
Mowbray, C.T., D. Mosley & M.E. Collins (1998) Consumers as Mental Health
Providers: First Person Accounts of Benefits and Limitations, Journal of Beha-
vioral Health Services & Research, 25, 397-411.
Nettleton, S., Burrows, R., OвҖҷMalley, L. & Watt, I. (2004) Health E-Types? An
analysis of the everyday use of the Iternet for health. Information, Communi-
cation & Society, 7, 4, 531-53.
Nicolini, D. (2006) The work to make telemedicine work: a social and articula-
tive view. Social Science & Medicine, 62, 2754-67
Nijhof, G. (2001) Ziekenwerk. Een kleine sociologie van alledaags ziekenleven.
Amsterdam: Aksant.
Norman, S., (2006) The use of telemedicine in psychiatry. Journal of psychiatric
and mental health nursing , 13, 771-7.
Onor, M.L. & Misan, S. (2005) The clinical interview and the doctor-patient rela-
tionship in telemedicine. Telemedicine and e-health, 11, 102-5.
Osborne, T. (2002) Medicine and epistemology: Michel Foucault and the liberal-
ity of clinical reason. History of the human sciences, 5,2, 63-93.
Oudshoorn, N. (2009) Physical and digital proximity: emerging ways of health
care in face-to-face and telemonitoring of heart-failure patients. Sociology of
Health & Illness, 31, 3, 390-405.
Oudshoorn, N., & Pinch, T. (2003) How Users Matter: The Co-construction of Users
and Technology. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Polanyi, M. (1966) The tacit dimension. Doubleday 1966.
Pappas, Y. & Seale, C. (2009) The opening phase of telemedicine consultations.
An analysis of interaction, Social Science & Medicine, 68, 1229-37.
Pesic, P. (1999) Wrestling with Proteus: Francis Bacon and the вҖҳTortureвҖҷ of Na-
ture. Isis, 90, 1, 81-94.
Petryna, A., Lakoff, A. & Kleinman, A. (eds.) (2006) Global Pharmaceuticals:
Ethics, Markets, Practices. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Petryna, A. (2007) вҖҳClinical Trials Offshored: On Private Sector Science and Pub-
lic Health.вҖҷ BioSocieties, 2, 21-40.
Petryna, A. (2009) When Experiments Travel: Clinical Trials and the Global
Search for Human Subjects. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Pickering, A. (1992) Science as Practice and Culture. Chicago & London: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Pitkin, H.F. (1984) Fortune is a Woman. Gender and Politics in the Thought of Ni-
collГІ Machiavelli. Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California
Press.
Pols, J. & Willems, D. (2011) Innovation and Evaluation. About taming and un-
leashing telecare technologies. Sociology of Health and Illness, 33, 4, 484-498.
190
references

Pols, J. (2010a) Breathtaking practicalities: A politics of embodied patient
positions,
Scandinavian
Journal
of
Disability
Research,
DOI:
10.1080/
15017419.2010.490726
Pols, J. (2010b) What patients care for with telecare. In: Mol, A. Moser, I. & Pols,
J. (eds) Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. Bielefeld:
Transcript verlag, 171-94.
Pols, J. (2010c) Wonderful webcams. About active gazes and invisible technolo-
gies. Science Technology & Human Values, 36, 2, 1-23.
Pols, J. (2010d) Bringing bodies вҖ“ and health care вҖ“ back in. Exploring practical
knowledge for living with chronic disease. Medische Antropologie, 22, 2, 413-
27.
Pols, J. & MвҖҷcharek (2010a) Introduction. Where are the missing bodies? Disabil-
ity Studies in the Netherlands. Medische Antropologie, 22, 2, 217-224.
Pols, J. & MвҖҷcharek (guest-editors) (2010b) The body in Disability Studies, special
issue of: Medische Antropologie, 22, 2.
Pols, J. & Moser, I. (2009) Cold technologies versus warm care? On affective and
social relations with and through care technologies, ALTER, European Jour-
nal of Disability Research 3 (2009) 159-178.
Pols, J. (2009) The heart of the matter. About good nursing and telecare. Health
Care Analysis. An International Journal of Health Care Philosophy and Policy,
10.1007/s10728-009-0140-1.
Pols, J. (2008) which empirical research, whose ethics? Articulating ideals in
long-term mental health care. In: Widdershoven, G., Hope, T., Van der
Scheer, L. & McMillan, J. (editors) Empirical Ethics in Psychiatry. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 51-68.
Pols, J., Schermer, M. & Willems, D. (2008) Telezorgvisie Essay over ontwikke-
lingen en beloften van telezorg in de Nederlandse gezondheidszorg. (Telecare
visions. Essay on the developments and promises of telecare in Dutch health
care) Amsterdam: Academic Medical Centre.
Pols, J. (2006) Washing the citizen: washing, cleanliness and citizenship in men-
tal health care. Culture, Medicine & Psychiatry, 30, 1, 77-104.
Pols, J. (2005) Enacting appreciations: beyond the patient perspective. Health
Care Analysis, 13, 3, 203-221.
Pols, J. (2004) Chapter 7: Conclusion: Enacting improvement. In: Good care. En-
acting a complex ideal in long-term psychiatry. Utrecht: Trimbos-reeks, 149-55,
http://www.trimbos.nl/webwinkel/productoverzicht-webwinkel/feitenвҖ“cij-
fersвҖ“beleid/af/af0519-good-care
Pols, J. (2003) Enforcing patient rights or improving care? The interference of
two modes of doing good in mental health care, Sociology of Health & Illness,
25, 3, 320-347.
Prior, L. (2003) Belief, knowledge and expertise. The emergence of the lay expert
in medical sociology. Sociology of Health & Illness, 25, 41-57.
Proctor, R. (1988) Racial Hygiene: Medicine under the Nazis. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Raad voor de Volksgezondheid en Zorg (RVZ) (2010) Gezondheid 2.0. (Health
2.0) Den Haag; RVZ.
Reverby, S.M. (2000) Examining Tuskegee: The Infamous Syphilis Study and Its
Legacy. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
care at a distance
191

Reverby, S.M. (ed.) (2009) TuskegeeвҖҷs Truths: Rethinking the Tuskegee Syphilis
Study. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Roberge, F.A., PagГ©, G., Sylvestre, J. & Chahlauoui, J. (1982) Telemedicine in
northern Quebec, Canadian Medical Association Journal, 127, 8, 707-709.
Roberts, C. & Mort, M. (2009) Reshaping what counts as care: Older people,
work and new Technologies Alter, European Journal of Disability research, 3, 2,
138-58.
Rorty, R. (1979) Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Ross Winthereik, B. & Langstrup, H. (2010) When patients care (too much) for
information. In: Mol, A., Moser, I. & Pols, J. (eds) Care in practice. On tinker-
ing in clinics, homes and farms. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag, 27-56.
Sacks, O. (1984) A Leg to Stand On. New York: Touchstone Books.
SГӨvenstedt, S., Zingmark, K., HydГ©n, L.C. & Brulin, C. (2005) Establishing joint
attention in remote talks with the elderly about health: a study of nursesвҖҷcon-
versation with elderly persons in teleconsultations. Scandinavian Journal of
the Caring Sciences, 19, 317-24.
SГӨvenstedt, S., Zingmark, K. and Sandman, P.O. (2004) Being present in a dis-
tant room: Aspects of teleconsultations with older people in a nursing home.
Qualitative Health Research, 14, 1046-1057.
Schermer, M. (2009) Telecare and self-management: opportunity to change the
paradigm? Journal of Medical Ethics, 35, 688-691.
Schillmeier, M. and DomГЁnech, M. (eds.) (2010) New Technologies and Emerging
Spaces of Care. Farnham: Ashgate.
Sehon, S.R. & Stanley, D.E. (2003) A philosophical analysis of the evidence-based
medicine debate BMC Health Services Research, 3, 14,www.biomedcentral.
com/1472-6963/3/14.
Shakespeare, T. (2006) Disability rights and wrongs. London: Routledge.
Shapin, S. & Schaffer, S.(1985) Leviathan and the air-pump. Hobbes, Boyle and the
experimental life. Princeton: Princetone University Press.
Silverstone, R. (2005) Domesticating Domestication. Reflections on the Life of
Concept, in: Berker, M. Hartmann, Y. Punie and K.Ward (eds) Domestication
of Media and Technologies, 229-48. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Silverstone, R., Hirsch, E. and Morley, D. (1992) вҖҳInformation and Communica-
tion Technologies and the Moral Economy of the HouseholdвҖҷ, in R. Silver-
stone and E. Hirsch (eds) Consuming Technologies: Media and Information in
Domestic Spaces. London: Routledge, 115-31.
Sluiter, L. (2007) Virtuele hulpverlener in huiskamer [the virtual living room],
Psy, 4, p.15.
Smith, K.V. & Godfrey, N.S. (2002) Being a good nurse and doing the right
thing: a qualitative study. Nursing Ethics, 9, 3, 301-12.
Sparrow, R. (2002) The march of the robot dogs. Ethics & Information Technology,
4: 305-18.
Sparrow, R. & L. Sparrow (2006) In the hands of machines? The future of aged
care. Mind Match,16: 141-61.
Struhkamp, R. Mol, A. & Swierstra, T. (2009) Dealing with In/dependence: Doc-
toring in Physical Rehabilitation Practice. Science, Technology & Human
Values, 34, 55-76.
192
references

Struhkamp, R. (2004) Dealing with disability. Inquiries into a clinical craft. PhD
thesis Amsterdam.
Suchman, L.A. (2007) Human-machine reconfigurations. Plans and situated ac-
tions. Cambridge University Press.
Suyata, V. (2009) The patient as a knower. Principle and Practice in Siddha Med-
icine. Economic and Political Weekly, XLIV, 16, 76-82.
Taylor, J. (2010) On Recognition, Caring, and Dementia. In: Mol, A., Moser, I. &
Pols, J. (eds) Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. Bielefeld:
Transcript Verlag, 27-56.
Thygesen, H. (2009) Technology and good dementia care. A study of technology
and ethics in everyday care practice. Centre for Technology, Innovation and
Culture (TIK), University of Oslo, Phd thesis.
Thygesen, H. & Moser, I. (2010) Technology and good dementia care: an argu-
ment for an ethics-in-practice approach. Schillmeier, M. and DomГЁnech, M.
(eds.) New Technologies and Emerging Spaces of Care. Farnham: Ashgate, 129-
147.
Timmermans, S. and M. Berg (2003) The gold standard: The challenge of evidence-
based medicine and standardization in health care. Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press.
Timmermans, S., Bowker, G.C. & Star, S.L. (1998) The architecture of differ-
ence: Visibility, Control and Comparability in Building a Nursing Interven-
tions Classification. In A. Mol & M. Berg (eds). Differences in Medicine. Unra-
veling practices, Techniques and Bodies. Durham & London: Duke University
Press, 202-25.
Tjalsma, D (2007) Remote control! Toekomst en betekenis van telemedicine voor
de zorggebruiker (Future and meaning of telemedicine for health care users)
Utrecht: NPCF.
Toulmin, S. (1976) On the nature of the physicianвҖҷs understanding. The journal of
medicine and philosophy, 1, 1, 32-50.
Trappenburg, M. (2008) Genoeg is genoeg. Over gezondheidszorg en democratie.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Tronto, J. (1993) Moral boundaries: A political argument for an ethic of care, New
York: Routledge.
Tuckett, A.G. (2002) An ethic of the fitting: a conceptual framework for nursing
practice. Nursing Inquiry, 5,4 220-227.
Turkle, S. (1984) The second self. Computers and the human spirit. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Velpry, L.(2008) The PatientвҖҷs View: Issues of Theory and Practice. Culture, Med-
icine & Psychiatry, 32, 238-58.
Verbeek, P.P. (2009), вҖҳAmbient Intelligence and Persuasive Technology: The
Blurring Boundaries Between Human and TechnologyвҖҷ. Nanoethics, 3, 231-
242.
Verbeek, P.P. (2006) Materializing Morality. Design ethics and technological
mediation. Science, Technology & Human Values, 31, 361-80.
Wakefield, B.J., Holaman, J.E., Ray, A. Morse, J., Kienzle, M.G. (2004) Nurse and
patient communication via low and high-bandwidth home telecare systems.
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 10, 156-9.
care at a distance
193

Webster, A. (2002) Innovative Health technologies and the social: redefining
health. Medicine and the Body. Current Sociology, 50, 443-57.
Weindling, P. (1989) Health, Race and German Politics between National Unifica-
tion and Nazism, 1870-1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University press.
Whelan, E. (2007) вҖҳNo one agrees except for those of us who have itвҖҷ: endome-
triosis patients as an epistemological community. Sociology of Health & Illness,
29, 7, 957-82.
WHO (1998) WHO definition of palliative care. Geneva: WHO.
Willems, D. (2010) Varieties of goodness in high-tech home care. In: Mol, A.,
Moser, I. & Pols, J. (eds) Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and
farms. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag, 257-76.
Willems, D. et al.(2006) Patient work in end-stage heartfailure. A prospective
longitudinal multiple case study. Palliative Medicine, 20, 25-33.
Willems D. (2004) Geavanceerde thuiszorgtechnologie: morele vragen bij een
ethisch ideaal. (Advanced homecare technology: moral questions with an
ethical ideal.) In: Signalering Ethiek en Gezondheid, Den Haag: Gezondheids-
raad.
Willems, D.L. (2003) Een wereld van verschil. Pluralisme in de medische ethiek.
(A world of difference. Pluralism in medical ethics). Inaugural lecture. Am-
sterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Willems, D. (2000) Managing oneвҖҷs body using self-management techniques:
practicing autonomy. Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics, 21, 23-8.
Willems, D. (1995) Tools of Care? Explorations into the Semiotics of Medical
Technology. Maastricht University
Willems, D. (1992) SusanвҖҷs Breathlessness. The construction of professionals
and lay persons. In: Lachmund, J. & G. Stollberg (eds) The social construction
of illness. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner, 105-14.
Wilson, E. (2005) вҖҳCan you think what I feel? Can you feel what I think?вҖҷ Notes
on affect, embodiment and intersubjectivity. AI. Scandinavian Journal of Med-
ia Arts, 2, 2. http://scan.net.au/scan/journal/display.php?journal id=54.
Winance, M. (2010) Care and disability. Practices of experimenting, tinkering
with, and arranging people and technical aids. In: Mol, A.Moser, I. & Pols, J.
(eds) Care in practice. On tinkering in clinics, homes and farms. Bielefeld: Tran-
script verlag, 93-118.
Winance, M. (2006) Trying out the wheelchair: The mutual shaping of people
and devices through adjustment. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 31, 1,
52-72.
Winance M. (2007), Being normally different? Changes to normalisation pro-
cesses: from alignment to work on the norm, Disability and Society, 22, 6,
625-638.
Winance, M. (2001). ThГЁse et ProthГЁse. Le processus dвҖҷhabilitation comme fabri-
cation de la personne. Paris: ENSMP, CSI.
Wittgenstein L. (1953). Philosophical investigations/Philosophische Untersuchungen.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Wyatt, S. 2008 Technological determinism is dead: Long live technological deter-
minism. In: E.J. Hackett et al. (eds) The handbook of science and technology
studies. Cambridge: MIT Press, 165-80.
194
references

Zola, I.K. (1991) Bringing our bodies and ourselves back in: Reflections on a
past, present and future вҖҳmedical sociologyвҖҷ. Journal of Health and Social Be-
havior, 32, 1-16.
Zuiderent-Jerak, T. & Van der Grinten, T. (2009) Zorg voor medische technolo-
gie. Over het ontwikkelen van zorgtechnologie, vormgeven van technologie-
beleid en behartigen van publieke belangen. In: Asveld, L. & Besters, M. (eds)
Medische technologie. Ook geschikt voor thuisgebruik. (Medical Technology: Also
Fit for the home). Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut.
care at a distance
195


Index of names
Chapter, note-number, page in text
Akrich III-2, 45; IV-6, 73; V-7, 80
Anderson V-15, 81
Anestad I-30-18
Arksey V-7, 80
Armstrong 25
Barbot I-8, 11; IV-2, 63; V-13, 80; V-27,
82
Barry V-25, 82; VI-13, 108
Bauer III-8, 46; I-5, 11; VI-5, 101
Berg I-4, 11; I-17, 13; I-19, 13; VIII-5,
138
Boevink V-34, 83; VIII-28, 149
Boltanski I-28, 16
Boonstra VI-15, 111; VII-2, 118; 7, 121
Borup I-6, 11
Bovenkamp I-14, 12; V-12, 80; V-18,
81; VII-5, 119; VIII-9, 139
Bowker I-19, 13; V-41, 88
Brown, H. II-2, 25
Brown, N. I-6, 11
Bruun-Jensen I-31, 18
CallГ©n I-30, 18; V-4, 80; VIII-16, 141;
VIII-25, 146
Callon IV-10, 76; V-8, 80; 11, 80; 16,
81; 30, 82; VII-8, 123
Canguilhem 82; V-22, 82; I-29, 17
Charmaz V-39, 85
Dehue I-22, 14; VIII-6, 138; 14-141
Dodier V-27, 82
DomenГЁch I-7, 11; 12, 12; VI-1, 99;
VII-7, 121
Edgar 5-13, 80
EminoviГ§ I-18, 13
Epstein 80; V-8, 80; 10, 80
Finch I-7, 11; 16, 13; 23, 14; II-12, 26;
VIII-13, 140; 16, 141; 25, 146
Foucault 19; 25; I-29, 17; 35, 19; II-3,
25; V-29, 82; VI-2, 100; VI-10, 104;
13, 108
Gad I-31, 18
Gammon III-7, 46; VI-7, 102; 8, 102;
11, 107
Geest, van der II-20, 37
Greenhalgh V-13, 80
Habermas 25; II-1, 25
Habraken V-44, 91
Haraway I-24, 16; 30, 18; II-25, 44;
VI-2, 100
Harbers VIII-21, 143
Hart V-14, 80
Hendriks V-30, 82
Henwood V-14, 80
Hester V-27, 82
Hughes V-4, 80
Hutchins V-41, 88
Idhe II-6, 26; VI-2, 100
Jonssen V-29, 82
Kivits IV-4, 72; V-4, 80
Kleinman II-20, 37; V-1, 79; 4, 80
Knudsen 100; 104
Korsten II-23, 40
Kuhn VIII-19, 142
Langstrup 55; I-23, 14; IV-3, 63; V-16,
81; VII-13, 140
Latour I-31, 18; 34, 19; III-2, 45; V-16,
81; VI-10, 104; VIII-21, 143
Law I-20, 14; 26, 16; 29, 17; 31, 18; V-
4, 80; 16, 81; 30, 82; VIII-21, 143
Lehman VIII-9, 80
Lehoux III-4, 46; VII-8, 123; VIII-14,
141
Lettinga I-21, 14
LГ©vi-Strauss V-27, 82
197

LГіpez I-7, 11; 12, 12; IV-8, 76; VI-1,
99; VII-7, 121
Lupton V-14, 80; V-17, 81
MвҖҷcharek V-4, 80; VIII-2, 136; 3, 137
Mair I-7, 11; VIII-25, 146
Marres VIII-1, 135
May I-2, 11; 4, 11; 7, 11; 23, 14; II-12,
26; III-4, 46; V-19, 81; VII-8, 123;
VIII-14, 141; 16, 141; 25, 146
Milligan I-7, 11; 13, 12; III-8, 46; VI-
12, 108; 16, 111; VIII-27,149
Misan I-5, 11; VI-5, 101
Mol I-19, 13; 20, 14; 26, 16; 27, 16;
29, 17; 31, 18; II-1, 25; 10, 26; 20,
37; III-3, 45; IV-1, 63; V-4, 80; 13,
80; 23, 82; 24, 82; 27, 82; 28, 82;
30, 82; VIII-3, 137; 10, 139; 11, 139;
21, 143
Moreira I-26, 16; IV-10, 76
Mort I-4, 11; 7, 11; 13, 12; 23, 14; II-12,
26; VI-12, 108; 16, 111; VIII-25,
146; 27, 149
Moser I-7, 11; 27, 16; II-5, 25; 15, 27;
16, 27; 20, 37; V-4, 80; 27, 82; 28,
82; 30, 82; VIII-10, 139; 11, 139; 16,
141; 21, 143
Nettleton V-17, 81
Nicolini III-4, 46; VII-8, 123; VIII-14,
141
Onor I-5, 11; VI-5, 101
Osborne II-3, 25; V-25, 82
Oudshoorn II-12, 26; IV-9, 76
Pappas VI-14, 109
Petryna V-1, 79
Pickering I-31, 18
Pinch IV-9, 76
Polanyi 83; V-31, 83
Pols I-5, 11; 20, 14; 24, 16; 27, 16; 30,
18; II-2, 25; 5, 25; 15, 27; 16, 27; 24,
40; III-1, 45; 2, 45; V-4, 80; 21, 81;
27, 82; 30, 82; 43, 89; VI-2, 100, 6,
101; VII-4, 118; 12, 126; VIII-3, 137;
18, 141; 23, 145; 24, 146
Prior V-5, 80; 27, 82
RabГ©harisoa IV-10, 76; V-8, 80; 11,
80; 30, 82; VIII-8, 139
Roberts I-7, 11; 13, 12; II-12, 26; VI-12,
108; 16, 111; VIII-27, 149
Ross Winthereik IV-3, 63
Sandman 100
SГӨvenstedt 100; 102; 104; III-7, 46;
VI-2, 100; 7, 102; 9, 102
Schaffer VIII-4, 138
Schermer 52, III-11, 52; IV-6, 73; VII-
4, 118
Schillmeier I-7, 11
Seale VI-14, 109
Shakespeare V-4, 80
Shapin VIII-4, 138
Silverstone I-30, 18
Sparrow, R. & L. 26; 27; 32; 34; 37; I-
5, 11; II-11, 26; 14, 26
Struhkamp II-3, 25; 24, 40; V-23, 82;
29, 82; 30, 82; VIII-10, 139
Suchman 85; II-25, 44; V-40, 85
Suyata V-4, 80
Taylor VIII-16, 141
ThГ©venot I-28, 16
Thygesen I-7, 11; 12, 12; 27, 16
Timmermans I-17, 13; 19, 13; VIII-5,
138
Toulmin V-29, 82
Trappenburg I-14, 12; V-12, 80; V-18,
81; VII-5, 119; VIII-9, 139
Tronto I-27, 16
Turkle II-25, 44
Velpry VIII-24, 146
Verbeek I-34, 19; VII-13, 131
Webster I-30, 18
Whelan V-7, 80
Willems 18; 83; V-31, 83; 32, 83
Winance II-20, 37; IV-3, 63; V-30, 82;
VII-4, 118; 12, 126
Wittgenstein I-25, 16; 29, 17; VI-2,
100
Wyatt II-9, 26; V-14, 80
Zingmark 100
198
index of names

Index of subjects
Page number; note number (n)
access 21, 33, 47, 71, 75, 80-1, 95, 99,
120; n 161/3, 169/3, 171/20, 172/31,
175/6
administrative 123-5, 131, 145
aesthetics 36-7, 42-5; n 166/21
ageing 11; n 161/12
aim(s)
вҲ’of aesthetics 36
вҲ’of care 20, 37, 45, 75, 85, 110,
118-20, 126, 136, 145, 149
вҲ’of efficiency 116-21
вҲ’of knowledge 66, 82, 86
вҲ’of research 15, 82, 136, 138-45
вҲ’of technology 28, 43, 110, 121,
126-8, 136
antibiotics 35, 65-6, 90
arrangements 11, 29, 84-5
articulate/articulation/articulating
14-6, 26, 31, 33, 70, 71, 74, 83, 141-
8, 154; n 163/24,171/26, 29, 172/31,
177/16, 18, 178/23, 24, 25
big sister 106-8, 112
blood pressure 17, 47, 51, 64, 66, 72,
117, 123, 136, 158; n 163/26, 168/8,
172/38
body/bodies 25, 26, 37, 48, 55, 64 -75,
84-94, 103, 105, 115; n 169/4
breath(less)/вҲ’(lessness)/вҲ’(ing) 48,
55, 59, 65-75, 83-95, 101, 110, 128,
150
business 14, 18, 135, 148
call centre 17, 47-53, 66-7, 73, 123-5,
131, 158
care organisation(s) 12, 14, 16, 47,
99, 105, 110, 118-20, 135, 149, 157;
n 162/9
chat (webcam-) 50-1, 54, 69, 74, 101-
12, 121; n 168/8, 175/9
choice(s) 12, 41, 50, 81, 104; n 174/10
close(r)/closeness 29, 33, 36, 40, 45,
53, 55, 59, 67-9, 101, 104, 109, 112,
113, 123, 127, 145, 147, 148-50; n
174/17
code (d)/coding 27, 28, 47, 129, 130
co-exist 21, 64, 76, 77
cold 11, 20, 25-44, 45-6, 135, 148; n
167/10
collective(ly) 14, 15, 21, 70, 75, 148,
153; n 168/10, 172/31
communities/patient вҲ’/caring вҲ’60,
86, 95, 110-1, 119, 136, 149; n 169/
7
compare/comparative/comparison(s)/
comparing 15, 28, 36, 60, 69, 93,
113-8, 126, 130, 143, 146-7; n 174/7
competition 14, 15, 135, 148; n 174/10
complaint(s) 27, 31, 35, 38-40, 66-8,
111
complex(ity) 13, 82, 95, 118, 123, 125,
128, 131, 137, 146; n 174/10, 175/3
concentrate/concentration 50, 102-4,
112
configuration(s) 17, 64, 73, 74, 146,
150; n 164/30, 168/3, 170/17
consumer(s) 37, 81-2, 95, 117, 135,
144, 146; n 161-3, 162-14, 170-17,
175-5, 178-24
context(ual) 14, 17, 29, 38, 43, 58, 63,
79-95, 104-6, 111-4, 115-7, 129, 130,
135-41; n 170/15, 16, 172/34, 176/8,
179/29
contingency/contingencies 117, 131,
137
control
(вҖ“ group) 157-8; n 162/17, 178/25
(вҖ“led study/trial) 13, 125 136, 138,
140, 141
вҖ“ of symptoms 20, 26-32, 42, 56,
60, 65, 73-4, 106, 145, 150; n
174/11
coordinate/coordination/coordinating
84, 90-4, 124, 129
199

COPD 16-7, 45-60, 45-60, 65, 69,
70-1, 75-6, 79-95, 99, 101-10, 119,
125, 126-8, 150; n 166/17, 172/34,
173/44
cost 11-2, 22, 105, 117-20, 130, 147,
148; n 167/13, 175/1, 2
creative 18, 43, 59, 76, 92, 116, 144,
146; n 164/30, 169/11, 176/12
daily 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 30, 31, 51, 54
вҲ’life/вҲ’practice/everyday life 55-
9, 63-78, 79-95, 149-50; n 166/
20, 171/30, 173-44
вҲ’measurements/monitoring/
checks 47-60, 64-7, 72-3, 117,
123, 136, 150
вҲ’process (of illness) 53-5, 59, 63
day to day, everyday, daily care 30-2,
40, 50-1, 59-66, 70-75, 83-7, 91, 93,
109-10, 115-7, 122-24, 127-8, 130,
136, 140, 150; n 161/2, 175/9, 47,
165/8, 176/2
decision(makers) 11, 15, 81, 117, 148;
n 161/4, 174/1, 177/16
decision (treatment/care) 73, 94
dehmunanise/вҲ’ation 26
deliberative/deliberations 126, 144-5;
n 164/30, 178/25
design (research вҲ’) 13, 135-51; n 162/
17, 176/12
вҲ’of technology 18, 28, 43, 57, 131,
144; n 164/30, 165/10, 176/13,
178/25
developing (вҖ“ment, вҲ’ers) of telecare
projects 12, 15, 17, 28, 39, 95, 117,
119, 130, 135; n 161/4, 7, 162/13,
165/9, 168/8, 178/25
вҲ’care 147; n 163/27
вҲ’ment of research see design
вҲ’norms 45-61, 67-69, 107, 111,
126
вҲ’(practical) knowledge 21, 70-5,
79-95, 99, 138-51
deviant measurements 45-7, 51-2, 66-
7, 73-7, 99, 136; n 177-17
diabetes 17, 47
diet 28, 57, 64, 66-7, 73-4, 150, 154
directive 45, 63, 68, 77, 79, 84, 87,
89, 95, 109, 115, 147; n 172/39
distance/(relational вҲ’) 11, 21, 36, 40,
45, 48, 56, 111-3, 119, 122, 148-9; n
161/2, 174/17
domestication (theory) 17-9; n 164/
30, 178/25
economies 115-8, 122; n 162/15, 174/1
efficiency/efficiencies 9, 11, 14 21-2,
52, 115-31, 135, 137, 147-51; n 162/9
174/1, 175/2, 6
email 11, 33, 47, 65, 66, 74, 99, 123,
124, 127
embarrass(ment) 57, 68, 95, 100, 101
embodied (embodying) 48-9, 71, 83-
95, 116-6, 121, 145; n 167/10, 172/
33, 178/25
emotion(al) 32, 43, 51, 70, 75, 81, 86,
91, 106, 128; n 173/5
enacting 45, 63, 66, 68, 76, 87, 89,
115, 130-1, 144, 146, 148; n 163/26,
164/29, 167/3, 168/1, 2, 9
ethnography (вҲ’ic) 15-6, 20, 146; n
177/16, 177/20, 178/25
evaluation (вҖ“ating) 13-5, 26, 82, 124-
6, 130, 137-51; n 162/18, 170/17,
177/16
evidence (вҲ’based medicine)/ebm 12,
80-2, 138-9; n 162/17, 170/12, 171/
19, 29, 175/4, 177/16
exotic 80-3; n 176/7
experience/patient вҲ’/experiential 15,
36, 38, 42, 55, 60, 63-77, 79-95,
99-113, 116, 122-4, 136-9, 148-9; n
169/3, 4, 7, 171/29,172/33, 39, 176/
7, 177/20, 179/28
expert patient 80, 82, 94
expert(ise) 59, 69, 75-6, 80, 83, 90,
94, 107, 139; n 169/3, 170/12, 172/
33, 178/25
family 21, 29-34, 38, 50, 64, 91, 103,
136, 150; n 165-8
fear 20, 26, 32, 37, 42, 46-9, 55-6,
60, 68, 70, 100, 160; n 165/6, 12
fellow patient(s) 16, 21, 64-78, 79,
86, 101, 103, 111, 112, 127, 150
finance(r) 14, 118, 135; n 162/14, 167/
13, 175/6
fluid intake/retention 47, 64, 67, 73-
6, 91, 115, 150
200
index of subjects

framing/naming notes 16, 26, 76,
81, 111-2, 127, 131, 136-42, 150-4; n
163/26, 27, 164/28, 177/17
frame (webcam вҲ’) 100-4, 112-3
frequency 51, 54-9, 117-8, 137; n 175/2
friend(s), friendship 21, 30, 33, 35, 36,
41, 64, 65, 69, 71, 74, 75, 93, 102,
103, 106, 111, 112, 114, 127, 149; n
166/16, 174/18
goals (of care) 14, 22, 57, 58, 75, 115-
128, 137-150; n 166/17, 24, 174/15
government 12, 119, 135, 148-9; n
161/7, 162/9, 13, 14, 167-13, 175-3,
4, 5, 176/6
habit(s) 56, 87, 88, 115, 154
heart/heart failure 17, 19, 45-60, 64-
76, 123, 124, 129, 130, 150; n 166-
17, 172-37
homecare 12, 16, 46-60, 99-114, 116-
25, 149; n 174/15, 175/6
hospital(-isation) 17, 27, 30, 31, 35, 36,
47, 49, 51, 53, 54, 59, 64-8, 90-2,
108, 118, 123, 124, 129, 150; n 167/
13
hype 11, 117, 135; n 161/2
implementation 12, 15, 20, 51, 79, 85,
115-31, 136, 144, 148; n 161/7, 162/
13, 174/15, 178/23
improving/improvement 11-6, 26,
43, 53, 55, 57, 65, 82, 84, 89, 92-4,
119, 123, 125, 130, 135-51; n 171/29,
175/4, 176/11
improvisation/improvise 84-5, 95,
131; n 176/2
industry/industries 12, 14, 26, 118,
135, 138, 148; n 162/9, 17, 176/6,
179/26
informed patient 80; n 168/7, 170/14
inhaler 83-4, 91, 110, 126-8; n 172/33
instrument 16, 84-6, 90, 141; n 172/2
instrumental 19, 25-6
insurance (company) 12, 14, 81, 135,
149; n 167/13, 171/20, 175/6
intense/intensity 20, 51, 55, 59, 73,
87, 101-13, 148-50
interdependence 18, 19, 76, 83, 130,
140, 145-6
interfere(nce) 26, 38, 120, 122, 125,
131, 137, 140-2; n 163/23, 165/13,
173/16, 177/17, 177/20
internet 47, 65-6, 74, 80, 99, 121,
123, 127-8; n 165/6, 13, 168/7
intertwine(ment) 14, 82
intimate/intimacy 21, 28, 49, 67-9,
100-113, 149
intrude/intrusion/intrusive 21, 40,
69, 106-8, 111-2; n 174/12
invisible/invisibility 20-1, 57, 70-1,
81, 99-112; n 168/8, 179/29
laboratory/laboratories 15, 80, 82, 87,
95; n 170/11, 171/24
lay expert(s) 80
logic(s) 25, 45, 66-77, 79, 82, 84, 92,
94, 117-8, 122, 129-30, 144; n 171/
24, 172/35
loneliness 74, 120, 141, 149
love 26-7, 30-6, 69, 91, 156; n 166/
16, 174/17
lung function 76, 93
lung(s) 16, 48, 64-5, 75, 84-6, 90-3
magnify(ing) 111-2
market 12-5, 81, 118-9, 135-6, 144,
148; n 161/7, 162/13, 14, 17, 175/3,
4, 176/1
material semiotics see relations
medication (вҲ’pills) 33-4, 39, 45-52,
64-6, 70-6, 80, 90-5, 122, 124, 129,
150; n 168/6, 170/9, 171/21
memory/ies 87-8, 116, 121; n 172/41
mess(y) 91, 94, 131
methodology/method 14, 20, 80-5,
136-51; n 170/11, 177/16, 19, 20,
178/20, 25
misfit 13, 40-3, 136-51
mobility scooter 63, 88, 89, 91; n
173/43
modern patient(s) 11, 79-80, 117, 170/
17, 171/19
modest(ly) 31, 42, 99, 104-114, 146
network 15, 47, 65, 68, 75, 109, 113,
123, 125-7, 137; n 164/29, 173/1
nightmare(s) 11-2, 14, 16, 20, 137; n
161/5, 162/10, 165/9, 167/10
care at a distance
201

normativity/normative 16, 20-2, 136-
8, 141-53; n 163/24, 27, 164/28,
166/22, 169/11, 177/18
object
вҲ’objectify 20, 25-6, 67, 125
вҲ’objective see goal
вҲ’objective/ity 34, 42, 45, 106,
138-41; n 163-26
вҲ’objective measurments 66-8,
76
вҲ’objective symptoms 66-8, 71-2,
75; n 176/4, 177/18
вҲ’of research 15-6, 58, 136-151; n
172/39, 177/15, 17, 20
вҲ’of care 54, 58, 91, 100
вҲ’problem definition 59
objects (things) 17, 19, 26, 34, 37, 76,
103, 112; n 163/25, 26, 164/29, 173/
42
objection (against technology) 144;
n 162/15, 165/14
observe 13-7, 47-51, 99, 142-8
observation (one, singular) 58
вҲ’by phone 59
вҲ’by webcam 105-6
вҲ’influences object see framing
intimate вҲ’69-70, 107-8
many вҲ’s 82
self вҲ’71-6, 87, 99, 143
third person вҲ’146
observer (involved-) 20
вҲ’(fallible) 108
вҲ’(strange/unfamiliar/outsiders)
108, 142
oncology 16, 20, 25-42, 54, 124-6,
129-30, 149
outcome 14, 15
вҲ’of care practice 137, 142, 147; n
176/2
вҲ’of research 137-8, 141, 151; n
176/4
unanticipated вҖ“s 141; n 168/3
unpredictable, changing/shifting
вҖ“s 141, 148
вҲ’variables 14, 15, 137; n 171/26
palliative 16-7, 20, 27-47, 124, 129-30,
140, 149; n 166/16, 17, 24
panic 65, 69-70, 90, 95
patient organisation(s) 12, 159; n 161/
3, 162/14
peak flow meter(s) 44, 76, 95
personal (subjective see subjective)
вҲ’alarm n 161/2, 162/12, 168/8
вҲ’conversation 100-8
вҲ’experience 77
impersonal technology 43
вҲ’ised treatment 52
вҲ’measurments 76
вҲ’privacy 111
вҲ’seeing patients in person 48-59
pilot 12-3, 52; n 162/15
pioneer (practices) 15, 136; n 175/4
practical knowledge 21, 79, 82-95,
99, 111, 136-53; n 169/3, 171/30
pragmatic(s) 43, 84, 93, 139
preferences 81, 146; n 171/20
prescription(s) see directives
process
вҲ’of being ill 38, 53-4, 59, 63, 70,
82, 90, 115
вҲ’of caring 37, 39, 42-3, 120-1; n
166/22, 175/4
вҲ’of changing routines 115-6
вҲ’of making technology work 14,
17-21, 31, 77, 137-8, 142-3; n
164/30, 169/11, 177/20, 178/25
вҲ’of telecare development 15-6
вҲ’of translation 90, 95
producer(s) of
вҲ’change n 164/30
вҲ’figures 66, 72
вҲ’fit 38; n 173/1
вҲ’meaning 163-25
вҲ’medical knowledge 79-80
вҲ’practical knowledge 13, 71, 86
вҲ’scientific knowledge n 176/4,
177/16
вҲ’telecare devices 12, 144; n 175/3,
4
promise(s) 1-16, 135, 137, 144-51; n
161/6, 165/9
вҲ’of efficiency 21, 117-8
вҲ’of increased self-management
21, 60
public
вҲ’concerns 15, 135, 147; n 176/1
вҲ’debate 130
вҲ’discourse 117; n 167/13
202
index of subjects

вҲ’space 89
вҲ’trust n 169/1
randomised controlled trial/RCT 13,
136-141; n 162/17, 163/23, 177/16
rationale/rationality/rationalities 12-
3, 50, 76, 81, 94, 115; n 170/15, 17,
171/20, 171/24
вҲ’medical rationality 81
вҲ’practical rationality 85
вҲ’rational (cold) 20, 25-6, 46
вҲ’rationalisation of work processes
22, 131
reflect(ions) 32, 60, 70, 87, 115, 116,
121, 136-51; n 164/31, 171/29, 178/
25
rehabilitation clinic 16, 65-70, 83-96,
99-110, 125-9
relational distance 111-3; n 174/17
relations (relationality)
вҲ’aesthetic relation 34
вҲ’between devices 116, 121
вҲ’between people 20, 25-7, 32, 45,
69-71, 104-114, 149; n 166/16,
167/10
ethical/epistemological вҲ’26, 34,
42-5
material semiotic вҲ’17-9, 39, 60,
77, 84, 121-3; n 164/29, 31, 168/
2, 10
professional вҲ’36-9, 46-60, 68,
81
вҲ’with technology 35-6, 42-4, 150
responsibility/responsible 17, 21, 35,
37, 46, 47, 50, 56-60, 67-76, 118,
123-4, 136, 144, 150; n 167/5
routine(s) 16, 20, 21-2, 32, 65, 70, 72-
5, 77, 83-89, 99 105, 115-131, 137,
142, 145-6, 151; n 161/2, 167/3, 171/
26, 176/2, 178/23, 178/24
safety (feelings of вҲ’) 55-65, 73, 106,
112, 120, 141-2, 147-8; n 162/12,
168/8
salt-free diet 51-7, 64, 73, 150
saturation device 89-90
scale(s) 31, 64, 72
science/scientific 21, 42, 79-82, 95,
138-40, 141, 151; n 161/6, 163/24,
170/11, 15, 171/24, 26, 172/35, 177/
19, 178/21, 138
script 51, 68; n 167/2
вҲ’inscribed 51
вҲ’inscription n 173/1
security see safety
self-management 21, 60, 76, 80, 90,
118, 137, 142, 145, 148, 150; n 168/
4, 6, 7
semiotic
вҲ’materials see relations
вҲ’questions 84
sensitisising concepts 84-5; n 172/39
sensitive/sensitivities 147, 37, 43,
147; n 163/24, 170/17
вҲ’lungs 86
вҲ’of concepts 18; n 163/24, 170/17
вҲ’sensitivity of methods 25, 142
situate(d) 17, 32, 40, 45, 85, 100, 121,
142-4; n 170/17
smel(ly) 46-50, 69, 100
social contact(s) see collectives, com-
munity
sociology of expectations n 161/6
space 31-2
being in the same вҲ’46-53, 59, 88,
100-13, 118, 122-3, 125, 137; n
162/12, 165/1, 170/11, 177/17
вҲ’to act 143
spouse see family
standard/standardised 27, 51-4
вҲ’care 130, 143; n 163/19, 170/1
gold вҲ’13, 20, 53; n 162/17
вҲ’individual вҖ“s 66
вҲ’professional вҲ’s 80
вҲ’research 140-1, 144; n 177/14
strange(r) 21, 69, 107-13
subjective 34, 42, 66-71, 101, 105-6,
138; n 171/29
interвҲ’25, 45
suffer(ing) 37, 46, 58, 67, 69, 86,
110, 149; n 169/3
surveillance 25, 46, 76, 112, 118, 150
tacit 57, 72, 115, 125, 126-8, 130-1, 137
вҲ’knowledge 83-4, 142, 145-6; n
167/3, 172/31
tailor-made care 34, 37, 51-3
care at a distance
203

taming 31, 58, 99, 113, 121, 125, 143-4
вҲ’& unleashing 18-20, 42, 58, 72,
104, 143-5
telephone/phone 11, 18-9, 28, 33, 35,
38, 44, 48-53, 55-9, 67-8, 93, 100-8,
118, 123-5; n 174/7
вҲ’anyone from the phonebook
111, 118, 123
вҲ’line 27, 31
telepresence: topological(ly) reversed-/
congruent вҖ“ 100, 111
threshold 33, 120
вҲ’value 13, 64-6, 89
time 14, 29-33, 40-1, 52-3, 67-8, 89,
99, 102-5, 116, 121, 130, 151; n 162/
12, 15, 173/1, 175/9, 177/20, 178/23
all вҖ“s 65
development over вҲ’43, 53-6, 70-5,
86-7, 91, 100, 103
efficiency/not wasting вҲ’115-9
вҲ’frame 139
investing вҲ’124-5, 145
life вҲ’119; n 170/9
вҲ’limit (for telecare use) 99, 128
вҲ’ly (in time) 20, 38-9, 46, 73,
149/untimely/inconvenient: 37,
42
long вҖ“ 107
many вҖ“s 30, 55
вҲ’odd times 27
tinker(ing) 37, 64, 76, 81-2, 130, 140,
144; n 166/22, 169/11, 171/27, 178/
23
together-management/-managers
96, 150
tool(s)
concepts as вҲ’16, 17, 79, 82-5, 91,
107
research вҖ“ 19, 141-2
technology as вҲ’11, 48, 58, 120
touch 100, 113
вҲ’screen 47, 120; n 174/17
stay in вҖ“ 33, 43, 83, 99, 103, 110,
128, 149
translation/translate 63, 81, 87-95,
116, 131, 139, 145; n 170/16, 178/25
transport(ing) knowledge 82-3, 87-
94, 139; n 171/29
trust 55-6, 68, 107-9, 111-2, 147; n
169/1, 174/11
uncontrolled 135, 142-51
unexpected 18, 27, 43, 87, 137-8, 148;
n 168/3, 173/1, 176/3
unleashing (see also: taming & вҲ’) 57-
8, 88, 95, 148
unpredictable see unexpected
user(s)
influence of вҲ’143, 148; n 178/25
value(s) 13, 15, 45, 47, 57, 59-60, 63,
76-9, 94, 107, 115, 136, 146-7; n
164/28, 177/18, 178/24, 25
competing вҖ“s 94-5
вҲ’consolidated 130
вҲ’s in research 138, 140
variable(s) 13-5, 43, 63, 70, 85, 91, 117,
137, 141-2, 147-8
visual 48, 50, 69, 101-4, 112
vital signs 11, 17, 45, 51, 60, 68, 71,
77, 118, 136, 141
voice 12, 101
making вҖ“ n 178/25
patients having/giving вҖ“ 95, 143;
n 175/4, 178/25
вҲ’voting 135, 144
warm 20, 25-44, 45
webcam(s) 11, 12, 16, 21, 46-9, 51-6,
60, 71-7, 79, 83-96, 99-114, 118-23,
125-30, 136, 146-9; n 173/2, 174/10,
11, 15, 17, 175/9
weight/weighing 17, 31-2, 47, 51, 64,
66, 72, 74, 76, 115, 123-4, 136, 147;
n 168/8
white box 25-44, 47, 51-60, 84, 124-6,
129-31, 140-1; n 166/23
204

In Care at a Distance: On the Closeness of Technology Jeannette Pols 
demonstrates that actual care practices employing telecare do not resemble 
the hopes of the industry and policy makers, nor the nightmares of ethicists. 
The detailed ethnographic studies of pioneering telecare practices show how 
nurses and patients re-shape care when they start using telecare devices. The 
book frames urgent questions about the future of telecare and the ways in 
which innovative care practices can be built on facts rather than hopes, hypes 
or nightmares.
PolsвҖҷs exciting new book provides important insights into how innovative telecare practices 
are вҖҳachievedвҖҷ in everyday practice and how вҖҳuncontrolledвҖҷ field studies can be used both to 
understand and improve care practices.
Flis Henwood, Professor of Social Informatics in the School of Applied Social Science, 
University of Brighton, UK
 
Jeannette Pols has written a timely and thought-provoking book about what happens when 
technologies are used to provide healthcare at a distance. By listening to the experiences 
of those who use the technologies, as healthcare providers or as patients, Pols provides a 
much-needed balance to the usual focus on efficiency.
Sally Wyatt, Director of the Netherlands Graduate School of Science, 
Technology and Modern Culture
 
Care at a Distance lays out a variety of ways in which long distance health care may work. 
Written attentively and with a real sense of engagement, it also offers long distance care. 
Intellectual care this time. For you, the captivated reader. 
Annemarie Mol, professor of Anthropology of the Body at the University of Amsterdam
Dr. Jeannette Pols is senior researcher at the 
Amsterdam Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam. 
www.aup.nl
9
789089 643971
ISBN 978 90 8964 397 1
