Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
60 
Breast feeding practices of mothers with children 
(aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa 
A qualitative approach 
Rozanne Kruger and Gerda Gericke 
OPSOMMING 
 
Hierdie studie was 'n verkennende ondersoek na 
die borsvoedingspraktyke van moeders / ver-
sorgers wat twee babaklinieke in die Moretele-
distrik besoek.  Beide kwantitatiewe en kwalitatiewe 
navorsingsmetodologieë is toegepas.  Individuele 
en fokusgroeponderhoude is vir data-insameling 
gebruik.  'n Geriefsteekproef (N = 174) moeders / 
versorgers is vir die onderhoude getrek.  Ses 
ouderdomskategorieë is aan die hand van bekende 
dieetveranderingsfases gebruik. 
 
Die antropometriese resultate het op groeipatroon-
abnormaliteite gedui wat op 18 maande 'n piek be-
reik het (suboptimale groei) en weer teen 
24 maande gestabiliseer het.  Dieetinname het ‘n 
beperkte verskeidenheid getoon en was voldoende 
behalwe wat yster, kalsium, sink, niasien, vitamiene 
D en A betref.  
 
Borsvoeding was die keusevoeding, maar dit was 
moeilik om die borsvoedingspraktyke (voedingstye 
en -frekwensie, duur van voedings) akkuraat te be-
paal.  Vaste voedsel is vroeg reeds (voor 4-6 
maande) (87%) in die dieet ingesluit weens die 
moeders se persepsie van 'n honger baba.  Graan 
(48%) en water (16,7%) is eerste vir fisiologiese/
gesondheidsredes bygevoeg.  Borsvoeding is op 
18-24 maande (83,3%) gestaak.  Die meeste 
kinders (34,5%) het vanaf 7-12 maande 'n ge-
mengde gesinsdieet ontvang. 
 
Die gevolgtrekking is dat moeders se kennis oor 
die voordele van borsvoeding, voedingspraktyke, 
en redes vir die insluiting van vaste voedsel ontoe-
reikend is.  Onderrig oor babavoeding / -voedings-
praktyke (spesifiek borsvoeding en spening) word 
aanbeveel om chroniese wanvoeding en voedings-
probleme in hierdie gemeenskap te voorkom. 
 
 
 
—  Mrs Rozanne Kruger 
Department of Consumer Science, University of Pretoria 
—  Ms Gertruida J Gericke 
Division Human Nutrition, University of Pretoria 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Health problems, especially those related to chronic 
malnutrition, have been causing concern worldwide 
(Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:96, Ocloo, 1993; Patel & Pet-
tifor, 1992).  Infants and toddlers are the most com-
mon victims of malnutrition because of their vulnerabil-
ity in the growth phase (Huffman & Martin, 1994, Patel 
& Pettifor, 1992, Walker, 1990).  Inadequate quantities 
of breast milk or inappropriate weaning practices con-
tributed to malnutrition that could cause stunted 
growth at a later stage (Steyn, Badenhorst, Nel & 
Ladzani, 1993; Patel & Pettifor, 1992; Walker, 1990).   
 
Breast feeding is accepted as the primary means of 
nourishing an infant and of preventing infant morbidity 
and mortality in developing countries.  The superiority 
of breast milk for infants has been confirmed: 
BREAST IS BEST (Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:84; Wells, 
1995; Lipsky, Stephenson, Koepsell, Gloyd, Lopez & 
Bain, 1994; Prentice, 1991; Walker, 1990; Ng'andu & 
Watts, 1990).   
 
The prevalence of breast feeding in urban areas of the 
developing world seems to be declining (Zetterström, 
1994).  Several researchers have found that breast 
feeding is supplemented from an early age (even in 
the first month) with either milk or water, fruit juice, 
tea, gruel, cereal, fruit and vegetables (Piwoz, Creed 
de Kanashiro, Lopez de Romaña, Black & Brown, 
1996; Roberts, Cleaton-Jones, Richardson, Sinwell & 
Lucas, 1995; Huffman & Martin, 1994; Walker, 1990; 
Underwood, 1984).  According to Steyn et al 
(1993:10), infant feeding practices clearly affect a 
child’s nutritional status, health and growth.  There 
should be increased focus on the feeding of infants 
and toddlers to help reduce chronic malnutrition and 
mortality  (Huffman & Martin, 1994). 
 
This article focuses on the breast-feeding practices of 
mothers who attended two baby clinics in the Moretele 
district (North-West Province of South Africa).  For the 
purposes of this research, breast feeding was defined 
as the intake of breast milk as the only source of food 
(Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:84; Guthrie & Picciano, 
1995:545; Prentice, 1991; Walker, 1990).   
 
The weaning diet was defined as the intake of solid 
food in combination with either breast milk or formula 
milk (Guthrie & Picciano, 1995:561; Huffman & Martin, 
1994), and nutritional knowledge implied the knowl-
edge of infant feeding of the mothers or caregivers in 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach  
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
61 
the study (Guthrie & Picciano, 1995:544; Naidoo, 
Padayachee & Verburgh, 1993). Breast-feeding prac-
tices included the choice, frequency and scheduling of 
breast feeding, attitudes to breast feeding and the 
reasons for these practices.   
 
The discussion takes place within a quantitative and 
qualitative paradigm.  Breast feeding is discussed in 
terms of the nutritional adequacy of the diet as well as 
the growth patterns of the children in the study.  The 
results revealed that education on breast-feeding 
practices is of crucial importance to the health of chil-
dren in this community. 
 
 
QUANTITATIVE METHODOLOGY 
 
The data for the quantitative analysis were collected 
according to standardised procedures (Lee & Nieman, 
1993:50-52, 63-68, 122-131).  A structured question-
naire was used to collect information on three compo-
nents, namely biographic, anthropometric and dietary 
intake.  The height, weight and head circumference of 
the child was measured, and all the anthropometric 
data on the child's growth chart were recorded.   
 
Dietary-related data were gathered by means of a 24-
hour recall method of habitual food intake (Lee & Nie-
man, 1993:50-52, 63-68, 122-131).  One trained inter-
viewer (moderator) at each clinic conducted the indi-
vidual interviews and also took the measurements.  
Descriptive statistics were collected and the results 
were presented by means of frequency distributions 
on a comparative basis between different age groups. 
 
 
QUALITATIVE METHODOLOGY 
 
The data were collected by means of a structured in-
terview schedule (in view of the transcultural nature of 
the research) during focus-group interviews (in view of 
the sensitive issues that were discussed) (Denzin & 
Lincoln, 1994:211-212; Stewart & Shamdasani, 
1990:39).  Six major topics on the nutrition of children 
were identified from the literature and included in the 
interview schedule.  Four topics covered feeding prac-
tices (one of which was breast feeding and the focus 
of this article), and two topics were nutrition-related 
knowledge and attitude to nutrition. 
 
Mothers / caregivers were interviewed in six age 
groups, classified in terms of known diet change 
phases (see Table 1) (Hendricks & Badruddin, 
1992:125). 
 
A trained moderator at each of the two clinics con-
ducted thirteen focus-group interviews with three 
groups in the 0-3/12 age category and two each in the 
other five categories.  A debriefing interview was con-
ducted with a transcription of the focus-group data 
immediately after each interview.  All the valuable in-
formation the moderator could contribute was there-
fore recorded.  An independent specialist (a dietician 
from the same cultural group who was fluent in the 
language used during the interview) was consulted to 
verify the translation and the quality of the data.  The 
final transcription of the data was compiled in a suit-
able format to compare the results in the different 
categories and between the different age groups 
(cross-interview analysis) (Morgan, 1988:66).   
 
When the data transcription had been finalised, cate-
gories were created to encode the data for analysis. 
The structured interview schedule was used to as-
semble the data (Morgan, 1988:66).  The researcher 
created the data categories, based on the theory.  
The category terminology is presented in Table 2. 
 
AGE CATEGORY 
(months)  
CLASSIFICATION OF THE  
AGE CATEGORY  
NUMBER OF CHILDREN   
MAKAPANSTAD
(n) 
MATHIBESTAD
(n) 
TOTAL
(N) 
0-3.0 months  
(0-3 /12) 
exclusive breast feeding 
13 
17 
30 
3.1-6.0 months  
(4-6/12) 
breast feeding and grains 
13 
12 
25 
6.1-9.0 months  
(7-9/12) 
breast feeding, grains, soft fruits and vege-
tables 
16 
14 
30 
9.1-12.0 months  
(10-12/12) 
breast feeding, grains, soft fruits and vege-
tables, and meat 
11 
16 
27 
12.1-24.0 months  
(13-24/12) 
breast feeding (supplement) and regular 
solid food 
20 
17 
37 
24.1-36.0 months  
(25-36/12) 
no breast feeding, only solid food 
12 
13 
25 
85 
89 
174 
TOTAL  
TABLE 1:            DESCRIPTION OF THE AGE CATEGORIES USED AND THE NUMBER OF CHILDREN IN 
                            THE STUDY GROUP 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
62 
DATA CATEGORIES 
References to any kind of environment were coded as either: 
♦
micro environment - closest people to the respondent (individual) like her family, or members of the same 
household or very close friends with whom interaction took place on a daily basis, 
♦
meso environment - people or objects in the community that could be seen as intermediary contacts.  Interac-
tion was less regular, like the clinic staff or neighbours. 
Health evaluations included the subjective evaluation of the child's clinical appearance, his body measurements 
and eating behaviour: 
♦
clinical evaluation - involved the subjective evaluation of physical appearance, good general health, no dis-
eases present, 
♦
anthropometrical evaluation - referred to the objective measurement of body size, weight and proportions at 
the clinic and included concepts like falling within applicable weight and height ranges, 
♦
food intake behaviour - referred to eating or food consumed and included concepts like the mother's / care-
giver's perception of a healthy appetite, or when a child is eating properly. 
Subject specific categories were created for coding reasons given by the mothers / caregivers for their practices 
in terms of broad themes like physiological, nutritional, health, financial reasons, etc.  Responses given as "good 
for you" / "good for the baby" were sometimes categorized in one or more of the subject specific categories be-
cause of the non-specific nature of the response. 
Physical items were classified according to the type of item, e.g. types of milk, water, food, drinks and utensils. 
Time related responses were categorized in terms of hours, days, weeks, etc. 
Methods for different actions were categorized separately according to type e.g. formula preparation, food stor-
age, etc. 
Volumes of food or drink used or given to the child were given in mL. 
Reasons for practices, knowledge or attitudes that did not fit into the subject specific categories were catego-
rized separately in terms of the relevant situation / theme.  
Correctness of reasons were categorized in terms of: 
♦
science based responses - any response that was based on a well accepted scientific fact, 
♦
misconceptions - any response that was based on some unknown or culturally based (scientific unsound) con-
cept, or which was not based on a scientific fact or on wrong interpretations of scientific concepts. 
TABLE 2:            DATA CATEGORIES USED FOR CONTENT ANALYSIS 
Ethnography and content analyses were used for data 
analysis purposes.  Two coders were used for data 
categorisation in the content analysis.  The prepara-
tion of data involved a process of unitising, sampling 
and recording of reduced data.  Unitising required the 
formation of different analysis units (see Figure 1), 
sampling involved the selection of data to be pre-
sented, and recording required coding according to the 
specified data categories.   
The results of the content analysis were presented in 
tabular format to communicate and describe significant 
patterns in the data (Morgan, 1988).  Ethnography was 
used by means of direct quotations to impact on the 
content analysis and to verify the data (Morgan, 
1988:64).   
 
Specific standardised or pretested measuring instru-
ments were used to ensure the reliability and validity 
of both the quantitative and qualitative measures.  A 
pilot study was conducted to refine the instruments for 
the quantitative methodology.  Each individual inter-
view instrument was tested twice: once in a pilot study 
and once in an interviewer training session.   
 
One specific moderator from the same ethnic group 
was exclusively used at every clinic.  The moderators 
evaluated all the measuring instruments in terms of 
their degree of difficulty, understandability and applica-
bility.  The focus-group interview schedule was tested 
twice: once during the development phase and once 
during the training of the moderators.  The moderators 
were thoroughly trained on research procedures.  An 
independent specialist verified the translations and the 
quality of the data produced in the transcriptions.  Two 
independent coders were used to record the data in 
relevant data categories  (Kruger, 1999:65-66, 68, 91-
92; Neuman, 1997).  
 
 
STUDY GROUP 
 
This research was undertaken to obtain baseline data 
on communities and their nutritional practices in areas 
where no such information was available.  The North-
West Province - and specifically the Hammanskraal 
area (Moretele district) - were identified as an area 
where no baseline data were available.  Two non-
urban areas, Mathibestad and Makapanstad, approxi-
mately 30 kilometres outside Hammanskraal proper, 
were identified.  The clinic in the Mathibestad area 
was approximately 30 kilometres from Hammanskraal 
proper, and the clinic in the Makapanstad area was 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach  
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
63 
FIGURE 1:           THE DATA REDUCTION PROCESS – DATA MAKING  
approximately 10 kilometres further into the more rural 
part of the district. 
 
The population consisted of mothers / caregivers with 
children between the ages of 0-36 months, living in the 
Moretele district.  The data were collected from Sep-
tember 1995 to March 1996. 
 
Convenience sampling was used according to the 
age-based classification described above (Hendricks 
& Badruddin, 1992).  The sample was taken from 
mothers / caregivers (N = 174) and their children who 
visited the baby / child or immunisation clinics in 
Makapanstad and Mathibestad on Tuesday mornings.   
 
Description of the study group 
 
The most common ethnic group was the Tswana 
(71,3%, n = 124) followed by the Shangaan (11,5%, 
n = 20), the North-Sotho (6,3%, n=11) and Pedi (5,7%, 
n=10), and the Ndebele, Zulu, Venda, South-Sotho 
and Xhosa groups made up the remaining 5,2% (n=9).  
Forty-two per cent (n = 73) boys and 58% (n = 101) 
girls were included in the study group.   
 
The children were mostly accompanied by their moth-
ers (85,1%, n = 148).  Young babies (0-9 months old) 
were least often accompanied by caregivers (26,9%, 
n = 7).  A considerable number of mothers (32,2%, 
n = 56) had a matric qualification, and one mother 
(0,6%) had a postmatric qualification.  The occupa-
tions of the mothers - according to their own percep-
tions - revealed that a few were working (12,6%, 
n = 22).  Some were still at school (12,1%, n = 21) and 
therefore not able to work.   
 
Most of the mothers were housewives (40,2%, n = 70) 
and came from the Makapanstad area (98,6%, 
n = 69).  Most of those who were unemployed / looking 
for work (35,6%, n = 62) came from the Mathibestad 
area.  Very few of the children’s fathers (34,5%, 
n = 60) lived with their families.  However, those who 
did not live with their families did contribute financially 
to the family (81,5%, n = 141).  More fathers contrib-
Referential units
Thematic units
Recording units
Physical units
Age for exclusive 
breastfeeding
Reasons for the 
duration of 
exclusive 
breastfeeding
Introduction and 
reasons for exclusive 
breastfeeding
Breastfeeding
Data making
Context units
Ethnography
Eating and drinking 
practices with 
breastfeeding
Reasons for 
choosing or for 
avoiding 
breastfeeding
Sampling unit

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
64 
uted to the care of the younger children than of the 
older children.   
 
 
RESULTS  
 
Quantitative results 
 
Anthropometry    The percentiles of the National 
Centre for Health Statistics (NCHS) (Hamill, Drizd, 
Johnson, Reed, Roche & Moore, 1979) and the refer-
ence data for the weight and height of the children 
(World Health Organisation (WHO), 1975) were used 
as standards for evaluation of the data.  Certain an-
thropometrical trends were identified. 
Weight increased for both sexes during the first year, 
with a slight decline at 12-24 months, recovering to 
birth percentiles at 36 months.  The decline in weight-
for-age occurred at approximately age 18 months for 
all the children. 
Length increased or remained the same for girls dur-
ing the first year, with a decline at 12-24 months, re-
covering to birth percentiles at 36 months. Length de-
creased for the boys with a prominent decline at 12-24 
months, never recovering to the birth percentile.  The 
most prominent dip in the growth curve occurred at 
the age of 18 months to below the fifth NCHS percen-
tile and to below the third WHO percentile, indicating 
failure to thrive. 
Head circumference increased in both sexes up to 
age 6 months with a decline at 12-24 months, recov-
ering or even increasing at 36 months.  The decline in 
growth of the head was again most apparent at age 
18 months.    
 
Dietary intake    As the ages of the children varied 
between 0 and 36 months, breast feeding appeared 
frequently on the 24-hour recalls.  Breast milk intake 
was calculated to ensure a full analysis of food intake.  
The number of times the baby was breast-fed during 
the day was recorded on the 24-hour recalls, referring 
to exclusive breast feeding or to breast feeding in ad-
dition to food intake.  Breast milk values for the differ-
ent feeding regimes were than added to the food in-
take data to complete the nutrient intake data set 
(Dickin, Griffiths & Piwoz, 1997:C1-C4, Guthrie & Pic-
ciano, 1995:547).   
 
The nutrient analysis from the 24-hour recall intakes 
was evaluated in terms of two sets of reference val-
ues, namely the WHO (World Health Organisation, 
1975) and RDA values (67% cut-off) (Hamill et al, 
1979).  The children received adequate intakes for 
energy, protein, carbohydrates and fats, but inade-
quate intakes for iron, calcium, zinc, niacin, vitamin D, 
and in some age groups vitamin A (these nutrients are 
all important for growth).   
 
The most common food items were stiff and soft 
maize porridge, sugar, tea and brown bread, followed 
by Nespray and soya mince.  Food items infrequently 
consumed included fruit like bananas, apples, or-
anges, juice and vegetables like spinach, tomato, on-
ion, cabbage and margarine, oil and peanut butter.  It 
was established that there was little variety in the diets 
of the children. 
 
Qualitative results 
 
The qualitative results are presented in four parts, 
namely breast feeding as the feeding choice, its intro-
duction, duration and implementation, and eating and 
drinking practices during breast feeding. 
 
Breast feeding as the feeding choice    All the sub-
jects in all the focus groups felt that a baby should be 
breast-fed.  There were no negative responses, indi-
cating that all the mothers intended to breast 
feed - even if circumstances forced them to bottle 
feed. 
 
The most frequently mentioned (n = 31, 70,5%) rea-
son for breast feeding babies was health (eg good 
health, strength, and breast feeding is best).  The sec-
ond most frequently mentioned category was for im-
munological reasons (n = 5, 11,4%) (to prevent ill-
ness).  The reasoning of the mothers / caregivers for 
their choices is reflected in the following ethnographic 
descriptions (in the mother or caregiver’s own words). 
 
Health reasons (n = 31, 70,5% of all responses) were 
mentioned most frequently.  However, very generally: 
♦
"a baby that receives breast milk will be strong and 
healthy" 
♦
"for the baby to grow well" 
♦
"breast is best" 
♦
"if you do not breast feed, the child will get kwashi-
orkor" 
♦
"breast feeding gives the baby strength". 
 
Responses dealing with immunological advantages 
(n = 5, 11,4% of all responses) included: 
♦
"it prevents infections" 
♦
"it prevents illnesses" 
♦
"when the child is sick you can easily feed her with 
breast feeding" 
♦
"breast milk doesn't have any germs" 
♦
"for the child not to become sick". 
 
The responses on immunological advantages were 
often linked to the health idea. The mothers / caregiv-
ers felt that breast feeding would be good for the gen-
eral health of the child and therefore prevent disease.   
 
The nutritional (n = 2, 4,5% of all responses) and psy-
chological reasons (n = 2, 4,5% of all responses) that 
were mentioned were: 
 
♦
"breast milk has protein and vitamins" 
♦
“because they have all the vitamins" 
♦
"the breast-fed child is getting a lot of love from the 
mother" 
♦
"it builds the bonding between the mother and the 
child". 
 
It was concluded that the mothers were not fully in-
formed about the advantages of breast feeding but 
had been exposed to mention of the importance of 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach  
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
65 
breast feeding.  It could be valuable for these mothers 
to learn more about all the advantages of breast feed-
ing for both the mother and the baby as such knowl-
edge could cause an attitude change and promote 
breast feeding in the community (Kibel & Wagstaff, 
1995:85-87; Wells, 1995; Tan & Jeffery, 1995; Lam-
bert & Hall , 1995a; Lipsky et al, 1994; Zetterström, 
1994; Prentice, 1991; Ng'andu & Watts, 1990; Cove-
ney, 1985; Walker, 1978). 
 
Mothers / caregivers were also asked to explain why 
a baby would not be breast-fed.  Many (50%) did not 
even answer this question, implying that babies 
should be breast-fed (breast feeding being the first 
choice).  Some mothers explained that breast feeding 
was not suitable for babies under certain circum-
stances, and referred to breast discomfort (n = 6, 
27,3% of all responses) and illness of both mother 
and baby (n = 4, 17,4% of all responses).  Some 
mothers (n = 11, 47,8% of all responses) could not 
say why they would choose another type of feed.  
This choice could be based on advice from clinic / 
hospital staff who failed to explain to them why a par-
ticular feed choice was recommended.  
 
Ethnographic descriptions for breast discomfort: 
♦
"when the mother has problems with the breast, 
for example a breast abscess" 
♦
"the mother may be suffering from 'rush' or some 
other disease" 
♦
"maybe when the mother is having sores on the 
breast". 
 
Responses dealing with either a sick mother (n = 2, 
8,7% of all responses) or a sick child (n = 2, 8,7% of 
all responses): 
♦
"maybe the mother is sick and advised by the doc-
tor not to breast feed" 
♦
"when the child gets ill" 
♦
"when they are sickly". 
 
A number of other general responses (n = 8, 35,9% of 
all responses): 
♦
"when the mother has problems with the breast, 
for example a breast abscess" 
♦
"maybe when the mother is having sores on the 
breast" 
♦
"when the mother have fear to breast-feed the 
child - she doesn't want her breasts to 'fall down', 
so she only give a bottle" 
♦
"maybe enough milk is not coming from the 
breast". 
 
The mothers had some knowledge about the reasons 
for stopping breast feeding.  Issues that could be ad-
dressed in nutrition education though, are those of 
milk production (especially concerning colostrum), 
breast feeding and illness (which in most cases need 
not stop), and breast care. 
 
Introduction and duration of breast feeding         In 
determining when breast feeding was introduced to 
the baby, mothers were prompted about initiating 
breast feeding immediately after birth. Most of the 
subjects (n = 40, 59,7% of all responses) indicated 
that breast feeding should start either directly or soon 
after birth (n = 13, 19,4% of all responses).  "Soon af-
ter birth" was interpreted as directly after birth, as 
soon as medical examinations and procedures have 
been completed, in other words within four hours after 
the baby’s birth.  "Directly after the baby is born" indi-
cated that breast feeding should start in the delivery 
room (which would probably only be possible in a leni-
ent clinic / hospital, in a hospital that adopted the 
Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative, or in the case of a 
home birth).   
 
A few mothers (n = 6, 9,0% of all responses) also 
mentioned starting breast feeding half a day after 
birth. Most mothers felt that breast feeding should 
start as soon as possible, within one full day after birth 
(n = 61, 91,1% of all responses).   
 
Various reasons were submitted to justify these deci-
sions, and these have been classified into four main 
categories.  Firstly physiologically based responses 
(n = 23, 46,0% of all responses) where hunger and 
thirst (noticeable because the baby cried) and rest for 
the baby were mentioned.  This category was related 
to previous answers about breast feeding "directly af-
ter birth" and "soon after birth".  Secondly, hospital / 
clinic procedures were mentioned as reasons for de-
laying a start with breast feeding (n = 10, 20,0% of 
all responses). These answers included observation of 
the baby, bathing of the baby, or given time sched-
ules.  The delay was seldom longer than four hours 
("soon after birth").  The mothers of older children (10-
12 months, 13-24 months, 25-36 months) most fre-
quently responded in this category.  Thirdly, a per-
ceived lack of milk was given as a reason for delaying 
breast feeding (n = 6, 12,0% of all responses)(one or 
more days), as colostrum was not considered the 
same as breast milk. Fourthly, the mother was al-
lowed time to rest after the delivery (n = 6, 12,0% of 
all responses) before breast feeding was initiated.   
 
Implementing breast feeding    This aspect refers to 
frequency and duration of feeding of each breast-
feeding session and gives an indication of the quality 
of the diet of the child.  The moderators tried to deter-
mine during the focus-group interviews how long and 
how frequently - during the day and during the 
night - the babies were actually put to the breast. The 
same problems were experienced as with the 24-hour 
recall and considerable probing was required to deter-
mine frequency and duration.   
 
The probes for frequency specifically asked the sub-
jects to consider only feeding times, and not the times 
breast feeding was offered to comfort / pacify.  The 
most popular response in all the groups was four-
hourly feeds (3x/day) (n = 23, 41,1% of all responses).  
It was discouraging that seven of the eleven re-
sponses in the 0-3 month age category mentioned 
three, two or one feed per day.  This implied inade-
quate intake for babies in this age group, as they re-
lied on breast feeding for their total nutritional intake.  
The risk of nutritional inadequacy was therefore high.   

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
66 
It was not possible to establish a pattern from these 
results, as the responses in the different age catego-
ries varied.  Although breast feeding on demand was 
mentioned as the best feeding choice for a new-born 
baby, it was not the most popular or common re-
sponse (n = 9, 16,1% of all responses). Two-hourly 
and three-hourly feeding regimens received an equal 
number of responses (n = 7, 12,5% of all responses). 
Ethnographic descriptions for day-time feeding re-
gimes included: 
♦
”it depends on your routine” 
♦
“can’t estimate - only when the child needs it” 
♦
“kort-kort” 
♦
“when the child cry” 
♦
“if at home, the baby breast feeds at any time”. 
 
Demand feeding during the night (with "night" speci-
fied as 12 night-time hours) elicited more responses 
(n = 18, 32,7% of all responses) than demand feeding 
during the day (n = 9, 16,1% of all responses). This 
was also the most common response.  The next most 
popular responses included a six-hourly regimen 
(n = 14, 25,5% of all responses) and a four-hourly 
regimen (n = 12, 21,8% of all responses).  In all these 
categories the responses were given in all the age 
categories except the 4-6-month group where there 
were no responses for six-hourly feeds.  In the 0-3-
month age group, most mentioned the twice-per-night 
feeding regimen (n = 4, 7,1% of all responses).  The 
babies usually remained in bed with their mothers and 
were fed when they woke or cried.  The mother con-
sequently did not always know when the baby drank.  
It appeared from the responses that demand feeding 
in this case referred to pacifying or comforting the 
child, rather than feeding the child.  Ethnographic de-
scriptions reflecting night feeds were vague: 
♦
“every time the baby wakes up” 
♦
“whenever the baby wants it” 
♦
“can’t estimate - when the child wants it” 
♦
“many times - whenever the baby’s mouth comes 
in contact with the breast, he starts sucking” 
♦
“kort-kort”. 
♦
“when she cries”.   
 
Very few of the subjects monitored and controlled the 
duration of breast feeding sessions.  Mothers allowed 
their babies to decide when they wanted to stop feed-
ing (n = 34, 60,7% of all responses), or they kept on 
breast feeding until the baby fell asleep (n = 13, 
23,2% of all responses).  The latter option was also 
the most popular among mothers with older children 
(10 months and older).  The least number of re-
sponses was about the mother deciding on the dura-
tion of a breast-feeding session (n = 9, 16,1% of 
all responses).   
 
It could be concluded that "breast is best" was well 
accepted in these communities, but that proper de-
mand feeding was practised less.  Attitudes to breast 
feeding were very positive, but in an absent-minded 
way.  The baby was put to the breast, and the mother 
was not concerned with the duration of the feed or the 
amount of milk the baby drank.  The mothers were 
more concerned about the child being happy and look-
ing well.  The breast was given to the baby at every 
opportunity (when the child cried or as a pacifier) 
rather than for actual feeding purposes.  Hence the 
answer of "kort-kort" (often) for practically all the 24-
hour recalls of children's dietary intakes.   
 
Feeding on demand of very young babies - who 
should be exclusively breast-fed to the age of 4-6 
months (Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:83; Wells, 1995; Lip-
sky et al, 1994; Hendricks & Badruddin, 1992; Pren-
tice, 1991; Walker, 1990) – was not common.  It was 
almost impossible to determine the duration of a feed-
ing session as the mothers could seldom answer this 
question.  The mothers were also hardly aware of the 
amount of milk that the baby was consuming due to 
their indifference regarding the time on the breast or if 
the baby was suckling for pacifying or for feeding pur-
poses. 
 
Eating and drinking practices with breast feeding    
The mothers / caregivers were asked whether the 
baby should get anything else to eat or drink while 
they were breast feeding.  The response to this probe 
was positive (n = 26, 100% of all focus groups) in all 
the groups. Exclusive breast feeding seemed rare in 
these communities, as solid food was introduced at a 
fairly early age (see Table 3).   
 
Solid foods were introduced to most babies in the 
study group (n = 134, 87%) before the recommended 
age of 4-6 months (Wells, 1995; Lambert & Hall, 
1995b; Hendricks & Badruddin, 1992).  Only 13% 
(n = 20) started on solid foods at the recommended 
age.  By age 4 months most babies in this study group 
(n = 151, 98,1%) were eating solid foods.  The rea-
sons mentioned most frequently were that the mother 
did not have enough milk to satisfy the baby (n = 70, 
45,8% of all responses), that the baby was crying 
(n = 35, 22,9% of  all responses), and that the mother 
did not cope well with breast feeding (n = 20, 13,1% of 
CLINICS  
MAKAPANSTAD 
(n=76)  
MATHIBESTAD 
(n=78) 
BOTH 
(n=154) 
n 
% 
n 
% 
n 
% 
1 - 2 months 
22 
29.0 
11 
14.1 
33 
21.4 
3 months 
41 
54.0 
60 
76.9 
101 
65.6 
4 months 
13 
17.0 
4 
5.1 
17 
11.0 
5 months 
0 
0 
1 
1.3 
1 
0.7 
6 months 
0 
0 
2 
2.6 
2 
1.3 
AGE FOR SOLID FOOD 
INTRODUCTION 
TABLE 3:            OMPARISON OF THE DIFFERENT AGES FOR INTRODUCING SOLID FOOD (N=154) IN 
                            THE TWO CLINICS 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach  
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
67 
all responses).  Crying seemed to be interpreted as 
the mother not having enough milk.  They assumed 
that the breast milk alone did not satisfy the hunger 
and solid food was therefore introduced to the diet to 
supplement the breast milk.  “Not having enough milk” 
was mentioned by 68,6% (n = 105) of the mothers. 
 
When the frequency of adding foods or drinks to 
breast feeding was probed, most of the subjects 
(n = 21, 50,0% of all responses) mentioned three 
feeds per day.  All the age categories responded to 
this option.  
 
It was also important to determine whether the addi-
tional food given to the breast fed babies interfered 
with the quality of the breast feeding, since additional 
food before a feeding session would inhibit the breast 
milk intake due to satiety.  Most mothers in all the age 
groups (n = 20, 83,3% of all responses) answered that 
the ideal time to give additional food was after a 
breast-feeding session.  This practice did not interfere 
with breast milk intake. 
 
The item most commonly added to the breast feeding 
was a soft porridge of maize meal (n = 19, 28,8% of 
all responses).  Commercial cereals like Nestum and 
Cerelac were also mentioned (n = 13, 19,7% of 
all responses).  Water was also added to the child's 
intake (n = 11, 16,7% of all responses).  Fruit and 
vegetables, commercial and fresh, were also added to 
the diet.  Milk was seldom added to supplement breast 
feeding. 
 
The stated reasons for the choice of these additional 
items in the baby’s diet were concerned with physio-
logical (n = 13, 37,1% of all responses) and health as-
pects (n = 14, 40,0% of all responses).  The physio-
logical reasons were related to texture (ease of chew-
ing and swallowing) and satisfying hunger or thirst 
(soft maize meal porridge or commercial cereals and 
water, or commercial "juices").  The health reasons 
were generally concerned with what was good or nutri-
tious for a baby, making a baby strong and healthy, 
and causing weight gain (eating porridge or cereal, 
fruit and vegetables).  All the other reasons the sub-
jects submitted were concerned with the importance of 
giving babies water every day.  Some of these rea-
sons were not scientifically sound, for example to help 
them digest their food (water was therefore frequently 
offered after breast feeding) or to remedy a sunken 
fontanel. 
 
Ethnographic descriptions of the reasons for adding 
these foods to the babies’ diets were presented in the 
food categories used for data reduction.  
 
Cereals were most commonly added to a baby's diet.  
Raw cereals like maize meal and oats were more 
popular than commercial products like Nestum or 
Cerelac, mainly because of their availability and price.  
Most of the focus groups said they gave soft porridge 
(bogobe) to the babies. It was usually given without 
additions, but some mothers, especially of older chil-
dren, said they sometimes added milk or the thin wa-
tery gravy (sop) in which the meat has boiled.  Their 
reasons for adding cereals to their babies’ diets cov-
ered a wide spectrum.  The physiological reasons in-
cluded texture, easy eating and preventing hunger:  
♦
"it is soft" 
♦
"introduce soft foods and gradually change the 
texture as the baby grows 
♦
"the baby will swallow it easily" 
♦
"to satisfy hunger" 
♦
"that they can't get hungry" 
♦
"she will not be satisfied with breast feeding only”. 
 
Health category reasons reflected general health con-
cerns: 
♦
"it is good for the baby" 
♦
"to make the baby strong and healthy" (matla) 
♦
"for the baby to gain enough weight" 
♦
“it has all the nutrients that are good for the 
baby" (dikotla).   
 
However, soft porridge was also considered to have 
other special functions, mostly misconceptions: 
♦
"to build the body" 
♦
"they keep the bones strong". 
 
Water was the second most frequently added item.  
Many reasons were listed for adding water to the 
baby’s diet daily.  Only two of these are scientifically 
sound: 
♦
"for her body to have enough water" 
♦
"for her not to be thirsty".  
 
The other reasons were misconceptions: 
♦
"to help the food during digestion"  
♦
"to pass the feeds"  
♦
"if you do not give enough water, the child is weak 
and the fontanel will go down - this is a problem". 
 
They believed that water had to be consumed after 
every meal to aid digestion and to help pass the food 
through the digestive system.  Although the mothers 
were ignorant in this regard, the practice had no im-
pact on appetite or stomach capacity that could influ-
ence food intake. 
 
Fresh fruit / vegetables were rarely added to the ba-
bies’ diet.  If fruits were given, bananas and oranges 
were mostly used.  Commercial fruit juices (artificial 
and sweetened) were also given to the children.  The 
fresh vegetable intake was limited.  Of those given, 
potatoes, sweet potatoes and carrots were mostly 
used.  Purity products, if they could afford them, were 
also given to the babies because of their texture and 
nutritional content.  Among the health reasons men-
tioned: 
♦
"it is good for the baby" 
♦
"it has all the vitamins and nutrients that is good 
for the baby” (dikotla) 
♦
"these foods are healthy". 
 
A few misconceptions existed about vegetables: 
♦
"potatoes and sweet potatoes help to build the 
body" 
♦
"Purity products aid in bones becoming strong". 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
68 
It could be concluded that it was quite common to sup-
plement the breast feeding with other food and drink.  
All relevant factors should be considered in making 
positive suggestions about suitable nutrition education:  
♦
Timing and frequency of additions  
♦
Describing the added items  
♦
The reasons for adding them.  
The mothers added food to their babies’ diets far too 
soon - and usually for the wrong reasons.  If breast 
feeding alone did not keep the child happy, soft por-
ridge was immediately added to the diet to prevent 
hunger and to keep the child happy. 
 
Cessation of breast feeding    All these responses 
were in the age category 12 months and older (n = 18, 
100%), indicating that younger children were not taken 
off the breast completely.  Most mothers / caregivers 
(n = 15, 83,3% of all responses) indicated that breast 
feeding was stopped completely between age 18-24 
months.  The reasons for ending breast feeding in-
cluded health issues (n = 9, 81,8% of all responses) 
(eg a suitable age to stop breast feeding, the child was 
big enough to be weaned) rather than physiological 
reasons.  Most of the mothers (n = 10, 34,5%) said 
that their children received a mixed family diet by age 
7-9 months.   
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
The children in both the Mathibestad and Makapan-
stad areas appeared to grow in accordance with their 
birth percentiles.  At age 3 years they were very close 
to their birth percentiles in terms of weight and head 
circumference, but all showed a growth decline 
(weight for age and head circumference) at approxi-
mately age 18 months, which was the age that most 
children were taken off the breast completely.  This 
possibly indicated a period of poor food intake thus 
leading to general growth failure at that age.  Average 
length measured below the birth percentile (indicating 
suboptimal growth)(Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:29, 98), 
and weight-for-height (indicating normal or stunted 
growth) was normal (Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:98).   
 
Growth pattern abnormalities occurred between age 
12-24 months, peaking at 18 months, probably due to 
final weaning from the breast to a full family diet that 
consisted 
of 
poor 
high-biological-value 
protein 
(Huffman & Martin, 1994; Walker, 1990; Ng'andu & 
Watts, 1990; Underwood, 1984).  In view of the recov-
ered length growth, the growth pattern does not indi-
cate stunting but failure to thrive at the age of total 
weaning from the breast.   
 
These results correspond with previous findings in 
South Africa (Faber, Oelofse, Kriek & Benadé, 1997).  
This growth pattern confirms the theory on the 
weanling's dilemma (Huffman & Martin, 1994; Walker, 
1990; Ng'andu & Watts, 1990; Underwood, 1984), as-
sociated with poor growth at age 6 months to 2 years, 
whereafter the nutritional status subsequently stabi-
lised again (Huffman & Martin, 1994; Ng'andu & 
Watts, 1990).   The growth pattern appeared to be 
worse in the Mathibestad area with higher rates of 
growth faltering.  However, no pronounced wasting or 
stunting was found. 
 
The macronutrients, including total energy intake, were 
consumed in adequate quantities.  The average pro-
tein intake (10-11% of total energy intake) compared 
well with the recommended 12-15% of total energy 
intake, the carbohydrates (67-75% of total energy in-
take), to the recommended >55%, and the fat intake 
(21-25% of total energy intake) to the recommended 
<30% (Guthrie & Picciano, 1995:37-48; Lee & Nieman, 
1993:25-26). The protein and kilojoule intakes were 
sufficient, but marginally so.  
 
More plant protein than animal proteins were con-
sumed in all the age groups, causing a lower high-
biological-value protein intake in these children.  There 
should be more emphasis on protein sources in the 
diet, focusing on affordable, high-biological-value pro-
teins to sustain growth and development.  The vita-
min A intake was adequate, except in the 13-36 month 
age groups in both geographical areas.   
 
The intake of iron-rich foods was fairly low, but still 
adequate if fixed cut-off points were used in the RDA 
analysis.  Intakes of other micronutrients were ade-
quate (in terms of both sets of standards), except for 
vitamin B3, vitamin D, zinc and calcium.  It is impera-
tive to attend to the intakes of iron, zinc, calcium and 
vitamin D in these communities as all of them play an 
important role in growth.  All these nutrients should be 
present at the same time to optimise growth (Guthrie & 
Picciano, 1995:574).   
 
Breast feeding on demand is marketed worldwide as 
best for new-born babies (Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:84; 
Wells, 1995; Lipsky et al, 1994; Prentice, 1991; 
Walker, 1990’ Ng'andu & Watts, 1990).  The qualitative 
research on breast-feeding practices did not reveal 
major differences between the two clinics.  Defining 
breast feeding practices in clear-cut terms in these 
communities seemed difficult.  It was concluded that 
the mothers from Makapanstad delayed starting breast 
feeding for one or more days, mainly because of the 
perceived absence of milk as colostrum was not con-
sidered suitable for babies.  The mothers from 
Mathibestad started breast feeding within half a day of 
birth.  This finding corresponds with research in 
KwaZulu-Natal and in the Western Cape where breast-
fed infants were put to the breast for the first time the 
day after birth (Faber et al, 1997). 
 
Generally speaking, the mothers / caregivers were 
very positive about breast feeding, albeit in an absent-
minded way.  It was almost impossible to obtain accu-
rate data on breast milk intake in these communities 
because the mothers / caregivers could neither report 
accurately on the frequency of feeds nor on the dura-
tion of specific feeds.  They were less concerned 
about the volume of milk the baby received than about 
its happiness and physical appearance.  The babies 
were breast-fed for several reasons: to stop crying, to 
quench thirst, to feed, to put to sleep.  If breast feeding 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach  
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
69 
alone did not keep the child happy, solid foods were 
immediately added to prevent hunger and to keep the 
baby happy.   
 
All the focus groups responded positively to questions 
about giving babies something in addition to breast 
milk.  Exclusive breast feeding was rare in these com-
munities, a finding that corresponded with previous 
research results (MacIntyre & Ruhle, 1997; Zöllner & 
Carlier, 1993).  The babies were given additional 
food / drink three times per day.  Three months was 
deemed an appropriate age for introducing solid food.  
Most mothers / caregivers (63%) started giving their 
babies solid food from age 2-3 months, and a mixed 
family diet was common by age 7-9 months.  The re-
sults about adding solid food to the  breast milk diet, 
the transitional period, and the final weaning age com-
pared to the weaning recommendations are presented 
in Table 4. 
 
It could be concluded that mothers / caregivers rarely 
practised exclusive breast feeding.  Breast feeding 
with solid food was common and continued until age 
18-24 months.  Mothers / caretakers added solid food 
to the diets of their small babies far too soon, usually 
unnecessarily and for the wrong reasons.  The risk of 
diarrhoea, malnutrition or other illnesses increased 
with the early introduction of other food (Huffman & 
Martin, 1994).   
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Based on this research, the qualitative research ap-
proach is recommended for research on nutrition as it 
supplements / strengthens quantitative research find-
ings.  The results of this investigation provided insight 
into practices, knowledge and attitudes regarding 
breast feeding.  These findings substantiate recom-
mendations aimed at improving the feeding practices 
and/or the nutritional status of children. 
 
The nutrition knowledge of the mothers / caregivers in 
the research group appeared inadequate and this re-
lates to unsatisfactory breast-feeding practices.  Strict 
cultural beliefs and practices further impeded the qual-
ity of the feeding practices of their children (eg dis-
carding colostrum and a consequent perception of in-
adequate milk flow).  Young mothers / caregivers often 
find it impossible to ignore the advice of elders or peer 
groups (Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:96-97; Jelliffe & Jel-
liffe, 1979).  Nutrition knowledge about infant feeding 
should be changed as a first step to implementing im-
proved breast-feeding practices.  Nutrition education 
should focus on imparting the necessary information to 
change current knowledge, attitudes and practices.  
These rural women should also be motivated to 
change their behaviour if they wish to improve the 
health status of themselves and their children in the 
long term (Kibel & Wagstaff, 1995:16-20; Huffman & 
Martin, 1994, 38). 
 
An interactive nutrition education programme should 
be developed and implemented for these communities 
and its health workers to improve breast feeding prac-
tices.  The mothers / caregivers should be made 
aware of the value of breast feeding and how to refine 
and / or improve their current practices.  Interactive 
nutrition education, taking best practices into consid-
eration, should address: 
♦
the value of starting breast feeding soon after birth 
♦
exclusive breast feeding    
♦
the value of a specific breast feeding routine  
♦
breast feeding on demand  
♦
the correct age and the correct reasons for adding 
complementary foods 
♦
the nutritional value and functions of specific foods 
in the diets of babies 
♦
the weaning procedure (Guthrie & Picciano, 
1995:544; Lambert & Hall, 1995b; Huffman & Mar-
tin, 1994; Hendricks & Badruddin, 1992). 
 
Improved breast-feeding practices will ensure ade-
quate growth, prevent growth retardation during the 
critical period of 12-24 months, and prevent other nu-
tritional problems.   
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
COVENEY, J. 1985.  Is breast milk the best food for all in-
fants?  Human Nutrition: Applied Nutrition 39A: 179-188. 
DENZIN, NK & LINCOLN, YS. (eds).  1994. Handbook of 
qualitative research.  London. Sage. 
DICKIN, K, GRIFFITHS, M, PIWOZ, E.  1997. Designing by 
dialogue.  A program planners' guide to consultative research 
for improving young child feeding. Washington: Support for 
Analysis and Research in Africa (SARA.). 
FABER, M, OELOFSE, A, KRIEK, JA & BENADÉ, AJS. 1997.  
Breastfeeding and complementary feeding practices in a low 
socio-economic urban and a low socio-economic rural area.  
The SA Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 9:43-51. 
GUTHRIE, HA & PICCIANO, MF.  1995. Human nutrition.  
London. Mosby. 
HAMILL, PVV, DRIZD, TA, JOHNSON, CL, REED, RB, 
ROCHE, AF & MOORE, WM. 1979.  Physical growth: Na-
tional Centre for Health Statistics percentiles.  American Jour-
nal of Clinical Nutrition 32: 607-629. 
HENDRICKS, KM & BADRUDDIN, SH. 1992.  Weaning rec-
ommendations: The scientific basis.  Nutrition Reviews 50(5): 
125-133. 
HUFFMAN, SL & MARTIN, LH. 1994.  First feedings: optimal 
feeding of infants and toddlers.  Nutrition Research 14:127-
159. 
JELLIFFE, DB & JELLIFFE, EFP. 1979. Cultural traditions 
and nutritional practices related to pregnancy and lactation.  
In Hambræus, L & Sjölin, S. 1979.  Symposia of the Swedish 
Nutrition Foundation XIV.  The mother / child dyad - nutri-
tional aspects.  Stockholm. Almqvist & Wiksel International. 
KIBEL, MA & WAGSTAFF, LA (eds). 1995. Child health for 
all.  A manual for southern Africa. 2nd ed.  Cape Town. Ox-
ford University Press. 
KRUGER, R.  1999. Feeding practices and nutritional status 
of children (aged 0 to 3 years) in two clinics in the Moretele 
district. Thesis for Master’s degree in Dietetics, University of 
Pretoria. 
LAMBERT, EJ & HALL, MA. 1995a.  Infant nutrition part 1: 
preweaning (0-4 months).  British Journal of Hospital Medi-
cine 53(11): 567-569. 
LAMBERT, EJ & HALL, MA. 1995b.  Infant nutrition part 2: 
weaning - 1 year.  British Journal of Hospital Medicine 54(7): 
327-330. 
LEE, RD & NIEMAN, DC.  1993.  Nutritional assessment.  

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 29, 2001 
70 
Weaning foods 
 
Months 
0        3        6        9        12        15        18        21        24 
 
                                                _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
~~~~************************************************ 
 
            _ _ _ _ _ _                                     _ 
         *********~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
 
                     _ _ _ _ _ _                            _                     
    *****~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
 
                               _ _ _ _ _ _ _               _                  
****************~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
 
Ideal                               Study group 
Transitional period  _ _ _ _ _                                ********** 
Given regularly                                                      ~~~~~~~ 
 
Reflections 
 
1. Breast milk should be given exclusively for the first four to six months.  In developing countries breast feeding 
should be encouraged throughout the first two years, even if it provides only a small part of total intake.  
In this study group breast milk was given exclusively for the first one to two months only, but continued to the 
age of eighteen to twenty-four months. 
 
2. Beginning at four months and no later than six months, the infant is gradually introduced to complementary / 
weaning foods.  The sequence of introduction is not precise and schedules will vary since each infant will 
progress at his/her own rate.  A staple food that is kilojoule dense and adequate in protein is important and 
variety is essential in providing for complete nutritional needs.  Iron, zinc, vitamin D, and vitamin A-rich foods 
should be emphasized. Initially, complementary foods are given once a day, then gradually the frequency is 
increased so that the infant is eating two to four meals per day by about six months of age.  Infants over six 
months of age need to eat meals and snacks about four to six times a day in addition to breast feeding. 
In this study group cereals were introduced as early as two months.  The next two foods introduced were 
fruits and vegetables.  Meat was generally not given to small children.  These children consumed adequate 
quantities of energy and all the macronutrients.  Vitamin A intakes were adequate to the age of 12 months, 
where-after it was lower than the reference value.  Intakes of iron, zinc, niacin, vitamin D and calcium were 
inadequate.  Children followed a regime of three meals a day from very early on and snacks were not intro-
duced to the children.  . 
 
3. To avoid bacterial contamination, only freshly cooked or freshly peeled or washed foods should be used.  
The hands of both the food provider and child should be washed before handling food. 
In this study group foods not finished at one mealtime were kept for later use under unsuitable conditions e.g. 
in the shade or on the floor, increasing the risk for infection. 
 
4. Throughout the latter half of the first year of life, variety in taste and texture of diet is expanded.  As the child 
approaches one year of age, he should be encouraged to feed himself, and by two years of age, he should 
be consuming a varied diet from the family diet with choices from each of the food groups. 
In this study group the children were introduced to the full family diet by the age of twelve to eighteen 
months.  However cultural practices were adhered to with regard to the inclusion of a limited variety of nutri-
tious foods.   
 
 
Breast milk 
 
 
Staple weaning food and 
other grains 
 
 
Soft fruits and vegetables 
 
 
Meats and other protein rich 
foods  
TABLE 4:             COMPARISON OF RESULTS TO THE BASIC WEANING RECOMMENDATIONS  
                            (adapted from Hendricks & Badruddin, 1992:130) 

Breast feeding practices of mothers with children (aged 0-36 months) in a rural area of South Africa  
A qualitative approach  
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 29, 2001 
71 
Oxford, England. Brown & Benchmark. 
LIPSKY, S, STEPHENSON, PA, KOEPSELL, TD, GLOYD, 
SS, LOPEZ, JL & BAIN, CE. 1994.  Breast feeding and 
weaning practices in rural Mexico.  Nutrition and Health 9: 
255-263. 
MACINTYRE, UE & RUHLE, M. 1995.  Impoverished Africa - 
time to restress the value of breast-feeding.  South African 
Medical Journal  85(1): 4-5.  
MORGAN, DL.  1988.  Focus groups as qualitative research.  
Qualitative research methods series. volume 16.  London. 
SAGE. 
NAIDOO, S, PADAYACHEE, GN, VERBURGH, AP.  1993. 
The impact of social and political factors on nutrition in South 
Africa.  South African Journal of Clinical Nutrition  6(3): 20-
26. 
NEUMAN, WL.  2000. Social research methods: qualitative 
and quantitative approaches.  4th ed. Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
NG'ANDU, NH & WATTS, TEE. 1990.  Child growth and du-
ration of breast feeding in urban Zambia.  Journal of Epidemi-
ology and Community Health 44: 281-285. 
OCLOO, E. 1993.  Chronic undernutrition and the young.  
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society 52: 11-17. 
PATEL, DN & PETTIFOR, JM. 1992.  Malnutrition in South 
Africa. The SA Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 4(2): 
22-23. 
PIWOZ, EG, CREED DE KANASHIRO, H, LOPEZ DE RO-
MAÑA, G, BLACK, RE & BROWN, KH. 1996.  Feeding prac-
tices and growth among low-income Peruvian infants: a com-
parison of internationally - recommended definitions.  Interna-
tional Journal of Epidemiology 25(1): 103-113. 
PRENTICE, A. 1991.   Breast feeding and the older infant.  
Acta Paediatrica Scandinavia Supplement 374: 78-88. 
ROBERTS, GJ, CLEATON-JONES, PE, RICHARDSON, BD, 
SINWELL, RE & LUCAS, VS. 1995.  Breast and bottle feed-
ing in rural and urban South African children.  Journal of Hu-
man Nutrition and Dietetics 8: 255-263. 
STEWART, DW & SHAMDASANI, PN.  1990.  Focus groups.  
Theory and practice.  Applied Social Research Methods Se-
ries. volume 20.  London. SAGE. 
STEYN, NP, BADENHORST, CJ, NEL, JH & LADZANI, R. 
1993.  Breast-feeding and weaning practices of Pedi mothers 
and the dietary intakes of their preschool children. The SA 
Journal of Food Science and Nutrition 5(1): 10-13. 
TAN, JCH & JEFFERY, HE. 1995.  Factors that influence the 
choice of infant feeding.  Paediatrics and Child Health 31: 
375-378. 
UNDERWOOD, BA. 1984.  Weaning practices in deprived 
environments: the weaning dilemma.  Pediatrics 75 Supple-
ment: 194-198. 
WALKER, ARP. 1978.  Infant feeding practices in South Af-
rica.  An appraisal of their significance to health.  South Afri-
can Medical Journal  54: 820-822. 
WALKER, AF. 1990.  The contribution of weaning foods to 
protein-energy malnutrition.  Nutrition Research Reviews 3: 
25-47. 
WELLS, D. 1995.  Infant feeding.  Nutrition and Food Science 
2: 42-44. 
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION.  1975.  Measuring 
change in nutritional status.  Annex 3.  Reference data for the 
weight and height of children.  Geneva. 
ZETTERSTRÖM, R. 1994.  Trends in research on infant nu-
trition, past, present and future.  Acta Pædiatrica Supplement  
402: 1-3. 
ZÖLLNER, E, CARLIER, ND. 1993.  Breast feeding and 
weaning practices in Venda, 1990.  South African Medical 
Journal 83: 580-583. 
