ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 36, 2008 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level 
A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
OPSOMMING 
 
Inleiding en literatuur agtergrond 
 
Vanuit die literatuur en vorige navorsing is dit duide-
lik dat vroulike verbruikers van menige Westerse 
lande vandag probleme ondervind met die passing 
van koop-klaar-klere. Ontwikkelende lande in Afri-
ka, soos byvoorbeeld Kenia, ondervind dieselfde 
probleme. Ongelukkig beskik hierdie lande nie oor 
die nuutste tegnologie, vaardighede en finansiële 
ondersteuning ten einde navorsing te kan uitvoer 
wat gerig is op die oplos van grootte-en-pas-proble-
me binne die kledingindustrie nie. Menslike lig-
gaamsvorms en proporsies verander mettertyd en 
verskil ook van kultuurgroep tot kultuurgroep, van 
land tot land en selfs van streek tot streek binne ‘n 
spesifieke land. Daar kan dus nie maar aangeneem 
word dat klere wat verbruikers van een land pas, 
verbruikers van ‘n ander land of kultuurgroep gaan 
pas nie. Ten einde die probleem van grootte-en-pas 
te kan oplos, is dit dus belangrik dat daar van tyd 
tot tyd in alle lande antropometriese opnames ge-
maak word ten einde ‘n beeld te kry met betrekking 
tot die groottes, proporsies en liggaamsvorms van 
die inwoners van die land. Sulke navorsing is nog 
nie voorheen in Kenia uitgevoer nie. Die vraag 
waarom dit dus in hierdie navorsing gegaan het is: 
Hoe lyk die Keniaanse vroulike verbruiker se unieke 
liggaamsvorm/s en hoe dra dit by tot die probleme 
wat die vroulike verbruiker in Kenia tans ondervind 
met die passing van klere? 
 
In menige ontwikkelde Westerse en Oosterse lande 
word grootte-en-pas-navorsing vandag met die hulp 
van 
sogenaamde liggaamskandeerders 
(“body 
scanners”) gedoen. Liggaamskandeerders is weens 
‘n gebrek aan finansies en tegniese vaardighede 
nie in Kenia beskikbaar nie, en gevolglik moes die 
navorsers hul wend tot alternatiewe tegnieke vir die 
bepaling van liggaamsvorm. Twee tegnieke, wat 
ook voorheen op beperkte skaal gebruik is vir die 
bepaling van liggaamsvorm, is vir die doel van hier-
die studie aangepas, naamlik die bepaling van lig-
gaamsvorm deur middel van die gebruik van lig-
gaamsmates, en deur visuele ontleding deur ‘n op-
geleide paneel sensoriese evalueerders. Hierdie ar-
tikel rapporteer dus oor die veldwerk-metodologie 
wat vir die doel van die navorsing ontwikkel en suk-
sesvol toegepas is.  
 
Metodologie 
 
Die artikel rapporteer die metodologie wat beplan 
Anne Mastamet-Mason, Helena M de Klerk & Susan Ashdown 
9 
is, probleme wat in die veld ondervind is, asook hoe 
die probleme opgelos is ten einde geloofwaardige 
data te kon genereer en die doelwitte van die navor-
sing te kon bereik. 
 
Steekproef     Die studie was beperk tot twee 
geografiese gebiede in Kenia, naamlik die Westelike 
gebied (Eldoret en Kisumu) en die Hoogland gebied 
(Nairobi). Die eenheid van analise was hoërskool 
onderwyseresse wat in stedelike gebiede woonagtig 
is en in die ouderdomsgroep 25 jaar tot 55 jaar val. 
‘n Sistematiese ewekansige steekproef tegniek is 
gebruik en 301 onderwyseresse is identifiseer.  
 
Soos wat dikwels die geval is met veldwerknavorsing 
het die navorser menige probleme op grondvlak on-
dervind en moes menige strategieë in werking gestel 
word ten einde deelnemers wat aanvanklik identifi-
seer is en gewillig was om deel te neem, te oorreed 
om wel aan die navorsing deel te neem. Dit was uit-
eindelik moontlik om die liggaamsmates van 123 
deelnemers te neem, terwyl 89 deelnemers gewillig 
was dat daar foto’s van hulle in minimale kleredrag 
geneem kon word. Die steekproef was egter groot 
genoeg om statisties betroubare resultate te kon ge-
nereer. 
 
Metodes     Ten einde in staat te kon wees om wel 
die navorsing deur te voer, was dit nodig om lig-
gaamsmates van deelnemers te neem, asook om 
hulle in minimale drag te fotografeer, wat dan die na-
vorsers in staat sou stel om die unieke liggaams-
vorm/s van die Keniaanse vroulike verbruiker te 
identifiseer. Die neem van liggaammates het, onder 
meer, impliseer dat die navorsers kreatief moes dink 
met betrekking tot die nodige apparaat wat vir so ‘n 
oefening nodig is. ‘n Aangepaste antropometer is on-
der meer ontwikkel, terwyl dit ook nodig was dat die 
navorsers onderrig moes word in die neem van an-
tropometriese mates.  
 
Die neem van voor-, sy-, en agteraansig digitale 
foto’s het onder meer impliseer dat spesiale passen-
de lyfkouse vir die neem van die foto’s konstrueer 
moes word, dat ‘n ateljee opgerig moes word en dat 
‘n paneel opgelei moes word om die visuele evalue-
ring te kon doen. 
 
Data analise     Beskrywende statistiek is gebruik vir 
die analise van die mates terwyl ‘n opgeleide paneel 
kledingkundiges die visuele evaluering van die foto’s 
gedoen het. 
 
 

Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body shapes 
in African developing countries 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 36, 2008 
 
10 
Evaluering, gevolgtrekkings en aanbevelings 
 
Ten spyte van probleme tydens die veldwerk, waar-
van die kry van gewillige deelnemers waarskynlik 
die grootste was, kon die navorsing suksesvol deur-
gevoer word en betroubare data kon gegenereer 
word om die doelwitte te bereik. Die navorsers het 
tot die gevolgtrekking gekom dat die twee tegnieke 
gesamentlik sinvol gebruik kan word om liggaams-
vorm te bepaal. Die gebruik van die twee tegnieke 
behoort ‘n uitdaging te wees vir die toegewyde en 
kreatiewe navorser wat bereid is om grootte-en-pas 
navorsing sonder die hulp van moderne tegnologie 
deur te voer. 
 
 
 
—  Ms A Mastamet-Mason 
—  Prof H M de Klerk  
Department of Consumer Science 
University of Pretoria 
 
—  Prof S P Ashdown 
College of Human Ecology 
Cornell University 
INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE  
BACKGROUND 
 
Female body shapes and proportions vary and 
change over time, as the result of, amongst others, 
nutritional changes, lifestyles and ethnicity. These 
differences have an impact on the fit of the con-
structed apparel, be it ready-made or custom-made 
(Hillestad, 1980; Winks, 1997:20; Ashdown, 1998; 
Simmons & Istook, 2003). Given that ready-made 
apparel depends on an accurate estimate of the distri-
bution of body shapes and sizes within a target popu-
lation, it becomes necessary for every country, and 
even regions within countries, to establish their own 
sizing systems based on the target population 
(Ashdown, 2000; Simmons & Istook, 2003; Simmons 
et al, 2004). 
 
The problem of fit with ready-made apparel has 
gained a lot of attention as consumer demand for well-
fitted apparel increases. Dissatisfaction with fit is one 
of the most frequently stated problems with garment 
purchases. Women have been reported as the most 
dissatisfied consumers (DeLong et al, 1993; Alexan-
der et al, 2005; Otieno et al, 2005). This has resulted 
in the emergence of mass-customisation establish-
ments, which have been facilitated by the use of body 
scanners in the developed countries. Through body-
scan technology, body dimensions and shapes are 
easily and rapidly extracted from a population and 
converted immediately into body shape categories, 
size charts and patterns for garment production 
(Ashdown, 1998; Simmons & Istook, 2003; Ulrich et 
al, 2003; Ashdown et al, 2004; Fiore et al, 2004). 
 
Although a considerable body of sizing and fit re-
search has already been done, most of the research 
has been done in first-world countries. This is under-
standable because the “modern-world-consumer” 
wants and demands well-fitting clothes and the cloth-
ing industries can benefit by supplying well-fitting 
clothes that suit the body shapes of the consumer 
they are catering for. However, in many cases these 
“well-fitting” clothes are manufactured in third-world 
countries that, in turn, are dumped with clothes, made 
to fit a totally different (and in most cases Western) 
body shape, from which the specific country’s con-
sumer then has to make a decent choice. African de-
veloping countries such as Kenya also face apparel-fit 
problems.  
  
Dimensions from the human body are the underpin-
ning to an effective sizing system and consequently 
better-fitting apparel items. Sizing systems originate 
from people’s measurements and body shapes (Bye 
et al, 2006; Petrova, 2007:56). Since the body shape 
is three-dimensional, the measurements obtained 
from it must be accurately taken and representative of 
the body’s characteristics that are critical to apparel’s 
fit. This would facilitate the production of apparel 
items, which harmonises with the body shape. The 
measurements and the varied body shapes can only 
be accurate, consistent and representative if they are 
taken accurately by correct methods, instruments and 
techniques employed (Ashdown, 2000; Simmons & 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 36, 2008 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
Istook, 2003; Ashdown & Dune, 2006). Up-dated and 
current population measurements are therefore vital in 
most countries, to minimize fitting problems related to 
ready-made apparel (Kunik, 1984:12; Winks, 1997:14; 
Ashdown et al, 2004; Simmons et al, 2004). The 
question for this research was thus: What are the dis-
tinctive women’s body shapes in Kenya and how does 
it contribute to the fit problems that female Kenyan 
consumers experience? 
 
Ashdown (2000) sees sizing systems as the focus 
around which all factors concerning sizing and fit 
evolve. She has identified the main factors affecting 
sizing systems and consequently the fit of ready-made 
apparel to be the population measures (body meas-
urements), the design features (construction of the 
apparel), the fit issues (fit-quality management) and 
the communication of sizing and fit (size labelling). 
Body shape/form, being a framework for clothing 
(Salusso-Deonier, 2005), will affect all these compo-
nents in one way or another. For example: 
♦ Body measurements require measuring the body 
in a specific way that will facilitate body- shape 
classification and accurate reflection of the three-
dimensional body’s characteristics when the gar-
ment is made. 
♦ The design features require that the body’s frame-
work (three-dimensional characteristics) be cor-
rectly interpreted to provide the patterns for the 
construction of well-fitting clothes. 
♦ The fit issues (fit-quality management) require that 
the fit-test techniques used, such as the use of fit 
models and dress forms, are in agreement with 
body shapes of the target market. 
♦ Communication of sizing and fit requires that 
measurements and body shapes indicated on size 
labels reflect the true picture of the target market. 
 
Most female sizing systems, currently in use, are 
based on the ideal Western figure that has well-
proportioned body components. Although shapes 
have been classified in most developed countries to 
solve the problem of apparel’s fit, African shapes, with 
reference to Kenya, have however not been consid-
ered. 
 
It is clear from the research that few previous re-
searchers have involved themselves in research con-
cerning the classification of body shapes, probably 
due to the fact that this type of research happened to 
be very time- and energy-consuming – a fact that 
should change with the emergence of body scanners. 
Except for body-scanning technology, two techniques 
were previously used (although on limited scale) for 
the classification of body shape, namely the use of 
body dimensions for body- shape classification, and 
body-shape classification through the analysis of vis-
ual stimuli by trained sensory evaluators. 
 
Body dimensions (measurements) are defined as 
those dimensions obtained from an individual to be 
used in pattern design for garment construction or 
used to create a set of clothing for a variety of people 
in the target market (Ashdown, 2000). Measurements 
can only be accurate and representative if they are 
taken accurately by correct methods, instruments and 
techniques employed (Ashdown, 2000; Simmons & 
Istook, 2003). There are three common methods of 
obtaining body measurements namely, (1) traditional 
tailor’s measurements (termed as unreliable because 
there are no standardized procedures of taking the 
measurements), (2) anthropometry, which is a stan-
dardized, valid and reliable procedure involving de-
fined body parts to be measured as well as the use of 
specified instruments and standardized measuring 
methods acquired through training (Ashdown et al, 
2004; Simmons & Istook, 2003), and (3) three dimen-
sional body scanning, which is a more accurate mod-
ern non-contact method that captures the outside 
surface of the human body within a few seconds 
(Ashdown, 2002; Simmons & Istook, 2003). Use of 
body scanning technology is relatively new and its use 
in developing countries is not practical considering its 
cost and other technicalities involved. For the pur-
poses of this study, traditional anthropometry was the 
only option for obtaining measurements for the pur-
poses of body-shape identification.  
 
Sensory evaluation is the assessment of a product 
using sensitivity of human senses. It implies the 
evaluation of selected characteristics of a product 
under controlled conditions by a trained panel of 
judges (American Society for Testing and Materials 
[ASTM], 1999:3; Leibowitz & Post, 1982:4; Lyon et al, 
2000:1). Photography may be defined as the art of 
capturing images using either an ordinary or a digital 
camera. It may be argued that in describing body 
shapes, measurements alone would not be enough to 
give a true representation of the proportions of a 
body. It is therefore essential to study relative propor-
tions through visual images as well as the actual 
measurements. Salusso-Deonier et al (1991) used 
photographs of various body shapes in their research 
about observers’ perceptions of male and female 
body types. Kuma (1999:39) trained an expert panel 
on the use of photographs for the clarification of fe-
male body shapes. Connell et al (2003:73) trained a 
team of experts in female body shape analysis and 
used the visual images of body scans as stimuli for 
the identification of body shapes. Body shape analysis 
by using body measurements and by using the visual 
analysis of body shapes by a trained panel, seemed 
to be the way to go for the identification of body 
shapes of Kenyan women.   
 
This article therefore focuses on a methodology that 
proved to be of value and could in future be applied in 
research within the field of the sizing and fit of clothes 
in developing countries where the need for well-fitting 
clothes exists, but where a lack of necessary techno-
logical and financial support also exists. The aim of 
this article is to report on a fieldwork methodology that 
was tested, proved to generate trustworthy results, 
and could be used by future researchers who would 
like to involve themselves in sizing and fit research in 
developing countries. 
 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
11 

Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body shapes 
in African developing countries 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 36, 2008 
 
vature and breast protrusions can only be understood 
through visual analysis of the body’s silhouette and 
profile. Based on this reasoning, as well as a review of 
the literature of traditional anthropometry, somatogra-
phy and body shape classifications, a comprehensive 
body measurement data-capturing sheet, body shape 
assessment training manual and body shape assess-
ment scale were compiled.  
 
Preparations for measuring and photographing 
exercises     The body measurement data-capturing 
sheet contained upper and lower parts of the body’s 
dimensions that were carefully selected to enrich the 
quality of body shapes’ sorting and identification. The 
body measurement data-capturing sheet was de-
signed to facilitate measuring. Height and vertical 
measurements were grouped and arranged in the 
order of their sequences from the top to lower part of 
the body. All the horizontal (girth) measurements and 
all the width and length measurements were also 
grouped and arranged from the right to the left part of 
the body in order of their occurrences. 
 
Prior to taking measurements as well as photos, the 
subjects were informed about the apparel items to be 
used, the measurements to be taken and the different 
views required for the images. To be efficient and ef-
fective in the exercise, the subjects were provided with 
and requested to wear body suits (leotards) with mini-
mal thickness that follow the natural contours of the 
body without binding as recommended by the Interna-
tional Society for the Advancement of Kinanthropome-
try (ISAK) (2001). This was to ensure uniformity 
amongst all the participants. Due to lack of ready-
made leotards in the recommended colour and style, 
the researcher made 20 body suits that were used by 
all the participants. They were dry cleaned after each 
use. Size description system used for assigning sizes 
to the body suits was the lettered type of small (S), 
medium (M), large (L) and extra large (XL). The meas-
urements used for the production of the body suits 
were based on the Kenya size standards (Kenya Bu-
reau of Standards [KEBS], 2001). The Small (S) size 
category comprised sizes 8 and 10 measurements, 
the medium (M) size category comprised sizes 12 and 
14 body dimensions, large (L) category comprised of 
size 16 and 18 body dimensions, while extra large 
(XL) comprised sizes 20 and 22 measurements.  
 
Measuring instrumentation and techniques     Ap-
parel anthropometry studies specifically use apparatus 
that have been developed to produce reliable and 
valid measurements. An antrhopometer (measuring 
stand), consisting basically of a graduated rule in milli-
metres, vertically mounted and with a moveable arm is 
used for measuring straight linear distances, while 
callipers are used to measure linear depths and 
widths. Calibrated measuring tapes are used to meas-
ure circumferences (Beazley, 1997; Ashdown, 2000). 
 
According to Babbie and Mouton (2001:74) the nature 
of the research problem statement and the resources 
available determine to a certain extent the data-
collection methods to be used in a study. For the pur-
poses of this study and due to available resources the 
Sampling   
 
The study was limited to two urban geographical re-
gions in Kenya, namely, the Western region (Eldoret 
and Kisumu) and the Upland region (Nairobi). The unit 
of analysis was urban high school female teachers 
within the two regions. They fell within the 25 and 55 
age bracket, as teaching profession in Kenya begins 
at age 25 while retirement age is attained at 55. Being 
professional teachers, it was assumed that they were 
exposed to fashion, have the income to spend on 
clothing and are also critical to apparel’s fit. It was 
also advantageous, as they would be studied easily at 
their places of work.  
 
A systematic sampling technique was chosen for this 
study, because probability sampling avoids the re-
searcher’s conscious or unconscious biases in ele-
ment selection (Kerlinger, 1986:110-111; Bailey, 
1994:90; Babbie & Mouton, 2001:201-202; Strydom & 
Venter, 2002:205). There are 41 urban government 
and private schools in the Western region of Kenya 
with a total population of 1083 female teachers. 
Twelve schools (six each from Eldoret and Kisumu) 
with a total population of 150 female teachers were 
systematically selected. There are 35 urban govern-
ment and private schools with a total population of 
1052 female teachers in Upland (Nairobi) region. 
Twelve schools with a total population of 151 were 
systematically selected from this region.  
 
The list of names was obtained from respective 
schools. The first number was determined through 
flipping a coin (head-odd number and the tail-even 
number). In the Western (Kisumu) region the 9th num-
ber was randomly selected as a starting number. 
There after, every 3rd school was picked from the list. 
A total of 76 female teachers were expected to partici-
pate in the study. In the Western (Eldoret) region, the 
5th number was randomly picked as a starting number. 
There after, every 3rd school was picked from the list. 
A total of 74 female teachers were to participate in the 
study. In the Upland (Nairobi) region, the 15th number 
was randomly selected as a starting number (point). 
There after, every 3rd school was picked from the list. 
A total of 151 female teachers from this region were 
selected to participate in the study.  
 
Methods 
 
For the purpose of identifying a distinct body shape of 
women in Kenya, traditional anthropometrical tech-
niques of attaining body dimensions were employed in 
this study. Anthropometry has been applied in many 
studies, while photography (somatography - the visual 
evaluation of body photographs and subsequent cate-
gorizing them into different body builds) has scantily 
been used, but has however produced reliable results 
(Salusso-Deonier et al, 1991; Kuma, 1999:39; Ander-
son et al, 2001:7; Douty, 1963 cited in Connell et al, 
2003). It may be argued that in describing body 
shapes, measurements alone would not be exhaustive 
enough to give true representations of the proportions 
of the body. Profile characteristics such as, pelvic tilts 
(buttock prominence), stomach protrusions, back cur-
12 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 36, 2008 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
researcher consulted professional anthropometrists 
from 
the 
company 
ERGOnomics 
TECHnology 
(ERGOTECH) in South Africa for training on how to 
take body dimensions professionally and the suitable 
instruments to be used. ERGOTECH manages the 
database of the South African Defence Force and 
therefore has experience in conducting anthropomet-
ric surveys. In this regard, ERGOTECH’s measuring 
techniques and instruments that are used were con-
sidered reliable and valid. To enhance reliability fur-
ther in taking body dimensions, the researcher took a 
one-week’s training course in anthropometry as a 
level 1 Kinanthropometrist offered by ISAK. This 
course included theoretical work and practical assign-
ments and was presented by the only internationally 
recognised anthropometrist in South Africa.  Based on 
long-term expertise and experience of ERGOTECH, 
the researchers’ training with ISAK and a thorough 
review of literature, the decision to use specific instru-
ments (Figure 1) for this study was reached. ISO 
(1989), ASTM (1999), Beazley’s (1996) and Simmons 
and Istook’s (2003) techniques of taking body dimen-
sions, were also consulted for the decision taken. 
 
Due to limited funds available and the unavailability of 
an anthropometer, the researcher opted to use an 
improvised standing anthropometer, with approximate 
resemblance of the real anthropometer. It consists of 
a measuring stand, basically of a graduated rule in 
centimetres and millimetres. It contains two parallel 
metal bars held at right angles from the base and 
braches (blades) mounted at right angles on the fit-
tings that slide/move along one of the vertical primary 
rods as shown in Figure 1. It was designed according 
to specified measurements referred from an ordinary 
anthropometer. After it was assembled, it was sub-
jected to critical testing for accuracy and reliability. 
The improvised standing anthropometer was used for 
measuring all the straight vertical linear distances as 
shown in Figure 2. A stature meter was used inter-
changeably with the anthropometer for the height 
measurements. All the contour measurements were 
measured using a 200 cm long dressmaker’s metal 
and glass fibre tape interchangeably to avoid stretch-
ing and tear during the exercise. A setsquare was 
used for locating trunk line on the side, while a seg-
mometer (an instrument that measures lengths and 
widths) was also used interchangeably with metal or 
fibreglass tape to measure widths (Figure 1). All these 
instruments were used after consultation with an an-
thropometrist and anthropometry sources such as the 
RMSS (1994), Norton and Olds (1996) and ISAK 
(2001).  
 
Other tools necessary for the taking of body dimen-
sions included land markers. These were white stick-
ers with a circular hole in the middle. They were 
placed on the relevant positions of the body and body 
suits (leotards) as landmarks (Beazley, 1996). Elastic 
tapes were used for locating indented waist dimen-
sion. Hair clips were required to hold hair away during 
measuring the subjects. Body suits were provided in 
standardized sizes and brassieres were provided 
whenever necessary. The measuring area was pre-
pared well in advance for convenience and speed of 
handling equipment and to reduce the fatigue of both 
the subject and the measurer. This therefore con-
tained a stationed table on the right hand side of the 
measurer with all the equipment and tools arranged 
according to the order of measurements given on the 
body measurement data-capturing sheet. 
 
Measurements (dimensions) from a person can only 
be accurate and representative if they are taken accu-
rately by correct methods, instruments and techniques 
employed (Ashdown, 2000; Simmons & Istook, 2003; 
Bye et al, 2006). However, accuracy is enhanced 
when the subjects are land marked prior to taking 
measurements. This ensures conformity and consis-
tency while taking body dimensions (Simmons & Is-
took, 2003). Since a land marking exercise requires 
palpation, touching and sometimes bending of parts to 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Improvised standing Anthropometer 
Metal Measuring Tape 
Segometer 
FIGURE 1: 
MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 
13 

Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body shapes 
in African developing countries 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 36, 2008 
 
find appropriate positions for the needed measure-
ments, participants’ privacy is violated in the process 
(Istook et al, 2003; Simons & Istook, 2003). Having 
observed the resistance of the women’s participation 
with the exercise, it was necessary to continue with 
negotiations throughout the procedure as recom-
mended by Neumann (2000:352). Most of the partici-
pants allowed minimal contact as much as possible 
and this demanded that the earlier planned land-
marking positions be adjusted to include only a few 
important points (refer to figure 3). The procedure 
used for land marking followed standardized methods 
as stipulated in Beazley (1996), ISAK (2001) and Sim-
mons and Istook (2003) (Figure 3): 
♦ The neck/nape (7th cervical vertebra): The subject 
assumed a relaxed position with hands hanging 
down the sides and the head in the Frankfort plane 
position. The landmark was obtained by bending 
the neck forward to locate it, as it protrudes when 
the head is lowered. This position was marked with 
the circular hole on the sticker, being placed on the 
centre (RMSS, 1994; Beazley, 1996). This land-
mark guided calculation of the shoulder slope, 
which was obtained by subtracting shoulder to 
ground measurement from nape to ground meas-
urement.  
♦ The shoulder point (acromion): The subject as-
sumed a relaxed position with hands hanging 
down the sides and the head in the Frankfort plane 
position. Acromio-clavicular joint positions on both 
right and left sides were determined by palpating 
along the spine of the scapula to the corner of the 
acromion. Marking was applied with the stickers’ 
central holes placed at the midpoints of the ac-
romions (ISAK, 2001:29; McConville, in Simmons 
& Istook, 2003). The shoulder landmark guided the 
calculation of the shoulder slope. It also acted as 
part of the points used to attain the side seam line 
(profile trunk line). 
♦ The armpit (axilla) level: The subject’s hands were 
raised and with the head in the Frankfort plane 
position. Landmarks with stickers’ central holes 
were placed at the midpoints of the hollow armpit 
regions. This landmark guided the bust extension 
measurement and the bust measurement. It also 
acted as part of the points used to attain the side 
seam line (profile trunk line). 
♦ The upper arm/biceps point: The subject assumed 
a relaxed position with arms hanging down the 
sides. Site is located at the mid-point of the 
straight line joining the acromiale and radiale, per-
pendicular to the long axis of the arm also appear-
ing as the fullest part of the biceps region. This 
landmark guided the upper arm circumferential 
measurements. 
♦ The breast tips/bust level: The subject assumed a 
relaxed position with hands hanging down the 
sides and the head in the Frankfort plane position. 
Marking was then applied with the stickers’ central 
holes placed at the breast tips. This landmark 
guided the bust extension measurement and the 
bust circumference measurement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stature, nape and waist 
heights from the ground 
Shoulder, waist, hip and knee 
heights from the ground 
Hip, thigh, Knee and calf heights 
from the ground 
FIGURE 2: 
HEIGHT MEASUREMENTS USING STANDING ANTHROPOMETER  
14 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 36, 2008 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
♦ The waist: The subject assumed a relaxed stand-
ing position with the arms folded across the thorax 
and the head in the Frankfort plane position. The 
landmarks with stickers’ central holes were placed 
at the midpoints of the natural waist indentation at 
the sides. Subjects with waistlines difficult to iden-
tify in a relaxed standing position, were requested 
to bend side ways to facilitate locating the indented 
waistline. This landmark served as a guide for 
measuring waist circumferences, and part of the 
points used to attain the side seam line (profile 
trunk line) (ISAK, 2001:87). 
♦ The hip (trochanterion): The subject assumed a 
relaxed standing position and with the arms folded 
across the thorax and the head in the Frankfort 
plane position. The site was identified by palpating 
the lateral aspect of the gluteal muscle with the 
heel of the hand until the superior surface of the 
hipbone (trochanter) can be felt when strong 
downward pressure is applied. For subjects with 
thick adipose tissue over the hipbone it is difficult 
to locate this. However, while supporting the left 
side of the subject’s pelvis, the subject is re-
quested to lift up the right leg as the palpation con-
tinues. This landmark served as a guide for meas-
uring hip/buttock circumferences at the level of 
their greatest posterior protuberance and as part of 
the points used to attain the side seam line (profile 
trunk line) (ISAK, 2001:87). 
♦ The thigh bulge point (almost at gluteal furrow 
point): With the subject assuming a relaxed stand-
ing position, the arms folded across the thorax and 
the head in the Frankfort plane position, the land-
mark was located at the broadest (bulging) part of 
the thigh. This landmark served as a guide for 
measuring lower hip circumference (appearing 
broadest), and part of the points used to attain the 
side seam line (profile trunk line) (ISAK, 2001:87). 
It also guided the calculation of the thigh bulge, 
which was obtained by subtracting hip circumfer-
ence from the lower hip circumference (hip ap-
pearing broadest). 
♦ Knee level (tibiale laterale): With the subject as-
suming a relaxed standing position and with the 
arms hanging down the sides or folded across the 
trunk and the head in the Frankfort plane position, 
the site was identified by palpating to locate the 
lateral condyle of the femur and the antero-lateral 
portion of the lateral border of the head of the 
tibia. Although it is a difficult site to locate, the sub-
ject is requested to flex and extend the knee sev-
eral times to ensure that correct position has been 
located, alternatively the subject bends the knee 
slightly to define the crease line, the mid part on 
the side is identified and land-marked (RMSS, 
1994; ISAK, 2001). This landmark served as part 
of the points used to attain the side seam line 
(profile trunk line). 
♦ The ankle (malleolus): The subject assumed a 
relaxed standing position, arms hanging down the 
sides or folded across the trunk and the head in 
the Frankfort plane position. The lower edge of the 
tibial bone was located and land-marked. This 
landmark served as part of the points used to at-
tain the side seam line (profile trunk line). 
♦ Trunk line (side seam): With the subject assuming 
a relaxed standing position, the ear hole (external 
auricular meatus) served as the head’s landmark, 
while the shoulder, armpit, natural waist indenta-
tion, hip (trochanterion), knee (tibiale laterale) and 
the ankle (malleous) served as the other land-
marks.   
 
Measurements were taken according to the standards 
stipulated in Beazley, 1996; Beazley, 1998:269; ISO, 
1989: 6; ASTM-D 5219-99; ISAK, 2001 and Simmons 
& Istook, 2003. All these sources have well docu-
mented standards of obtaining body measurements 
for apparel design purposes. 
 
The researcher took all measurements and called out 
the readings to her research assistant for recording 
purposes. To confirm that the measurements were 
correctly recorded, the research assistant loudly an-
 
 
FIGURE 3:       LANDMARKS AND BODY DIMENSIONS ATTAINED FOR BODY SHAPE CLASSIFICATIONS 
15 

Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body shapes 
in African developing countries 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 36, 2008 
 
swered what she had heard. The research assistant 
was also skilled in apparel design, and had been 
trained prior to the fieldwork. She also assisted with 
aligning of the metal tape measure at the back while 
circumferential measurements were taken and thus 
acted as a mirror for the measurer where she could 
not see or reach. 
 
Photographs:     Based on the study of somatogra-
phy (Salusso-Deonier et al, 1991; Kuma, 1999:39) 
and the concept of imagery with the body-scan tech-
nologies, it was decided to use photography for this 
study as an alternative method to body-scan technolo-
gies. Photographs were taken with a digital camera. A 
professional photographer trained the researcher in 
the use of digital photography for this research. Fe-
male participants were photographed using standard-
ized methods while dressed in body suits and assum-
ing different positions (front, back and side/profile). 
The different views facilitated proficient judgment 
about body components that are critical to apparel 
items’ fit. Those components of the body could there-
fore be visually analysed and categorized. 
 
In order to achieve consistency and reliability when 
photographing, all sets of photographs were taken 
from the same distance with the subjects and photog-
rapher taking the same postures and positions. Six-
metre guiding grid paper was mounted on the wall at 
the back and extended to the front on the floor. The 
extended section on the floor had two footmark posi-
tions. The first one was close to the wall and was the 
subject’s position, while the second mark was further 
away from the wall and served as the photographer’s 
position. The grid paper was made of 15 cm squares 
with a bolded mid-line, which served as a balancing 
point when photographing. The background (grid pa-
per) was to standardize all photographs taken and to 
allow for better judgment later when analysing each 
shape (Figure 4). All the sets of photographs were 
taken from the same position and distance while the 
subjects took specific standardized stances and were 
dressed in similar styled and neutral (grey) body suits/
leotards to ensure uniformity and clarity during evalua-
tion (Figure 5) (Kuma, 1999:39; Anderson et al, 2001; 
Ashdown et al, 2004).  
 
To facilitate easy identification of the sets of photo-
graphs during analysis, three digit numbers were as-
signed to the subjects as they were photographed, 
while their privacy was ensured as their heads were 
masked (Kuma, 1999:39). Photographs were taken 
from the front, side and the back as shown in Figure 5. 
Subjects were requested and assisted regularly to 
assume and hold an erect stance with the head in the 
Frankfort plane position and directly on the footmarks 
with the grid central line passing through their mid-
points. With the training experience of the researcher, 
the use of a quality digital camera and the standard-
ized distance position as well as focus points applied 
consistently during the entire exercise, reliability of the 
exercise was ensured. Trained sensory evaluators for 
purposes of sorting out and identifying most distinct 
body shapes later evaluated all the photographs. 
 
Analysis of the Data 
 
Body dimensions (height and drop values) were first 
determined and the Mean and Standard Deviations 
were calculated for the total group’s dimensions 
deemed important for height categories, identification 
of distinct body shapes and distinct body features. The 
Mean Values ± the Standard Deviations (SD) facili-
tated the classification of height groups (short, me-
dium and tall), and the body shape categories of dis-
tinct characteristics (small, medium and large). The 
medium categories were classified by “Mean ± SD”. 
Values above the “Mean ± SD” were classified as 
large, whereas values below the “Mean ± SD" were 
classified as small. Beazley (1998) and Gupta and 
Gangadhar (2004) applied descriptive statistical tech-
niques in their studies. Statistics used were descrip-
tive methods that integrated simple percentiles to 
combinations of uni-variate and bi-variate analyses. 
Uni-variate analysis refers to the analysis of one vari-
able at a time. An example is a frequency/percentage 
table (Bryman & Bell, 2007:357). Bi-variate analysis is 
concerned with the analysis of two variables at a time 
in order to uncover whether or not the two variables 
are related (Bryman & Bell, 2007:360). Data were 
normalized giving ranges of two Standard Deviations 
either side of the Mean Value, which covered 95% of 
the population where applicable. This removed the 
extreme dimensions in a range, which could cause 
distortion.  
 
The drop values used for identifying body shapes 
were the difference between the bust and the hip di-
mensions and the difference between the bust and 
waist dimensions. The range (maximum and mini-
mum) dimensions of the drop values within the context 
of anthropometric data of this study were used to sort 
out different shapes based on the five prevalent 
shapes (hourglass, triangle, inverted triangle, apple 
FIGURE 4:      PHOTOGRAPHING STUDIO SET UP 
16 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 36, 2008 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
and rectangular) (Beazley, 1998; Gupta & Gangadhar, 
2004; Shin & Istook, 2007). 
 
For the purposes of trustworthiness and reliability of 
the visual evaluations, the researcher prepared a 
comprehensive training manual and a body shape 
assessment-scoring sheet/scale after a thorough re-
view of literature and critically analysing the field pho-
tos in a chronological order. It was reasoned that ac-
curacy in evaluations could be achieved if there were 
some form of agreement between different evaluators 
and through a unified method of assessment. Stan-
dardization would be achieved once the universal 
bodies’ body shape characteristics and how to spot 
them out on the body were identified and well under-
stood. The development of the training manual was 
therefore necessary to facilitate some form of unanim-
ity between evaluators during assessments of the 
body shapes. According to Fan (2004:28), assessors 
who do subjective assessments may have different 
internal assessment scales to rate an observation, 
thus the necessity to train them so as to bring each 
member of the panel as near to an identical scale as 
possible. Based on a thorough review of the literature 
and the outcomes of the preceding steps of the fe-
male body shape assessment formula, it became pos-
sible to develop a comprehensive manual for the pur-
poses of training. 
 
Slater (1997), cited by Fan (2004:29), points out that 
in subjective assessment, results could be affected by 
factors such as subject’s personality, skills, state of 
mind and health. In order to ensure validity and reli-
ability for this method of study, the quality of the 
evaluators, the assessment procedure, assessments 
scaling as well as analysis methods were carefully 
considered. It has been pointed out that use of trained 
professional assessors ensures that the differences 
perceived are smaller (Slater in Fan, 2004:29). An 
expert panel in a testing atmosphere works as a sen-
sitive test instrument, capable of providing valid and 
reliable responses to the sensations being studied 
(ASTM, 1999:5). This implies that well-trained profes-
sional evaluators would give more reliable judgments 
than non-professionals. 
 
It is important that the visual parameters are estab-
lished and clearly defined for the evaluators. The train-
ing and the subsequent assessment scale had, in this 
case, clearly defined body characteristics that served 
as visual parameters. Two evaluators with profes-
sional experience of 14 and 25 years in the field of 
apparel design and manufacture were believed to be 
experts and qualified enough for the assessment of 
the body shapes in this study. As both evaluators 
were experts in apparel design and manufacture, 
which involves the understanding of the human figure 
and translating it into apparel, each evaluator inde-
pendently studied the training manual and practiced 
with similar stimulus material (sample photos). This 
helped them to understand the clearly defined visual 
parameters necessary for the assessment of the im-
ages. The professional evaluators later met to resolve 
any misunderstanding arising from the training manual 
and to improve the scoring sheet. This provided a 
standardized and sequential way of assessing and 
recoding evaluation of the photos. 
 
An average Kappa value of 0.66 demonstrated moder-
ate inter-rater reliability. Although this was a lower 
17 
 
 
 
Front View 
Side View 
Back View 
FIGURE 5: 
DIFFERENT VIEWS OF BODY SHAPES  

Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body shapes 
in African developing countries 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 36, 2008 
 
statistic than was expected, it compares well with inter
-rater Kappa values from previous body shape re-
search (Connell et al, 2006). Significant tests with 
Kappa (p<0,0001) suggested that there were no com-
plete disagreement between the two evaluators. In 
cases where the inter-rater reliability was below the 
Kappa value of 0,75, the specific assessment was 
subjected to a trained group of expert evaluators for 
further evaluation. 
 
 
LIMITATIONS AT GRASSROOTS LEVEL 
 
While the researchers had anticipated some negative 
reactions, it was minimised in the mind and, in the 
event, the extent was overlooked. In the field, some of 
the school principals (gatekeepers) of the private 
schools refused access to their schools. Although 
Neumann (2000:352) warns that bargains and prom-
ises of entry may not remain stable over time and 
may require that the researcher returns later for rene-
gotiating, the decision to exclude all the private 
schools in the two regions was made because time 
and limited finances could not accommodate any fur-
ther errors. This decision necessitated new lists of 
government schools only to be sought from the Minis-
try of Education’s offices within the respective re-
gions. The new lists were then used for re-sampling 
purposes. Babbie and Mouton (2001:299, 310) state 
that most field research offers no fixed rules in meth-
odology to follow, because sometimes, sampling crite-
ria emerge from the fieldwork. Although the new lists 
had fewer schools, the original sample sizes of 151 
and 150 participants from the two regions respec-
tively, were maintained. Systematic sampling tech-
niques remained in force as had been planned and 
the procedures were maintained  
 
Having initially gone to schools for negotiations with 
the school principals, it was there at school level that 
the first rejection was encountered, and a research 
permit was demanded. This encounter signalled that 
there were more powerful gatekeepers that needed to 
be identified and to build a trusting relationship with 
them, as Hammersley and Atkinson (1995: 65) warns. 
It 
also 
confirmed 
Hammersley 
and 
Atkinson’s 
(1995:54) statement that researchers have to rely on 
their own resources, strategies and skills to get ac-
cess to suitable participants. Strydom (2002:283) also 
cautions that in some cases, gatekeepers and other 
sensitive obstacles may prevent one gaining access 
to the field. Having been rejected and a research per-
mit demanded the researcher had to apply for a re-
search permit from the Ministry of Education before 
commencing the research. A research proposal had to 
be submitted for scrutiny and approval had to be ob-
tained from the Ministry so that the research permit 
could be granted. Neumann (2000:353) points out that 
disclosing the project to the highest ranking gatekeep-
ers is one way of developing trust, and subsequently a 
step forward towards entry to the field. At least the 
research permit was granted, but revealed different 
authorities (gatekeepers) to report to in every region 
that the study was to be undertaken before the re-
search could commence. 
 
Socio-cultural differences that often lead to divergence 
in perceptions, beliefs and behaviour, include geo-
graphic locations, ethnicity, religion, and sexual orien-
tation (Fiore & Kimle, 1997:86; Marshall et al., 
2004:94). Considering the nature of the study, taking 
body dimensions and photographing female career 
women wearing minimal apparel is a delicate matter, 
also observed by Apeagyei et al (2007). It required 
caution, patience and deep understanding of the par-
ticipants’ cultural and religious beliefs, even before 
negotiating with them. The researcher, after seeking 
permission from the school principals comprehen-
sively explained the objectives and the importance of 
the study to the staff members (potential participants 
of the study). The researcher then requested them to 
volunteer from their own free will. As soon as agree-
ments were made, those who were willing to partici-
pate were requested to decide on a suitable date and 
time for the measurements and photographs to be 
taken. Initially, all participants volunteered, were posi-
tive and accepted unanimously to participate. Later 
on, the majority accepted to complete the accompany-
ing questionnaire but declined to be measured and 
photographed. When undertaking a sensitive study in 
a new country, the cultural limitations must be well 
understood beforehand, and even then, room should 
be allowed for any eventualities. It would be wise to 
move away from an egocentric view, because each 
social 
cultural 
context 
shapes 
the 
individual’s 
thoughts, beliefs and feelings towards any activity 
that, in one way or the other, would infringe upon their 
privacy within their cultural and/or religious beliefs. In 
this specific study, in one case, a few participants 
turned up for measurements and photographs. Alarm-
ingly, in the middle of the exercise, administrative po-
lice from the chief’s camp in the locality of the study, 
accompanied by some unidentified women, stormed 
the studio and demanded that the exercise be 
stopped. The security staff accompanying them and 
the women cited witchcraft, cultural/religious beliefs 
and pornography as the main reasons why the exer-
cise should not proceed. Nevertheless, after produc-
ing a research permit and other supporting documents 
from the different gatekeepers, the researcher was 
allowed to proceed. Babbie and Mouton (2001:309) 
observe that qualitative researchers may meet with 
several levels of attitude and actions, but flexibility, as 
a chief benefit of qualitative research, permits one to 
amend the research plan any time and adapt the 
methodology and other aspects of the study to suit the 
object of the study. Neumann (2000:346) points out 
that a researcher’s direct participation in the field often 
has an emotional impact. Although the damage as a 
result of humiliation had already been done, the exer-
cise on that particular day proceeded, but dejectedly. 
Time was running out and therefore a new strategy 
had to be devised on the spot. According to Hammer-
sley and Atkinson (1995:55) it is imprudent to allow 
one’s strategy to be lead entirely by one’s own per-
ceptions concerning what is and is not accessible. 
Despite the refusal to participate, a renegotiation proc-
ess was still achievable as recommended by Neu-
mann (2000:352). A new tactic was devised and ap-
proached with caution and patience. Having interacted 
18 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 36, 2008 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
with the teachers, the researcher identified skilled and 
influential (vocal) members with apparel and textiles 
skills, to be used as pioneers as well as negotiators/
recruiters and persuaders of other participants. The 
vocal members convinced a few other members who 
also identified others for the exercise. This recruiting 
exercise went on until there were no further persons 
willing to participate from each specific school. This 
resulted in snowball sampling within the initial 
(already) systematic sampled groups in different 
schools. Out of the population of 301 people that was 
initially pre-determined by the researcher, only 123 
bodies were measured and 89 sets of photographs 
were taken.  This, therefore, agrees with Babbie and 
Mouton’s (2001:310) viewpoint that in an interpretive 
research design, two types of sampling are commonly 
found, one where the researcher sets up sampling 
before commencing with the fieldwork and another 
where sampling criteria emerge from the fieldwork. 
 
Neumann (2000:349) observes that steps taken in a 
field project are not completely programmed but rather 
serve as an estimated guide or road map. As a re-
entry strategy, the researcher and the research assis-
tant were forced to develop stronger trust and rapport 
with the participants by providing their own photo-
graphs taken while dressed in body suits and without 
any masks on their faces. The purpose and impor-
tance of the study were comprehensively explained to 
all the willing participants (snowball sampled group) all 
over again. Some apparel items with fit problems were 
used to demonstrate how body shapes influence the 
fit of apparel, as a point to drive home. Neumann 
(2000:352) reports that the researcher has to continu-
ously negotiate and explains the research objectives 
of the study time and again in the field.  
 
Although a thorough explanation was made before 
each exercise, it must be reported that human beings 
are difficult to control and have them stationary in one 
position. Most of the landmarks were applied on the 
body suits and not directly on the body except for the 
neck, nape, shoulders, biceps, chest, and back width 
positions. The stickers in most cases would shift and 
sometimes fall off as the participants moved. The po-
sitioning of each individual in a recommended manner 
was always a problem as even the slightest move-
ment such as breathing, coughing or even stretching a 
little, would alter the intended position. Most subjects 
wore wrong-sized and -shaped brassieres, which also 
affected positioning of the breasts points. Even when 
brassieres were provided for them, or straps of their 
own adjusted, slight movements on the subject would 
still affect the landmarks and their positions. It was 
observed that frequent adjustments of the brassieres 
also made the participants uncomfortable. However, 
the researcher managed to obtain all the measure-
ments through standardized methods stipulated in 
ISO (1989), Beazley (1996), ASTM (1999), and ISAK 
(2001).  
 
It should be noted that such a measurement exercise 
is very tiring to both the measurer and the participant 
being measured. It took approximately 25-30 minutes 
to measure one person. Most participants felt uncom-
fortable being measured on some parts of the body, 
for example, crotch depth, bust tips and bust depth. 
These measurements were taken after a demonstra-
tion on the researcher herself. The improvised anthro-
pometer was very effective except that it is heavy and 
cumbersome to carry. 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
The researchers succeeded with the identification of 
two unique body shapes, typical for the Kenyan 
women, who seemingly resemble two of the estab-
lished Western body shapes, but are in effect totally 
different from the established Western body shapes. 
Digital photography produced quality front, back and 
profile images that enabled the evaluators to come up 
with clear assessments. The two body shape identifi-
cation techniques produced corresponding results. 
However, the researchers are of the opinion that, con-
sidering that body dimensions are one-dimensional 
elements, it would not be possible to isolate contours 
and precisely locate the positions of body characteris-
tics such as buttocks and bust contours along circum-
ferential dimensions. Images taken from different an-
gles facilitate comprehensive scrutiny on the size/
depth of any contours and any outlines that appear on 
the body. It is therefore possible to segregate body 
characteristics with the use of both body shape identi-
fication techniques (using body dimensions and 
evaluations of photographs). Characteristics that were 
not possible to identify concurrently using both tech-
niques are: the bust and the height proportions 
(identified through body dimensions), the body build, 
stomach, upper back curvature, back waist curvature 
and the top arm (identified through visual evaluations 
of the photographs).  
 
The results from both body dimensions as well as 
evaluations of photographs further demonstrate that 
both techniques, when combined, yield even better 
results that can address apparel fit problems more 
usefully. Considering that body scan technology is not 
popular in developing countries due to its cost and 
technicalities involved (Xu et al, 2002; Ashdown & 
Dune, 2006), it may be reasoned that in the meantime 
both body shape identification techniques (from the 
dimensions as well as visual evaluations of photo-
graphs) could be used simultaneously to produce reli-
able results. 
 
Executing fieldwork research and generating trustwor-
thy data in third world countries, where a lack of mod-
ern technology exists, and where a strong traditional 
culture in many cases restrains the researcher from 
following the familiar research strategy, is definitely 
not an easy task. It asks for a patient, creative, open-
minded and totally committed researcher. For the re-
searcher who possesses of these qualities the end 
result is, however, exciting and fulfilling.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
ALEXANDER, M, CONNELL, LJ & PRESLEY, AB.  
19 

Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body shapes 
in African developing countries 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 36, 2008 
 
2005.  Clothing fit preferences of young female adult 
consumers.  International Journal of Clothing Science 
and Technology 17(1):52-64. 
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERI-
ALS [ASTM]. 1999. Standard terminology relating to 
body dimensions for apparel sizing. D 5219-99. New 
York. American National Standards Institute. 
ANDERSON, LJ, BRANNON, EL, ULRICH, PV, 
PRESLEY, AB, WARONKA, D, GRASSO, M & GRAY, 
S.  2001.  Understanding fitting preferences of female 
consumers: Development of an expert system to en-
hance accurate sizing selection.  National Textile Cen-
tre Annual Report 198-A08. Available online. URL: 
http://car.clemson.edu/fit2000/ 
Accessed 
on 
06/03/2004. 
APEAGYEI, PR, OTIENO, R & TYLER, D.  2007.  
Ethical practice and methodological considerations in 
researching body cathexis for fashion products.  
Journal of Fashion Marketing 11(3):332-348. 
ASHDOWN, SP.  1998.  An investigation of the struc-
ture of sizing systems: A comparison of three multidi-
mensional optimized sizing systems generated from 
anthropometric data with the ASTM standard D5585-
94.  International Journal of Clothing Science and 
Technology 10(5):324-341. 
ASHDOWN, SP. 2000. Introduction to sizing and fit 
research, Clemson Apparel Research Center, Avail-
able online. URL: http://car.clemson.edu/fit2000/ Ac-
cessed on 06/03/2004. 
ASHDOWN, SP.  2002.  Communication of sizing and 
fit. Available online. http://www.cornell.edu/units/txa/
research/ntc/S01-CR01-03.pdf. 
 
Accessed 
on 
06/03/2004. 
ASHDOWN, SP, LOCKER, S & ADELSON, C.  2004.  
Use of body scan data to design sizing systems based 
on target markets.  Available online.  http://
www.cornell.edu/units/txa/research/ntc/S01-CR01-
03.pdf.  Accessed on 12/01/2005. 
ASHDOWN, P & DUNE, L.  2006.  A study of auto-
mated custom fit: Readiness of the technology for the 
apparel industry. Clothing and Textiles Research 
Journal 24(2):121-136. 
BABBIE, E & MOUTON, J.  2001.  The practice of 
social research.  Cape Town. Oxford University Press. 
BAILEY, KD.  1994.  Methods of Social Research.  
New York. Free Press. 
BEAZLEY, A.  1996.  Size and fit: Procedures in un-
dertaking a survey of body measurements.  Part 1.  
Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management 2(1): 
5-85. 
BEAZLEY, A.  1997.  Size and fit: Formulation of body 
measurement tables and sizing systems.  Part 2.  
Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management 2
(3):260-284.  
BEAZLEY, A.  1998.  Size and fit: The development of 
size charts for clothing.  Part 3. Journal of Fashion 
Marketing and Management 3(1):66-84.  
BYE, E, LABAT, KL & DELONG, MR.  2006.   Analy-
sis of body measurement systems for apparel. Cloth-
ing and Textiles Research Journal 4(2):66-79. 
CONNELL, LJ, ULRICH, P, KNOX, A, HUTTON, G, 
BRUNER, D & ASHDOWN, S.  2003.  Body scan 
analysis for fit models based on body shape and pos-
ture analysis.  National Textile Center Annual Report 
S01-AC27. Available online. www.explore.cornell.edu/
scene.cfm?scene  Accessed on 23/04/2003. 
CONNELL, LJ, ULRICH, PV, BRANNON, EL, ALEX-
ANDER, M & PRESLEY, AB. 2006. Body shape as-
sessment scale: Instrument development for analyzing 
female figures. Clothing and Textile Research Journal 
24(2):80-94. 
DELONG, M, ASHDOWN, S, BUTTERFIED, L & 
TURNBLACK, KF.  1993.  Data specifications needed 
for apparel production using computers.  Clothing and 
Textiles Research Journal 11(4):1-7. 
FAN, J. 2004.  Perception of body appearance and its 
relation to clothing. In Fan, J, Yu, W & Hunter, L. 
(Eds).   Clothing appearance and fit: Science and 
technology.  New York. Woodhead. 
FIORE, AM & KIMLE, PA.  1997.  Understanding aes-
thetics for the merchandising and design professional. 
New York. Fairchild. 
FIORE, AM, LEE, S & KUNZ, G.  2004.  Individual 
differences, motivations, and willingness to use mass 
customization option for fashion products.  European 
Journal of Marketing 38(7):835-849. 
GUPTA, D & GANGADHAR, BR.  2004.  A statistical 
model for developing body size charts for garments.  
International Journal of Clothing Science and Technol-
ogy 16(5): 458-469. 
HAMMERSLEY, M & ATKINSON, P. 1995.  Ethnogra-
phy: Principles in practice. 2nd ed. New York. 
Routledge. 
HILLESTAD, R.  1980.  The underlying structure of 
appearance.  Dress 6: 117-125. 
International Society for the Advancement of Kinan-
thropometry (ISAK). 2001.  International Standards for 
Anthropometric Assessment.  Sydney. 
INTERNATIONAL 
ORGANISATION 
FOR 
STAN-
DARDIZATION (ISO).  1989.  Garment construction 
and anthropometric surveys: body dimensions. No 
8559-1989.  Geneva. International Organisation for 
Standardization. 
ISTOOK, C, LITTLE, T, HONG, H & PLUMLEE, T.  
2003.  Automated garment development from body 
scan data.. National Textile Center Annual Report. 
S00-NS15. 
Available 
online. 
URL: 
http://
car.clemson.edu/fit2000/ Accessed on 06/03/2004. 
KENYA BUREAU OF STANDARDS (KEBS).  2001.   
Draft Kenya standard specification for size designation 
for women’s and girls’ clothing. Nairobi. Kenya Bureau 
of Standards. 
KERLINGER, F.N.  1986.  Foundations of behavioral 
research.  3rd ed.  Fort Worth. Harcourt. 
KUMA, MA.  1999.  Design guideline for selected plus-
sized professional black South African women.  
M.Tech thesis. Pretoria. Tshwane University of Tech-
nology. 
KUNIK, P.  1984.  Sizing pattern construction and 
grading for women and children’s garments.  London. 
Philip Kunik.  
LEIBOWITZ, HW & POST, RB.  1982.  Capabilities 
and limitations of the human being as a sensor, se-
lected sensory methods; problems and approaches to 
measuring hedonics.  In Kuznick, JT, Johnson, RA & 
Rutkiewic, AF.  Selected sensory methods: problems 
and approaches to measuring hedonics.  American 
Society for Testing and Materials.  STP 773. Philadel-
phia. ASTM. 
LYON, DH, MENNEER, JL, MCEWAN, JA, METHER-
20 

ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 36, 2008 
Sizing and fit research at grassroots level.  A methodology for the identification of unique body 
shapes in African developing countries 
INGAHAM, TLC & LALLEMAND M. 2000. Guidelines 
for the selection and training of assessors for descrip-
tive sensory analysis. Budapest. Campden and Chor-
leywood Magyarorszag. 
MARSHALL, SG, JACKSON, HO, STANLEY, MS, 
KEFGEN, M & TOUCHIE-SPECHT, P.  2004.  Indi-
viduality in clothing selection and personal appear-
ance. 6th ed. New Jersey. Pearson Education.  
NEUMANN, WL.  2000.  Social research methods.  4th 
ed.  Boston. Allyn and Bacon. 
NORTON, K & O’LDS, T.  1996.  Anthropometrica. A 
textbook of body measurements for sports and health 
courses. Sydney. University of Wales Press. 
OTIENO, R, HARROW, C & LEA-GREENWOOD, G.  
2005.  The unhappy shopper, a retail experience: ex-
ploring fashion, fit and affordability.  International Jour-
nal of Retail and Distribution Management 33(4):298-
309. 
PETROVA, A.  2007.  Creating sizing systems.  In 
Ashdown, SP.  2007.  Sizing in clothing developing 
effective sizing systems for ready- to-wear clothing.  
New York. Woodhead Publishing. 
REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA MILITARY STAN-
DARDS (RMSS).  1994.  RSA-MIL-STD-127, 1(4): 1-
264.  
SALUSSO-DEONIER, CJ.  2005.  The body as a 
framework for apparel. Available online. http://
www.wsu.edu:8080/salusso/BODY/contents.html. 
Accessed 20/01/2005. 
SALUSSO-DEONIER, C, MARKEE, NL & PEDER-
SEN, EL.  1991.  Developing realistic stimuli for as-
sessing observer’s perceptions of male and female 
body types. Perceptual and Motor Skills 72:603-610. 
SIMMONS, KP & ISTOOK, CL.  2003.  Body measure-
ment techniques, comparing 3-D body-scanning and 
anthropometric methods for apparel applications.  
Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management 7
(3):06-332. 
SIMMONS, K, ISTOOK, CL & DEVARAJAN, P.  2004.  
Female figure identification technique (FFIT) for ap-
parel.  Part 1: Describing female shapes.  Journal of 
Textile and Apparel, Technology and Management  4
(1):1-16. 
STRYDOM, H.  2002.  Information collection: Partici-
pant observation.  In De Vos, AS. Research at grass 
roots.  2nd ed.  Pretoria. Van Schaik. 
STRYDOM, H & VENTER, L. 2002. Sampling and 
sampling methods. In De Vos, AS.  Research at grass 
roots. 2nd ed. Pretoria. Van Schaik. 
ULRICH, PV, ANDERSON-CONNELL, LJ & WU, W.  
2003.  Consumer co-design of apparel for mass cus-
tomization.  Journal of Fashion Marketing and Man-
agement 8(4):398-412. 
WINKS, JM.  1997.  Clothing sizing, international stan-
dardization.  The Textile Institute, London. Redwood 
Books. 
XU, B, HUANG, Y, YU, W & CHEN, T.  2002.  Body 
scanning and modeling for custom fit garments. Jour-
nal of Textile and Apparel, Technology and Manage-
ment 2(2):1-11. 
21 
