Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations 
A peer-reviewed e-journal of the Council of Centers on Jewish-Christian Relations 
Published by the Center for Christian-Jewish Learning at Boston College 
Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel: 
The Ethical Promise and Theological Limits of Christian Realism 
 
Carys  Moseley 
School of Divinity, Edinburgh University 
 
Volume 4 (2009) 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 
 
 
 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel  
Moseley 1 
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
    Reinhold Niebuhr was the most prominent liberal Prot-
estant theologian to support Zionism in the United States in the 
mid-twentieth century. Only a minority of theologians, clergy, 
and laity in the mainline churches ever supported Zionism. 
Some argue that because Niebuhr’s Zionism was not grounded 
in dogmatic theology and Biblical exegesis, it was not transmit-
ted to the next generation of Mainline Protestants. Furthermore, 
the structure of his thought left open the possibility of an anti-
Zionist approach. This article assesses the tensions between 
theology and ethics in Niebuhr’s Zionism, and links it to his 
conception of both Israel and America as messianic nations 
with civilizational missions. First, it assesses Niebuhr’s support 
for a Jewish return to Palestine in relation to Protestant and 
Jewish relocation of the Promised Land. The second section 
argues that Niebuhr’s Zionism was integral to his Christian real-
ism. The third section probes his shift from viewing Jews as a 
messianic people to understanding America as a messianic   
nation, subsuming Israel under America’s civilizing mission. 
The fourth section argues that Niebuhr’s natural theology, 
which was the basis for his understanding of history and divine 
transcendence, constrained what he could say concerning the 
“Biblical myths” of covenant and election regarding Israel. The 
final section argues that Niebuhr located his Zionism within his 
reconstruction of natural law and subjected it to his critique      
of nationalism and religion. As his Zionism was not theo-
logically grounded, his support for Israel could not be persua-
sive theologically for subsequent generations of Mainline           
Protestants.  
 
1. The Promised Land as Zion: Relocation from America to 
    Palestine 
 
The relocation of the idea of Zion, the Promised Land, 
from America to Palestine occurred in the 19th century among 
American Protestants and in the 20th century among American 
Jews.1 Niebuhr’s Zionism is located midway between the two. 
The Congregationalists and Puritans who came to New 
England in the 17th century saw America as Zion.2 Many 
American religious people changed from seeing America as the 
Holy Land to seeing the Land of Israel as the Holy Land. 
American Congregationalist missionaries in the 19th century 
believed the second coming was imminent, and set off in 1819 
to found missions, despite Catholic and Muslim Turkish 
opposition.3 Nineteenth-century American Congregationalist 
missionaries “helped replant the sacred territory of Scripture 
from America to the Land of Israel, including its eschatological 
ramifications.”4 This approach was an important source for 
American Evangelical attitudes to Israel. However, liberal 
Protestants 
interpreted 
the 
issue 
differently. 
Gershom 
Greenberg compares Reinhold Niebuhr’s attitude to that of two 
other prominent liberal Protestant churchmen of the first half of 
the 20th century, Adolf A. Berle, Sr. and Harry Emerson 
Fosdick. The distinctions between them, and between Niebuhr 
and Fosdick in particular, correspond to the subsequent divide 
among Mainline Protestants over Israel.  
 
 
Berle was an American Congregationalist pastor from 
Boston, who penned a volume entitled The World Significance 
of a Jewish State in 1918.5 In it he idealizes Jews and Judaism 
as superior to Christianity, which had failed both to avert the 
                                                          
1. I am indebted to the account of Gershom Greenberg for the basic tenets of 
this section. See his The Holy Land in American Religious Thought, 1620-
1948: The Symbiosis of American Religious Approaches to Scripture’s 
Sacred Territory (Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America, 1994).  
2. Greenberg, Holy Land, 15-45; Robert T. Handy, A Christian America: 
Protestant Hopes and Historical Realities (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1971), chs.1 and 2.  
3. Greenberg, Holy Land, 113-141.  
4. Greenberg, Holy Land, 132.  
5. Adolf A. Berle, Sr., The World Significance of a Jewish State (New York: 
Mitchell Kennerly, 1918); Greenberg, Holy Land, 281-282.  
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 2  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
First World War and mitigate its consequences. He looked for 
the religious rehabilitation and unification of Jews and the 
formation of a Jewish state on this basis. He envisioned a 
Hebrew commonwealth in which the Hebrew language and 
literature would thrive. This would enable the renewal of ancient 
Israelite law and national structures. The Jewish state would 
display its national traditions and idealisms, which had made 
the politics of the Israelite prophets such an integral part of 
Christianity. As a result, anti-Semitism would be eliminated. 
Jewish return to Israel would be the occasion for “world 
instruction in the religion of Israel, which has never been 
vouchsafed to any other cult in the history of mankind!”6 Berle 
considered Judaism as “the barometer of civilization,” a future 
moral paradigm. In this, he represented a shift away from 
seeing America as the world’s exemplary nation. Placing 
responsibility upon a future Jewish state for “improving the 
world” due to disenchantment with Christianity was a significant 
move, as it opened the door to later liberal Protestant 
disenchantment with Israel for not being morally perfect.  
 
 
Harry Emerson Fosdick, a prominent New York Baptist 
minister, toured Palestine in 1920.7 Fosdick was disappointed 
with the land, and disagreed with Theodor Herzl’s slogan that it 
was “a land without a people,” given that there were more than 
half a million Arabs living there. Fosdick, like many American 
liberals, sympathized with the Arabs’ view that they had been 
betrayed by the British when they were not granted autonomy 
in return for winning the First World War against the Ottoman 
Turks. Fosdick sympathized with the Arab fear that Jews would 
try to rebuild Solomon’s Temple, thus provoking conflict with 
Islam. (This was somewhat disingenuous given that he knew 
most Jews to be secular.) He wanted to restrict the number of 
Jewish refugees allowed into Palestine, but like Berle, he also 
                                                          
wanted Jews to reside in the land in a way that would somehow 
“benefit mankind.” Fosdick spoke about Zionism to staff and 
students at Union Theological Seminary in New York in 1927. 
Zionism for him was a form of nationalism and as such an idol. 
He would only support a Zionism that was a cultural and 
educational revival such as that espoused by Rabbi Judah 
Magnes (1877-1948), then chancellor of the Hebrew University 
of Jerusalem. This influenced subsequent Mainline Protestant 
attitudes, for Magnes and other intellectuals at the Hebrew 
University were convinced anti-Zionists, favoring the idea of a 
binational Jewish-Arab state. The most important proponent of 
this view was Martin Buber, who advanced the concept of the 
“true Zionism” of the soul.
6. Berle, World Significance, as cited in Moshe Davis, America and the Holy 
Land (Westport, Connecticut: Praeger, 1995), 64, fn. 5. 
7. Greenberg, Holy Land, 282-284. 
8
 
 
From the time of his critique of liberalism onwards, Niebuhr 
differed from both Berle and Fosdick in placing fewer moral 
expectations upon Jews to redeem the human race. He 
eschewed moralism, mounting a sharp critique in the early 
1930’s of the liberal Social Gospel movement and its perceived 
optimism concerning human perfectibility and the gradual 
progression of history. Niebuhr saw Palestine as a home for the 
Jews, not as a project that was supposed to “benefit mankind” 
(Fosdick) or “improve the world” (Berle). Thus he did not tend to 
hold Jews and Israel to a higher standard than other nations. 
He definitely did not want to see ancient Israelite law revived, 
and was almost paranoid about Israel’s becoming a theocracy. 
Israel for Niebuhr was neither a displacement of Christian 
hopes for worldly redemption and progress onto Jews, nor a 
displacement of Christian hopes for religious resurgence. His 
secularized Zionism was an alternative to more evangelical 
forms of Christian support for Zionism.  
                                                          
8. Martin Buber, A Land of Two Peoples: Martin Buber on Jews and Arabs, 
ed. Paul R. Mendes-Flohr (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2005), 220-
224. For strong Zionist criticism of Buber’s role in Israel, see Yoram Hazony, 
The Jewish State: The Struggle for Israel’s Soul (New York: Basic Books, 
2001), 181-193, 267-283. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 3  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
Niebuhr would grasp the “creational” aspects of 
Zionism, as opposed to its soteriological and eschatological 
aspects. In this respect, his thinking was closer structurally and 
substantially to that of Reform and secular Jews than to that of 
fellow Protestants. Louis Brandeis’ case for Jewish assimilation 
in the United States along with the founding of a Jewish state 
influenced Niebuhr, as both men shared a commitment to the 
United States as a liberal democracy.9 Brandeis’ argument was 
that nations have rights and duties to develop and promote the 
higher goals of civilization, because they are just as “individual” 
as persons. Niebuhr also agreed with his friend Justice Felix 
Frankfurter that Palestine would rescue Jewish national 
identity.10 Frankfurter had been recruited to American Jewish 
Zionism by Brandeis even before Woodrow Wilson led America 
into the First World War.11 His unofficial diplomacy would prove 
to be both significant on the Jewish side and supportive of 
Niebuhr’s efforts.12  
 
2. Niebuhr’s Zionism Expressed as Christian Realism 
 
 
Early in his career Niebuhr encountered American 
Jews. His friendships with them nourished a belief that 
Judaism’s sense of social justice was superior to that of 
contemporary American Protestantism. As a result he became 
a convinced Zionist, expressing this conviction through his 
method of “Christian realism.” The Israeli political theorist Eyal 
Naveh has recently argued that Niebuhr’s support for Zionism 
formed part of a “non-utopian liberalism:”  
                                                          
                                                          
9. Reinhold Niebuhr, “Jews after the War: Parts I and II,” in Love and Justice: 
Selections from the Shorter Writings of Reinhold Niebuhr, ed. D. Robertson 
(Louisville, Ky.: Westminster John Knox Press, 1992), 133-134, 138-139.  
10. Greenberg, Holy Land, 341.  
11. Paul Charles Merkley, The Politics of Christian Zionism, 1891-1948 
(London: Frank Cass, 1998), 87-88. 
12. Daniel F. Rice, “Felix Frankfurter and Reinhold Niebuhr, 1940-1964,” 
Journal of Law and Religion 1, no. 2 (1983): 325-426.  
As one who always opposed any simple identification 
between historical events and the divine cosmic 
structure, Niebuhr refused to give any religious meaning 
and redemptive significance to the destiny of the Jews. 
He considered Zionism as a legitimate political 
movement; a possible, not necessarily inevitable 
solution; one, not necessarily exclusive, remedy for the 
Jewish problem in the twentieth century. He admitted, 
however, that “the ideal of a political homeland for the 
Jews is so intriguing that I am almost willing to sacrifice 
my conviction for the sake of it.”13
 
Niebuhr’s Zionism was central to his Christian realism, which 
itself was deeply rooted in his favoring what he considered to 
be the “Hebraic” moral aspect of the western Christian tradition 
over its “Hellenic” metaphysical aspect.  
 
The development of Niebuhr’s Zionism reflects the 
continued 
co-ordination 
of 
Christian 
realism’s 
three 
components: political, moral and theological.14 Political realism 
involves taking into account all the different kinds of forces 
involved in making political decisions. Accordingly, the human 
condition is too complicated to allow pure moral idealism to 
affect such decisions, as it risks disempowering political agents 
through lack of worldly wisdom. Niebuhr’s subtlety on this 
matter has been overlooked, both by critics and supporters. 
John Howard Yoder accuses Niebuhr of introducing into 
Christian ethics extraneous concepts that found his political 
realism upon national self-interest rather than on any Christian 
 
13. Eyal Naveh, Reinhold Niebuhr and Non-Utopian Liberalism: Beyond 
Illusion and Despair (Brighton/Portland, Oregon: Sussex Academic Press, 
2002), 83, citing Reinhold Niebuhr, “Judah Magnes and the Zionists,” Detroit 
Times (December 28, 1929): 16.  
14. For this categorization, see Robin W. Lovin, Reinhold Niebuhr and 
Christian Realism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 3-24. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 4  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
moral considerations.15 The influential International Relations 
theorist Hans Morgenthau, on the other hand, read Niebuhr in a 
reductionist fashion, as if he were denying the importance of 
moral values for politics and implying that they are reducible to 
self-interest.16
 
This matters because Niebuhr was committed to an 
underlying moral realism, a conviction that moral statements 
are true or false independent of the individual or community 
that espouses them. This rules out ethics solely guided by self-
interest as well as moral relativism. Niebuhr formulated his 
version of moral realism by reconstructing Protestant natural 
law theory along the lines of “ethical naturalism.” This will 
receive further attention below in section 5. For now it is 
enough to say that a proper understanding of human nature is 
necessary to make right action possible.  
 
Niebuhr’s theological realism is intertwined with the 
morally realist pursuit of justice. This rests on a belief that God 
is love, and that this love requires justice of human beings. 
Deflecting fears of moral authoritarianism whereby all theo-
logical realists would be required in advance to know or agree 
on the content of ethics, Niebuhr implies that due to God’s 
transcendence over creatures, no one has complete knowledge 
of the divine will and purpose on any particular issue. This 
feeds his critique of religion in relation to nationalism, which will 
also be considered below in section 5.  
  
Niebuhr’s key writings on Zionism demonstrate his 
application of this threefold realism. He started speaking and 
writing publicly in support of American Jewish Zionism in the 
                                                          
                                                          
15. John Howard Yoder, “Reinhold Niebuhr and Christian Pacifism,” 
Mennonite Quarterly Review 29, no. 2 (April 1955): 101-117. 
16. See Lovin, Reinhold Niebuhr and Christian Realism, 10; Daniel F. Rice, 
“Reinhold Niebuhr and Hans Morgenthau: A Friendship with Contrasting 
Shades of Realism,” Journal of American Studies 42 (2008): 255-291. 
1930s, as he realized that the situation of Jews in Europe was 
worsening. European Jews were attempting to flee Nazi 
persecution by emigrating to British Mandatory Palestine. In 
1938 Niebuhr addressed Hadassah, the women’s Zionist 
organization, supporting a Jewish home in Palestine. Admitting 
the real difficulty of this occurring on land claimed by Arabs, he 
first compared it to other situations across the world affected by 
heavy migration. He assumed the realist perspective that 
“nothing in the realm of politics can be done without friction.” He 
concluded that “Palestine must not be abandoned,” not only 
due to lack of an alternative location for Zion, but also “because 
the years of expenditure of energy, life and treasure…must not 
be sacrificed.”17 Addressing the 44th annual convention of the 
Zionist Organization of America in Cincinnati in September 
1941, he said that when all had been said about the problem of 
relating Diaspora Jews to the Land of Israel, the justice of 
Zionism enters because “there is no spirit without a body, and 
there is no body without geography.”18 This is the single most 
important Zionist statement that Niebuhr made, because he 
connected the Land of Israel with creaturely embodiment and 
statehood, as they were in the Bible. It also articulates in a 
nutshell his reconstruction of natural law theory to incorporate 
freedom, here expressed as “spirit.”  
 
 
Niebuhr’s most important publication on Zionism was his 
1942 article “Jews after the War.” It demonstrates a far-sighted 
approach unmatched by other Christian ethicists. Reintegrating 
Jews into Europe would be unrealistic due to prospective post-
war impoverishment and endemic anti-Semitism. Assimilation 
alone would be ethically unacceptable as this would bring about 
the disappearance of Jews as a nationality. Nationality, not 
 
17. Reinhold Niebuhr, “My Sense of Shame,” Hadassah Newsletter 19 (Dec. 
1938): 59-60.  
18. Reinhold Niebuhr, September 9, 1941, cited in Charles C. Brown, Niebuhr 
and His Age: Reinhold Niebuhr’s Prophetic Role and Legacy (Philadelphia: 
Trinity Press International, 1992), 142.  
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 5  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
religion, represented that which is unique to Jewish life.19 Jews 
render no service either to democracy or to their people by 
seeking to deny this ethnic foundation of their life, or by giving 
themselves to the illusion that they might dispel all prejudice if 
only they could prove that they are a purely cultural or religious 
community.20
 
 
In this, Niebuhr reflects Louis Brandeis’ arguments for 
Zionism. He astutely observes that poorer Jews had not been 
able to enjoy the benefits of emancipation and assimilation as 
richer Jews had, because “majority bigotry” always falls much 
harder on the poorer members of an ethnic group. Poorer Jews 
thus had a very strong need to return to the Land of Israel.21 
Zionism was therefore seen as the socialism of poor Jews. Due 
to Niebuhr’s Christian realist critique of Marxism as a myth or 
religion capable of corrupting politics, he never carried this 
argument to the logical conclusion expressed in Marxist strands 
of early Zionism. Those saw emigration to Palestine as 
necessary for poor Jews to win the class struggle against their 
more privileged brethren.22 Christian realism is articulated in 
nuce in his statement that Zionism represents “the wisdom of 
common experience against the wisdom of the mind, which 
tends to take premature flights into the absolute or the universal 
from the tragic conflicts and the stubborn particularities of 
human history.”23
 
                                                          
19. Niebuhr, “Jews after the War,” 134. 
20. Niebuhr, “Jews after the War,” 135. 
21. Niebuhr, “Jews after the War,” 136.  
22. On Niebuhr’s use and subsequent critique of Marxist ideas, see Langdon 
Gilkey, On Niebuhr: A Theological Study (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2001), 33f. On Jewish Marxist Zionists, see David J. Goldberg, To The 
Promised Land: A History of Zionist Thought (London: Penguin, 1996), 113-
134.  
23. Niebuhr, “Jews after the War,” 137. 
Niebuhr viewed Israel as an outpost of western civilization 
in the Middle East. Indeed, this seems to have become 
intertwined for him with the idea of a Jewish refuge from 
persecution as Israel’s raison d’être. As primary spokesman of 
the American Christian Palestine Committee, Niebuhr favored 
free immigration, unlimited settlement by Jews and the 
development of a Jewish majority in Palestine empowered to 
establish a democratic government. He advocated that 
Palestine should be “set aside for the Jews,” and that the Arabs 
should be “otherwise compensated.” It is vital to understand 
this through the prism of Niebuhr’s own German descent, which 
enabled him to have contact with German Zionists during the 
Nazi era. This deepens the impact of his painful acknowl-
edgement to American Jews that he was ashamed that “an 
allegedly Christian civilization” could stoop to the level of 
systemic anti-Semitism.24 What surfaces is awareness of the 
deep cultural link between western Europe and the United 
States. Proper appreciation of this very American sentiment is 
necessary to grasp the importance for Niebuhr of Israel as 
carrier of western civilization, specifically one not tainted by the 
currents that fed Nazi ideology.  
 
In order to defend Christian realism and advance the 
Zionist cause, he founded the journal Christianity and Crisis, 
soberly telling his American audience that the Nazi regime 
really intended to annihilate the Jewish people and to destroy 
Christianity as well. In 1942, forty mainline church leaders and 
scholars, including Niebuhr, formed the Christian Council for 
Palestine to support Zionism. On January 10, 1946, Niebuhr 
appeared before the Joint Anglo-American Committee of 
Inquiry, formed after the war ended, on behalf of the Christian 
Council for Palestine, making the following statement:  
 
There is in fact no solution to any political problem. The 
fact, however, that the Arabs have a vast hinterland in 
                                                          
24. Niebuhr, “Jews after the War,” 137. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 6  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
the Middle East, and the fact that the Jews have 
nowhere to go establishes the relative justice of their 
claims and of their cause.25  
 
 
He supported transfer of Arabs out of Palestine, 
including Herbert Hoover’s idea that they should be resettled in 
Iraq.26 Building upon the critical defense of democracy as the 
only seriously viable form of government that he had developed 
in his 1944 book The Children of Light and the Children of 
Darkness, Niebuhr then continued:  
 
Christians are committed to democracy as the only 
safeguard of the sacredness of human personality…The 
opposition to a Jewish Palestine is partly based on the 
opposition of Arabs to democracy, western culture, 
education and economic freedom. To support Arab 
opposition is but supporting feudalism and Fascism in 
the world at the expense of democratic rights and 
justice.27  
 
 
Whilst Niebuhr did not explain what he meant by 
“fascism,” the available historical evidence strongly suggests 
that he has in mind the active support for Hitler, the Shoah and 
instigation of Arab attacks on Zionist Jews in Palestine by Haj 
Muhammad Hamin al-Husseini, appointed the Grand Mufti of 
Jerusalem in 1921 by Sir Herbert Samuels, the British 
                                                          
                                                          
25. Merkley, Politics, 171, citing “Statement to Anglo-American Committee of 
Inquiry,” Reinhold Niebuhr Papers, Library of Congress; also, Central Zionist 
Archives/box F40/file no. 59; both references in Merkley, Politics, 201, fn. 34. 
26. Raphael Medoff, “Communication: A Further Note on the ‘Unconventional 
Zionism’ of Reinhold Niebuhr,” Studies in Zionism 12, no. 1 (1991): 85-88. 
The British Labour Party also supported transfer. 
27. Niebuhr, “Statement”; cf. Reinhold Niebuhr, The Children of Light and the 
Children of Darkness: A Vindication of Democracy and a Critique of Its 
Traditional Defense (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1944), 84-104. 
governor.28 There are no other serious explanations possible 
for Niebuhr’s use of the term “fascism” here. The fact that 
Niebuhr would later complain of the Eisenhower Adminis-
tration’s combined influence with the USSR in the United 
Nations to keep General Nasser in power in Egypt and carry on 
with “Nazi measures,” i.e. intention to destroy Israel, corro-
borates this judgment.29  
 
 
 
In 1947 Britain followed Ernest Bevin’s advice and 
referred the issue of Palestine to the United Nations. In 
November of that year, the UN passed a resolution calling for 
the land to be partitioned into Jewish and Arab states─the first 
instance of a “two-state solution.” Britain was to evacuate the 
land by May 1948. Niebuhr supported this two-state solution 
against the idea of a binational state, which was popular with 
Mainline Protestants as well as Jewish anti-Zionist intellectuals 
such as Martin Buber and Hannah Arendt. 
 
 
The decision of the United Nations Assembly to partition 
Palestine and to create a Jewish and an Arab state brings 
several interesting and perplexing chapters of contemporary 
history to a conclusion. On the purely political level it represents 
the first real achievement of the United Nations…The “right” of 
the Jews to Palestine is established partly by the urgency of the 
problem of their collective survival and partly by ancient claims 
and hopes which found their classical expression before the 
Jewish dispersion…The right of the Arabs is quite simply…the 
 
28. See Jeffrey Herf, “Convergence - The Classic Case: Nazi Germany, Anti-
Semitism and Anti-Zionism during World War II,” Journal of Israeli History 25, 
no. 1: (March 2006): 63-83. 
29. Reinhold Niebuhr, “Seven Great Errors of US Foreign Policy,” The New 
Leader 24-31 (December 1956): 3-5. On Niebuhr and Mainline Protestants in 
relation to post-war US foreign policy, see William Inboden, Religion and 
American Foreign Policy, 1945-1960: The Soul of Containment (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2008).  
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 7  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
right of holding what one has and has had for over a thousand 
years.30  
 
          He went on to say that the Arabs lagged behind the Jews 
in terms of cultural development, such that “this whole Near 
Eastern world has fallen from the glory where the same lands, 
which now maintain only a miserable pastoral economy, 
supported the great empires in which civilization arose.” In 
response to the argument for a binational state, Niebuhr simply 
pointed out that the United Nations had already rejected this 
“primarily because the Arabs were unwilling to grant the Jews 
any freedom of immigration in such a bi-national state.”31  
 
 
Niebuhr defended Israel’s wars against its Arab 
neighbors as defensive wars against intentions to annihilate the 
Jewish state.32 Commenting on Israel’s victory against the 
attack of its Arab neighbors upon it as soon as it had declared 
independence, Niebuhr said:  
 
It now seems probable that the new state of Israel will 
be able to establish itself the hard way, by an armed 
defense of its existence against Arab attacks…The 
Arabs were, of course, intent upon preventing this new 
political force from challenging their sovereignty, and 
also their pastoral-feudal social organization…One 
cannot speak of this victory as a morally unambiguous 
one. No political victory can be so described.33  
                                                          
                                                          
30. Reinhold Niebuhr, “The Partition of Palestine,” Christianity and Society 13 
(Winter 1948): 3-4.  
31. Reinhold Niebuhr, editorial note, Christianity and Crisis 8 (March 15, 
1948): 30.  
32. For a lucid defense of Israel’s wars as necessary to defend the country’s 
very existence, see Yaacov Lozowicz, Right to Exist: A Moral Defense of 
Israel’s Wars (New York: Anchor Books, 2003).  
33. Reinhold Niebuhr, “The Future of Israel,” Messenger 13 (June 8, 1948): 
12.  
         He recognized that Christian missionaries to Middle 
Eastern Arabs had opposed Zionist goals as “unjust invasions 
of the rights and securities of the Arab world.”34 At the same 
time, he wanted America to lift its embargo on supplying 
Zionists with arms, noting that army strategists opposed it for 
fear of an Arab embargo on oil. Niebuhr seems to have been 
willing for America to risk losing oil for the sake of arming the 
Zionists (cryptically saying that lifting the arms embargo would 
allow Arab self-defense to be organized). He believed such a 
policy “would have more meaning in preventing a larger war.”35
 
 
The plight of the Arab refugees who fled or were driven 
out during 1947-1949 concerned Niebuhr, who saw it as a 
tragic outcome of the foundation of Israel. He was aware of 
missionary reports of atrocities never reported in American 
newspapers.36 In 1951, he endorsed a proposal to resettle 
these refugees in the surrounding countries, in areas that were 
controlled by the United Nations. The proposal also included 
the development of waterways and other material resources in 
those Arab countries. The funding would have come from Israel 
and other United Nations member states. The Arab countries 
refused this offer.37 Raphael Medoff provides evidence that the 
prominent American Zionist leader, Rabbi Stephen Wise, 
privately thanked Niebuhr for publicly supporting the idea of 
Arab transfer. Jews could not articulate this view publicly for 
fear of reprisals. Medoff suggests that Niebuhr’s support for 
transfer was part of what Naveh calls his “anti-utopian 
liberalism,” as well as being part of the post-war ethos by which 
the superpowers effected the transfer of Germans from Eastern 
 
34. Reinhold Niebuhr, “Christians and the State of Israel,” Christianity and 
Society 14, no. 3 (1949): 3. 
35. Reinhold Niebuhr, “Palestine,” Christianity and Society 13 (Winter 1948): 
5.  
36. Reinhold Niebuhr, “Christians and the State of Israel,” 3, 4.  
37. “$800, 000, 000 asked for Arab refugees,” New York Times (December 
19, 1951): 1, 20, cited in Brown, Niebuhr and His Age, 142.  
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 8  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
European countries for the sake of peace.38 Critics may argue 
that Niebuhr’s support for the foundation of Israel, even of a 
two-state solution, constituted a flight into idealism, but it is 
consistent with his threefold realism. The combination of 
European anti-Semitic persecution and Arab hostility had 
pushed Niebuhr to a morally and politically realist support for 
Zionism alongside liberal Jewish assimilation in the Diaspora. 
 
 
Responding to the Suez Crisis of the mid-1950’s, Niebuhr 
consolidated his support for Israel’s survival as a Jewish-
majority state. The central issue was saving Israel from 
annihilation by its Arab neighbors, especially by Egypt under 
Nasser. Niebuhr never let go of this central moral goal. He 
argued that the very existence of Israel was offensive to the 
Arab world for three reasons. First, Niebuhr argued that “it has 
claimed by conquest what the Arabs regard as their soil.” 
However, this is simplistic reasoning. The early Zionists legally 
purchased land from absentee Arab landlords during the time 
of Turkish and later British rule. Niebuhr may be conflating this 
with the flight and expulsion of Palestinians in 1947-1949.39 He 
believed that the second reason Israel’s existence was 
offensive to the Arabs was his own discovery that the Arab 
states refused to resettle these refugees, and that Israel could 
not reabsorb them without endangering its security as the 
refugees were intrinsically hostile. This problem continues to 
this day. Niebuhr believed that the third reason for Arab hostility 
to Israel was the strongest.  
 
 
The state of Israel is, by its very technical efficiency and 
democratic justice, a source of danger to the moribund feudal 
or pastoral economics and monarchical political forms of the 
                                                          
                                                          
38. Raphael Medoff, “Communication,” 88. 
39. See Benny Morris, The Birth of the Palestinian Refugee Problem 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).  
Islamic world and a threat to the rich overlords of desperately 
poor peasants of the Middle East.40  
 
 
He believed that the survival of Israel “may require 
detailed economic strategies for the whole region and policies 
for the resettlement of Arab refugees.” Recommending 
economic development as a remedy for Arab grievances 
against Zionism was ironic given that in his visit to the USSR in 
1930, Niebuhr had worried that industrial efficiency was 
elevated above other values.41 His approach to the Arab 
question betrays lingering traces of his employment of certain 
Marxist concepts originally used to criticize the Social Gospel 
movement for its progressivist view of history.42 Stone gives a 
thorough analysis of Niebuhr’s engagement with Marxism. He 
argues that “some ideas from his Marxist philosophy remain” in 
his later writings “but they have found independent justification 
in his thought.”43 Niebuhr’s hope for economic development 
also was naive in ignoring the fact that the process of Israel’s 
foundation dealt not only a socio-economic blow to Palestinian 
Arabs, but constituted Jewish emancipation from centuries of 
Islamic rule over territory claimed by Islam.44  
 
Finally, Niebuhr compared the Six Day War to the combat 
between David and Goliath. Like many other observers, 
Niebuhr understood the war as motivated by a serious intention 
 
40. Reinhold Niebuhr, “Our Stake in the State of Israel,” New Republic 136 
(February 4, 1957): 9-12.  
41. Ronald H. Stone, Reinhold Niebuhr: Prophet to Politicians (Washington, 
DC: University Press of America, 1981), 61.  
42. Stone, Reinhold Niebuhr, 55. 
43. Stone, Reinhold Niebuhr, 91. 
44. Hyam Maccoby, Antisemitism and Modernity: Innovation and Continuity 
(London/New York: Routledge, 2006), “Muslim Antisemitism,”150. On 
Palestinian support for Zionism, see Hillel Cohen, Army of Shadows: 
Palestinian Collaboration with Zionism, 1917-1948 (Berkeley, California: 
University of California Press, 2008). 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 9  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
by Israel’s neighbors to annihilate it. He bluntly proclaimed that 
“a nation that knows it is in danger of strangulation will use its 
fists.” At the same time, the survival of Israel was “a strategic 
anchor for a democratic world” and “an asset to America’s 
national interests in the Middle East.”45 This “special rela-
tionship” was to be cloaked in the theologically ambiguous 
notion of national messianism.  
 
3. America as a Messianic Nation 
 
Niebuhr drew on the myth of America’s election, which 
stretches back to the colonial era of US history, to forge his 
notion of America as a messianic nation with a mission. This 
myth of America as “God’s New Israel” has been expressed in 
two different versions.46 The first claims that God called people 
out of the old nations to America, which, from the Puritan period 
onwards, became the “Promised Land” given to this people and 
their descendants as a place suitable for the growth of a free 
society. America was to be “a light unto the nations,” an 
example of a free society for other nations to emulate. Drawing 
on Puritan roots, this version was important in the American 
Revolution and lies at the root of isolationist tendencies in 
American politics. The second version expresses the belief  
that America is required to spread the fundamental values 
enshrined in the Bill of Rights and to spread democracy 
globally. This underlay nineteenth and twentieth century 
American Christian missions and has influenced generations of 
American foreign policy. Cherry argues that it has “unlovely 
manifestations” such as imperialism concealing national self-
interest and the myth of Anglo-Saxon superiority.47 Niebuhr’s 
sense of American messianism is a critical reworking of this 
                                                          
45. Reinhold Niebuhr, “David and Goliath,” Christianity and Crisis 27 (June 
26, 1967): 141. 
46. Conrad Cherry, God’s New Israel: Religious Interpretations of American 
Destiny (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1998), 19.  
47. Cherry, God’s New Israel, 20.  
second version, one that he did not originally espouse. His 
theology of American messianism was not closely tied to or 
driven by active interest in American Christian missions 
abroad.48  
 
Early on, Niebuhr had taken a similar view to Berle in 
viewing the Jews rather than Americans as a messianic people. 
This was because they embodied for him the values of the 
Social Gospel movement better than did Protestants. The 
Social Gospel movement promised redemption within history 
through moral progress.49 The reason Niebuhr dropped the   
link between Messianism and Jews was his encounter with 
Orthodox Jews who regarded literal Messianism as blas-
phemous. This coincided with Niebuhr’s disenchantment with 
the whole idea of the Social Gospel as built on an overly benign 
understanding of human nature.50 In Moral Man and Immoral 
Society, Niebuhr denied that the Kingdom of God would ever 
be brought to earth.51 This represented a clear repudiation of 
the postmillennialism of the Social Gospellers, or the premillen-
nialism of the Evangelicals and Fundamentalists. Niebuhr never 
demurred from this conclusion, and this also explains why he 
remained silent about any possible theological significance to 
                                                          
48. By contrast many other American Mainline Protestants connected foreign 
missions and foreign policy. See James H. Moorhead, “The American Israel: 
Protestant Tribalism and Universal Mission,” in Many Are Chosen: Divine 
Election and Western Nationalism, ed. William R. Hutchison and Hartmut 
Lehmann (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1994), 145-166. Niebuhr repudiated 
Christian mission to Jews in a sermon preached on 10 January 1926. This 
discovery was made by Dieter Splinter and is recorded in Franklin H. Littell, 
“Reinhold Niebuhr and the Jewish People,” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 
6, no. 1 (1991): 45-61, citing the Reinhold Niebuhr papers, Library of 
Congress, Container XIV, 1, Folder 15. 
49. Reinhold Niebuhr, Leaves from the Notebooks of a Tamed Cynic (New 
York: Willett Clark and Co., 1929), 187-188.  
50. Reinhold Niebuhr, “The Return of Primitive Religion,” Christendom 3 
(Winter 1938): 1, 6.  
51. Reinhold Niebuhr, Moral Man and Immoral Society (New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, 1932), 19-21. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 10  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
the foundation of Israel in 1948 or its victory in the Six Day War, 
as these were regarded by premillennialists as the fulfillment   
of Biblical prophecy and as signposts towards the coming 
millennial kingdom.  
 
 
  The Social Gospel movement held that Israel’s end had 
come in the universalism of the Christian religion, reiterating the 
traditional 
Christian 
understanding 
of 
Israel’s 
national 
supersession.52 Nevertheless it was impossible for any subse-
quent nation to be the exact counterpart to ancient Israel. 
James H. Moorhead articulates this attempt at balancing 
notions of Israel’s and America’s election:  
 
 
Individual nations might, by providential circumstances, 
play a unique role in the advancement of God’s purposes, and 
the Israel of the Old Testament might function as a paradigm 
for the righteous nation in covenant with God. In this sense, 
analogies between America and Israel were deemed legitimate 
and were frequently made; the comparison, however, could 
never be exact.53  
 
 
What Moorhead does not demonstrate is that the 
difficulty of making and sustaining the analogy is due to the fact 
that whilst Israel’s election is a doctrine rooted in traditions of 
biblical exegesis, notions of America’s election obviously 
cannot be directly based on exegesis, but are built upon 
speculative providential interpretations of American history. 
Failure to make this distinction is also a problem in Niebuhr’s 
own writing on the subject. In his 1943 article “Anglo-Saxon 
Destiny,” Niebuhr spoke of America as a nation with a mission 
to spread democracy and international justice around the globe. 
This was required by the new Anglo-American alliance which 
“must be the cornerstone of any durable world order;” its 
                                                          
                                                          
52. Moorhead, “The American Israel,” 149. 
53. Moorhead, “The American Israel,” 149. 
position was only intelligible for Niebuhr as a manifestation of 
“destiny.”54 Fleshing out the ethical implications, he compared 
Amos’ view that Israel’s destiny as elect gave it a “special peril,” 
not a “special security,” to America’s supposed destiny as 
chosen. “God has chosen America in this fateful period of world 
history…The real fact is that we are placed in a precarious 
moral and historical position by our special mission.”55 Here 
Niebuhr’s notion of America’s being “chosen” by God seems to 
be a belief in temporary rather than eternal election, as well as 
based on a political and cultural rationale rather than an 
inscrutable divine decree. This is evident from the fact that 
Niebuhr utilized the notions of “chosenness” and “destiny” to 
account for the fact of Anglo-American global power and 
influence.  
 
Niebuhr’s writings from the post-war period leave the 
door open for the national supersession of Israel, i.e. its 
replacement by another nation in the providential divine 
economy. This is closely tied to the aforementioned increasing 
tendency to view America as a chosen nation. In the winter of 
1948, Niebuhr questioned whether the Jewish prophets’ 
universal salvific vision betrayed the Jewish claim to the 
Land.56 However, he did not support this with an exegetical 
argument that could have opened up ecumenical and interfaith 
dialogue on the issue.57 Addressing the First General Assembly 
of the World Council of Churches, he spoke of the task of 
Christian mission to entire nations, noting that “Jesus wept over 
Jerusalem and regretted that it did not know the things that 
 
54. In Christianity and Crisis 3 (October 4, 1943), reprinted in Cherry, God’s 
New Israel, 296. 
55. Niebuhr, “Anglo-Saxon Destiny,” 3. 
56. Niebuhr, “The Partition of Palestine,” 3.  
57. Niebuhr has been criticized for not really engaging in exegetical 
discussion in his ethics. See Jeffrey S. Siker, Scripture and Ethics: Twentieth-
Century Portraits (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997). 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 11  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
belonged to its peace.”58 This wording echoes the Lucan 
account of the Lament over Jerusalem.59 This is an odd choice, 
given that he included no discussion of parallel Lucan 
passages readable as references to the sack of Jerusalem, the 
end of Gentile rule over it and final Jewish acceptance of 
Jesus. Niebuhr only reiterated traditional Christian teaching that 
the second Jewish exile was a punishment for rejecting Jesus, 
without introducing the hope and promise of a second return. 
By not grounding his support for Jewish return theologically, he 
left the door open for covert and overt Christian views that 
Jewish return was unjustified. 
  
In his 1963 volume, A Nation So Conceived, Niebuhr 
unashamedly says that America is a messianic nation. Most of 
the nations, in Western culture at least, have acquired a sense 
of national mission at some time in their history. Our nation was 
born with it. England acquired it after the Revolution of 1688 
and viewed the Magna Carta retrospectively in the light of its 
newly developed democratic mission. Russian messianism was 
derived from its consciousness of being the “third Rome.” Like 
Israel of old, we were a messianic nation from our birth. The 
Declaration of Independence and our Constitution defined the 
mission. We were born to exemplify the virtues of democracy 
and to extend the frontiers of the principles of self-government 
throughout the world.60
 
 
He does not acknowledge that these older nations’ 
sense of mission derived from national supersession of ancient 
Israel. Niebuhr does not provide an adequate understanding of 
                                                          
58. Reinhold Niebuhr, “The Christian Witness in the Social and National 
Order,” in his Christian Realism and Political Problems (London: Faber & 
Faber, 1956), 112.  
59. Lk 19: 41-44. 
60. Reinhold Niebuhr, A Nation So Conceived: Reflections on the History of 
America from Its Early Vision to Its Present Power (London: Faber & Faber, 
1963), 123.  
the convergence and divergence between older European and 
American notions of national election to a mission. His failure to 
provide theological and exegetical warrant for American 
messianism is a problem, because omission of theological and 
exegetical sources for his position deprived him of the 
possibility of connection and debate with other western 
Christian and Jewish notions of messianism. These include 
various interpretations of the Messiah and/or Israel as God’s 
suffering servant (based on Isaiah 53), Christian belief that 
Jesus is the Messiah anticipated by the Jewish prophets, the 
succession of Jewish individuals claiming to be the Messiah 
through the centuries, political hopes for a Messianic Age, and 
hopes that a contemporary restored Israel would be a 
messianic nation.61 Given his critique of religion in relation to 
nationalism, Niebuhr would not have endorsed religious 
Messianic strands of Zionism.62  
 
Niebuhr’s view of Israel as an outpost of western 
civilization in the Middle East is linked to its being a democracy, 
an important element of his understanding of America. He 
observed that the “messianic consciousness” of America was 
“very robust” because of the covenant in the Constitution, as 
well as Puritan millenarian and Enlightenment influence. 
America would fulfill the Reformation of Christendom. The 
notion that America’s national mission was to safeguard 
republican democracy became part of the deep fabric of 
national consciousness, encapsulated by Woodrow Wilson’s 
view of the First World War as intended “to make the world safe 
                                                          
61. For a comprehensive survey of Jewish forms of messianism, see Dan 
Cohn-Sherbok, The Jewish Messiah (Edinburgh: T & T Clark, 1997). For 
studies on biblical material and the early centuries of the Common Era, see 
William Horbury, Messianism among Jews and Christians: Twelve Biblical 
and Historical Studies (London: T & T Clark, 2003). On pre-Enlightenment 
Jewish methods of calculating the coming of the Messiah, see Abba Hillel 
Silver, A History of Messianic Speculation in Israel: From the First through the 
Seventeenth Century (New York: Macmillan, 1927). 
62. Cohn-Sherbok, The Jewish Messiah, 153-158. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 12  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
for Democracy.”63 However, Niebuhr warned that such a 
missionary and messianic self-belief can be confusing, because 
nations then hide from themselves “the will to power” that they 
posses, behind “the veil of ideal purposes.” The danger is that 
the nation conceives of its mission purely in terms of its original 
content, a comment that reflected his strong pragmatism. 
Nevertheless, with a self-confidence that many today would find 
difficult, Niebuhr said that “fortunately the substance and 
content of our national sense of mission, namely the presser-
vation and extension of democratic self-government, is more 
valid than other forms of national messianism.”64  
 
Niebuhr was also troubled by Wilson’s view of the war 
because Wilson omitted to give clear notions of how democracy 
may be universally valid and neglected to inquire “in what 
sense it was an achievement of European culture, requiring 
political skills and resources which may be beyond the reach of 
primitive or traditional cultures.”65 Still relevant is Niebuhr’s 
question as to whether all countries have “the elementary 
preconditions of community, the cohesions of a common 
language and race,” which helped prepare the way for 
democracy in Europe. The question loomed large over whether 
and to what degree traditional cultures had acquired the skills 
to “put political freedom in the service of justice.” Finally, 
Niebuhr was aware that around the world, peoples “desire 
national freedom, but have no knowledge of, or desire for, 
individual freedom except as it has validated itself as a servant 
of justice and community.”66 With regard to Palestinian 
nationalism as well as Israel’s other neighbors, this continues to 
be a serious theological, ethical and political question.  
                                                          
                                                          
63. Niebuhr, A Nation So Conceived, 126.  
64. Niebuhr, A Nation So Conceived, 127.  
65. Niebuhr, A Nation So Conceived, 139ff.  
66. Niebuhr, A Nation So Conceived, 150.  
        Ultimately Niebuhr’s cautions about American messian-
ism ring hollow when applied to Israel because he perpetuated 
national supersessionism. As long as American Mainline Pro-
testant theology ignores the doctrines of election and 
providence in relation to Israel, it will also be incapable of 
repairing this problem. These factors combined to open the 
door to something that Niebuhr himself would not have wanted, 
namely one of his students suggesting removal of Jews from 
the Middle East, should support for Israel conflict with American 
interests.67 This brings us to inquire into the adequacy of 
Niebuhr’s theology for supporting his ethics. 
 
4. Natural Theology as the Basis of Niebuhr’s Ethics 
 
Niebuhr’s ethics is undergirded by a natural theology,68 
meaning, a realist acceptance of the world external to the 
psyche that is bound up with a religious acceptance of 
transcendence, creation and historical events. In order to 
understand this, though, we must first understand his theology 
of revelation. This presumes the classic Christian distinction 
between natural and dogmatic theology, or in Niebuhr’s terms, 
general and special revelation. General revelation is learned 
from observation and is constituted by experiences that are 
inescapable in worldly terms. These experiences lead one to 
comprehend the presence of a transcendental reality, leading 
to a sense of moral obligation, a desire to be forgiven and a 
sense of awe and dependence. Special revelation is required to 
illumine general revelation. Forms of special revelation cor-
relate with the three elements of general revelation. The sense 
of moral obligation corresponds to Yahweh’s covenantal 
relation with Israel, and the human desire to be forgiven with 
the life and death of Jesus Christ. Both “answers” to the human 
 
67. Ronald H. Stone, Prophetic Realism: Beyond Militarism and Pacifism in 
an Age of Terror (New York/London: T & T Clark/Continuum, 2005), 163-64. 
68. This is set out in Niebuhr’s The Nature and Destiny of Man: A Christian 
Interpretation (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1941), I: 141-160.  
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 13  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
moral sense and desire respectively are historical events in 
which the eyes of faith perceive divine self-revelation and 
demonstrate God as Judge and Redeemer. The human sense 
of awe and dependence grows from perceiving God as the 
Creator.69
 
 
Niebuhr also expresses the distinction between general 
and special revelation (and therefore natural and dogmatic 
theology) more politically as private versus public revelation. 
Public revelation is historical and corrects the ambiguities of 
general or private revelation. However, private revelation came 
first historically and is bound up with apprehension of external 
reality. There is a dialectical relationship between public and 
private revelation. This experience is what enables people “to 
entertain the more precise revelations of the character and 
purpose of God as they come to them in the most significant 
experiences of prophetic history.”70 The nature and significance 
of this political division between the two forms of revelation has 
not been noted by Niebuhr’s critics. It is part of his overall 
repudiation of mysticism and pietism as anti-political and, as 
such, irresponsible. Clearly, for him, the history of ancient Israel 
constituted public or special revelation, yet he does not seem to 
view the rise of modern Zionism as its continuation. 
 
 
Two major contemporary Christian readers of Niebuhr, 
Robert Song and Stanley Hauerwas, have criticized the natural 
                                                          
                                                          
69. Noting that for Niebuhr these historical events are the key to history’s 
meaning, Robert Song correctly refutes Paul Ramsey’s charge that Niebuhr’s 
theology was simply derived from anthropology. Robert Song, Christianity and 
Liberal Society (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997), 54, citing Paul 
Ramsey, Speak up for Just War or Pacifism: A Critique of the United 
Methodist Bishops’ Pastoral Letter “In Defense of Creation” (University Park, 
Pa.: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1988), 114.  
70. Reinhold Niebuhr, The Nature and Destiny of Man I: 127, 70.  
theology that underlies his ethics.71 Song finds it insufficiently 
Trinitarian, and therefore inadequate for generating a proper 
Christian ethic and defending the meaningfulness of history. He 
thinks that Niebuhr declined to use the strongest theological 
case for this, namely a full account of the Incarnation as the 
divine assumption of human flesh.72 Turning to Niebuhr’s 
eschatology, Song argues that its structure, coupled with 
Niebuhr’s reluctance to espouse a doctrine of the general 
resurrection, means that his theology “is ultimately focused not 
on God, but on the project of giving significance to human 
finitude,” and in particular to prompting people to “accept their 
historical responsibilities gladly.”73 In other words, ethics and 
politics are driving theology. Song concludes that Niebuhr’s 
God is “more a principle of transcendence than the living God 
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.”74 Song thus unsubtly assumes 
that a theology that is not fully Trinitarian cannot be a witness to 
the God of the Old Testament; rather, it is necessarily reduced 
to being a philosophy.  
 
At the root of Song’s criticism is inattention to Niebuhr’s 
Hebraic turn to the Old Testament as source for Christian 
realist ethics, in contradistinction to what he perceived as the 
unworldly asceticism of Jesus. Niebuhr taught his students that 
the Old Testament had given rise to two ethical tendencies: 
prophetic messianism, fulfilled by Christianity, and legalism, 
which he believed to have been both resurrected by secular 
Jewish Zionism as well as fulfilled in the coming of Christ and 
 
71. Song, Christianity and Liberal Society, 114; Stanley Hauerwas, With the 
Grain of the Universe: The Church’s Witness and Natural Theology (London: 
SCM, 2002), 115-116, n. 6.  
72. Song, Christianity and Liberal Society, 79.  
73. Song, Christianity and Liberal Society, 82, citing Reinhold Niebuhr, The 
Nature and Destiny of Man, II: 332. 
74. Song, Christianity and Liberal Society, 83. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 14  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
the eschatological promise of universal peace.75 Jesus himself 
was for Niebuhr “presented more as a messianic figure rather 
than as a teacher of ethics.”76 There is a sharp distinction 
between the perceived legalism and realism of the Old 
Testament, and the prophetic messianism and unworldly 
asceticism of Jesus and the New Testament on the other. 
Essentially, Niebuhr wants to say that legalism was fulfilled 
both in the coming of Christ and in secular Jewish Zionism. His 
belief that Jews do not need to become Christians meant that 
he was unlikely to use the doctrine of the Trinity to undergird 
his support for Zionism, e.g. by arguing that its legalism was 
part of a hidden work of Christ as fulfillment of the Old 
Testament law. Niebuhr’s reluctance to use the doctrine of the 
Trinity a lot is probably also due to apologetic reserve, deemed 
necessary when speaking publicly about matters of social 
justice with non-Christians, including and especially Jews.  
 
 
In his Gifford Lectures on Niebuhr, Stanley Hauerwas 
makes the charge that Niebuhr’s “god” was merely William 
James’ sense that “there must be more.”77 Hauerwas thinks 
Niebuhr has not adequately responded to Gustave Weigel. 
Weigel had criticized Niebuhr for believing in the Trinity 
“symbolically but not literally,” accusing him of believing that the 
Trinity is little more than an idea attempting to describe our 
“experience” of God. Hauerwas expresses surprise that in his 
pastoral work, Niebuhr did “use trinitarian language without 
apology.”78 He refuses to take Niebuhr entirely at his word 
when he wrote that he was incompetent in “nice points of pure 
                                                          
                                                          
75. Ronald H. Stone, Professor Reinhold Niebuhr: A Mentor to the Twentieth 
Century (Louisville, Ky.: Westminster John Knox Press, 1992), 58ff. 
76. Stone, Professor Reinhold Niebuhr, 62. 
77. Hauerwas, With the Grain of the Universe, 122.  
78. Hauerwas, With the Grain of the Universe, 128, n. 31, citing Reinhold 
Niebuhr, “The Hazards and the Difficulties of the Christian Ministry,” in Justice 
and Mercy, ed. Reinhold Niebuhr and Ursula M. Niebuhr (New York and 
London: Harper & Row, 1974), 129-130.  
theology.”79 The reason is that he insists that Niebuhr really 
assumes these are “Jamesian over-beliefs that cannot be true 
or false.” This is necessary for Hauerwas’ “Barthian” strategy of 
rendering Niebuhr a Feuerbachian whose theology is really 
reducible to anthropology. Hauerwas later makes the revealing 
admission that Niebuhr’s doctrine of creation signifies that “the 
world in its totality [is] a revelation of His majesty and self-
sufficient power.”80
 
        Niebuhr observes, and I confess I have never under-stood 
what he means, that the biblical doctrine of creation is itself not 
a doctrine of revelation but the basis for the doctrine of 
revelation. He attempts to explain this claim by observing that 
the doctrine of creation perfectly expresses the basic biblical 
idea that God is at once transcendent and in an intimate 
relation to the world. But why do you need the doctrine of 
creation to express the transcendence and immanence of God? 
All you need is [William] James’s account of the “more.”81  
 
What Niebuhr most likely means is that the doctrine of 
creation expresses his notion of general revelation, and that our 
apprehension of special revelation (what Hauerwas calls in 
Barthian fashion “the doctrine of revelation”) depends on our 
prior acceptance of general revelation in history. Hauerwas is 
being both mischievous and cynical when he proceeds, despite 
professing not to understand Niebuhr on this matter, to defend 
to the hilt his view that Niebuhr is only really a Jamesian. This 
is his way of discrediting Niebuhr for adhering to a natural 
theology. It should be obvious that “the Jamesian ‘more’” is not 
enough for Niebuhr, because he does not want to support 
mystical and pietistic versions of Christianity with their desertion 
of history and politics. This is why he cites Romans 1:20 to 
 
79. Hauerwas, With the Grain of the Universe, 114. 
80. Niebuhr, The Nature and Destiny of Man, I: 132.   
81. Hauerwas, With the Grain of the Universe, 123, n. 22. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 15  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
defend his dialectical notion of revelation as both private and 
public, which Hauerwas himself cites! The relevance of 
Hauerwas’ critique of Niebuhr for Zionism is that Hauerwas 
wants to set up a parallel with the debate between Karl Barth 
and Emil Brunner on natural theology in the 1930s.82 Hauerwas 
plays the role of Barth with Niebuhr cast as Brunner. This has 
obvious political resonance, because whilst Barth feared that 
Brunner’s theology could be used in complicity with the anti-
Semitic and anti-Zionist Nazi regime in the 1930’s, Hauerwas’ 
tendency is to worry that Niebuhr’s natural theology is used to 
underwrite certain kinds of Christian ethical support for the 
American state and notions of western civilization.83
 
 
Robert Song argues that Niebuhr’s theology is dubious 
because it is serving “the less than ethical requirements of 
civilization.”84 This requires further elaboration, for the concept 
of civilization can be linked back to a reading of Genesis as 
being concerned with the twin rise of agriculture and civilization. 
In reality, both Genesis and historical research show that 
agriculture and civilization rose together, and are thus ethically 
intertwined. Debates over the foundation of contemporary Israel 
included debates about the viability of developing Israeli 
agriculture. This matters theologically because in speaking of 
the return of the Jews to the Land, Ezekiel speaks of the 
Gentiles saying, “This land that was desolate has become like 
the Garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined 
towns are now inhabited and fortified.”85 This is how the Gentile 
nations will know that the God of Israel is the Lord of all 
                                                          
82. Hauerwas, With the Grain of the Universe, 115-116, n. 6; 123, n. 23. 
83. The fact that Niebuhr supported Zionism on the basis of his natural 
theology, whereas Barth supported Zionism on the basis of a doctrine of 
election and opposition to the kind of natural theology espoused by Niebuhr, 
goes unnoticed by Hauerwas. See Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics III/3 
(London & New York: T & T Clark, 2004), 211-226.   
84. Song, Christianity and Liberal Society, 84. 
85. Ez 36: 35.  
creation. Eden is here a type of the Land of Israel. As a garden, 
it is inextricably linked to the project of civilization. Song’s 
critique misses the real problem, which is lack of serious 
attention to the very concept of civilization by Christian 
ethicists. Niebuhr would have been very suspicious of its 
rejection, given his lifelong view that America is “spiritually a 
part of Europe,” and that the fall of European civilization would 
adversely affect it.86 Christian ethics would in his eyes need to 
absolve itself of the charge of retreat into the sphere of the 
church as community of virtue.  
 
 
The “Barthian” rhetoric of Song and Hauerwas’ criticisms 
promises more than it actually delivers. Unlike Niebuhr’s 
contemporaries, these critics show little awareness of Niebuhr’s 
Hebraic turn. Also, Song and Hauerwas are respectively British 
and American ethicists unhappy with any Christian ethic that 
will support “civilization” and the state. In practice it means that 
Niebuhr tends to be repudiated on methodological grounds 
without an adequate appreciation of the link between his 
method and his substantive commitments. 
  
Niebuhr saw Jewish nationhood as one of the oldest and 
most legitimate in history, and that it was granted in “a religious 
covenant experience.”87 This contradicts Eyal Naveh’s view 
that Niebuhr’s Zionism was only based on pragmatism.88 It was 
based on respect for an ancestral claim, not on a dogmatic 
belief. Niebuhr argued that Christian doctrines were based on 
“biblical myths” that had universal significance: creation, fall, 
                                                          
86. Reinhold Niebuhr, “America and Europe” in Young Reinhold Niebuhr: His 
Early Writings, 1911-1931, ed. Willam G. Chrystal (New York: The Pilgrim 
Press, 1977), 141. 
87. Reinhold Niebuhr, Discerning the Signs of the Times: Sermons for Today 
and Tomorrow (New York, 1946), 75-76; The Self and the Drama of History 
(New York, 1955), 40, 87; The Structure of Nations and Empires (New York, 
1959), 161-162.  
88. Eyal Naveh, “The Hebraic Foundation of Christian Faith According to 
Reinhold Niebuhr,” Judaism 41, no. 1 (1992): 42. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 16  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
redemption and love. Myth was the dialectical counterpart of 
logic and rationality, expressed as story, proposition, image or 
symbol, grasping “the world as a realm of coherence and 
meaning without denying the facts of incoherence.”89 The 
covenant was not one of these myths. Perhaps he believed that 
its being connected both to the particular history of ancient 
Israel and to the church threatened to disrupt the universal 
appeal and intent of his apologetic theology. Proof of this is 
found in his book Faith and History, published in 1949, where 
he compares Abraham, the father of the Jewish nation with 
whom Yahweh made His covenant, with Abraham Lincoln as 
the “father” of America,” thus relativizing the uniqueness of the 
Jewish Abraham and of the covenant made with him. He also 
criticizes the Jewish prophets for being unswervingly nation-
alist.90 This echoes his supersessionist shift from Israel to 
America as the messianic nation.  
 
5. The Critique of Natural Law, Nationalism and Religion 
 
Conceiving of Jewishness and Zionism in secular national 
terms enabled Niebuhr to circumvent debates about the 
covenant of righteousness that Christians had traditionally used 
to deny theological validity to Jews returning to the Land before 
first becoming Christians. Niebuhr managed to connect Zionism 
to what he perceived as the ethics of the Old Testament, which 
held nationalism and internationalism in tension. Consequently, 
the texts themselves require a theological realist reading that 
does not claim that the entirety of the divine will for Israel’s 
history can be worked out in advance. Basing Zionism on 
Jewish nationality also enabled Niebuhr to set aside potential 
Christian theological demands for a coherent system justifying 
the movement.  
                                                          
                                                          
89. Naveh, Reinhold Niebuhr and Non-Utopian Liberalism, 34.  
90. Reinhold Niebuhr, Faith and History: A Comparison of Christian and 
Modern Views of History (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1949), 23-24, 
106. 
Niebuhr begins his essay “Coherence, Incoherence and 
Christian Faith” by stating the realist claim that “the whole of 
reality is characterized by a basic coherence. Things and 
events are in a vast web of relationships and are known 
through their relations.”91 He argues that coherence must not 
become the basic test of the truth of an intellectual system for 
four reasons. First, some things and events are unique, and 
thus cannot fit into any system. Unique moral situations exist 
“that don’t simply fit into some general rule of natural law.” We 
may understand the founding of Israel as one such situation, 
given that Niebuhr’s theology did not adequately account for 
the promise of the Land to the Jews and that Niebuhr realized 
that Zionist and Arab claims to the Land clashed. The second 
reason that coherence must not be the main criterion of truth is 
that “realms of coherence and meaning stand in rational 
contradiction to each other.”92 Here he has in mind theo-   
logical doctrines such as Trinity and Christology, philosophical 
attempts to relate being and becoming, essence and existence. 
This gives away Niebuhr’s anti-metaphysical “Hebraic” ten-
dency and shows why he shied away from developing a fully-
fledged systematic theology for his work. Third, some things 
stand above every system, so man is both in and above nature. 
Fourth and related, genuine human freedom does not fit into 
any system. In line with my argument for the first reason given 
above, a fitting instance of this can be seen in the reality of 
Jews declaring independence in 1948 and exercising genuine 
freedom outside the bounds of “Christendom.”  
 
 
Niebuhr’s suspicion of metaphysics accords with a 
reluctance to formulate a doctrine of providence, the doctrine 
Christians often used to deny Jewish aspirations to return to the 
 
91. Reinhold Niebuhr, Christian Realism and Political Problems (London: 
Faber & Faber, 1956), 165. 
92. Niebuhr, Christian Realism, 166. 
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 17  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
Land. 93 Providence could easily be joined to natural law 
thinking to defend the socio-political status quo as based on the 
divine will. John Milbank has criticized Niebuhr for allegedly 
appropriating Stoicism into his reconstruction of natural law.94 
John Burk astutely refutes Milbank on this, noting that Niebuhr 
actually wanted to pull Protestant ethics away from the excess 
of Stoicism found in older orthodoxies.95 This was precisely 
because he perceived “Hellenic” thinking as more cosmic and 
static, less interested in the historical dimensions of human   
life. Niebuhr had already written in 1935 that the law of love 
actually “suggests possibilities which immediately transcend 
any achievements of justice by which society has integrated its 
life.”96 Given that at this time Niebuhr was becoming supportive 
of Zionism, his very support may be viewed as an instance of 
the “law of love” at work. As Burk explains, Milbank erroneously 
understands Niebuhr as positing a conflict between the 
essential (love) and the existential (human life), in a replay of 
the Stoic conflict between what is ideal and what is real. 
Actually what interests Niebuhr are conflicts within the real 
historical realm of human life. This is precisely why his support 
for Zionism cannot be dismissed as a flight into idealism based 
on passionate personal conviction. 
 
 
                                                          
                                                          
93. Niebuhr nevertheless insisted on positing providence in order to remind 
Christians that history is not within our control. However, avoiding a fully-
fledged doctrine comports with his theological realist refusal to understand 
specific events and programs as unfolding a single divine purpose. See his 
“Providence and Human Decisions,” Christianity and Crisis, (January 24, 
1949): 185-186. 
94. John Milbank, “The Poverty of Niebuhrianism” in his The Word Made 
Strange: Theology, Language, Culture (Oxford: Blackwell, 1997), 233-254. 
95. John Burk, “Moral Law, Privative Evil and Christian Realism: 
Reconsidering Milbank’s ‘The Poverty of Niebuhrianism’,” Studies in Christian 
Ethics 22, no. 2 (2009): 221-228.  
96. Burke cites Reinhold Niebuhr, An Interpretation of Christian Ethics (New 
York: Harper & Brothers, 1935), 144.  
Niebuhr’s ethical critique of religion and nationalism aids 
our understanding of his approach to Zionism. He himself 
acknowledged Israel’s right to choose to be a secular or 
religious society. He preferred the former because he feared 
religion’s ability, especially when it was espoused as “true 
belief,” to identify itself with God’s exclusive will on a particular 
issue.97 Niebuhr did not give a theological grounding to his 
ethical criticism of nationalism, because he feared that intro-
ducing religion into the conflict would absolutize the issues and 
render compromise impossible. In other words, it would com-
promise his threefold realism. He became conscious of this in 
the 1930’s when, as part of his reconstruction of natural law 
theory, Niebuhr went beyond Marxism in allowing that the 
interest of the dominant economic classes within nations 
accentuate conflicts, but are not the only reason for them. 
Niebuhr saw the conflict between Jews and Arabs in British 
Mandatory Palestine as an example of such a conflict. There 
were two key factors: the natural will-to-live of two collective 
nationalities and religions; and the economic differences 
between the feudalism of the Arabs and the technical 
civilization which the Jews were able to introduce into 
Palestine.  
 
 
The participants cannot find a common ground of 
rational morality from which to arbitrate the issues because the 
moral judgments which each brings to them are formed by the 
very historical forces which are in conflict. Such conflicts are 
therefore sub- and supra-moral.98
 
  
Niebuhr’s analysis here is clear-sighted, for he 
recognizes the mutually exclusive nature of the each party’s 
claim to the land. He also demonstrates how a realist approach 
would need to be pragmatic, requiring his reconstruction of 
 
97. Niebuhr, Christian Realism and Political Problems, 97-98.  
98. Niebuhr, An Interpretation of Christian Ethics, 126-127.  
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 18  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations   
                 Volume 4(2009): Moseley 1-19 
natural law precisely because the liberal tendency to ground 
natural law only in reason will not succeed in this conflict. He 
even prefigures contemporary dimensions of the conflict.  
 
 
The effort to bring such a conflict under the dominion of 
a spiritual unity may be partly successful, but it always 
produces a tragic by-product of the spiritual accentuation of 
natural conflict. The introduction of religious motives into these 
conflicts is usually no more than the final and most demonic 
pretension. Religion may be regarded as the last and final effort 
of the human spirit to escape relativity and gain a vantage-point 
in the eternal. But when this effort is made without a contrite 
recognition of the finiteness and relativity which characterizes 
human spirituality, even in its moments of yearning for the 
transcendent, religious aspiration is transmuted into sinful 
dishonesty. Historic religions, which crown the structure of 
historic cultures, thus become the most brutal weapons in the 
conflict between cultures.99  
 
 
Here we arrive at the limits of Niebuhr’s legacy for 
supporting Israel. He was insufficiently immersed in theology, 
as opposed to ethics, to be able to imagine ways in which the 
different parties could envisage mutual coexistence by at least 
partial use of religious discourse. His reconstruction of natural 
law privileged individual freedom, yet this is precisely what is so 
problematic to Israel’s neighbors where Islamic fundamentalism 
now thrives. 
 
 
Niebuhr placed modern Israel and Zionism outside his 
theology, because he wanted to communicate with several 
audiences who did not share similar theological beliefs. 
Consequently, the centrality of Zionism to his Christian realism 
has not been appreciated and his reasoning for Israel’s right to 
exist as a Jewish state has not been passed on to the Mainline 
Protestant churches. Instead the idea of the binational state 
                                                          
has reappeared, this time on the grounds of Palestinian 
Liberation Theology. In addition, Ronald H. Stone, a prominent 
student of Niebuhr, has suggested that should the long-
envisaged two-state solution not succeed in abating Islamist 
terrorism, Jews should be removed from the Middle East and 
live in the United States.
99. Reinhold Niebuhr, An Interpretation of Christian Ethics, 126-127. 
100 This contradicts Niebuhr’s threefold 
realism, which was moral and took into account America’s 
relation to Europe as well as the Middle East. It is incredibly 
naïve to think that dismantling the state of Israel would succeed 
in lessening Islamist terrorism. Terror would still strike against 
western countries, precisely because abandoning Israel would 
be perceived as the “defeat” of the alleged “Zionist-Crusader 
conspiracy.” America would presumably still need to learn that 
Niebuhr’s vision of her as “messianic” was heretical. Christians 
and others supportive of Israel’s existence living in Middle 
Eastern 
countries 
would 
face 
innumerable 
problems. 
Unfortunately prominent Niebuhr scholars have simply ignored 
his Zionism; so far I have not found rebuttals of Stone’s 
argument in academic literature. Ultimately, Niebuhr lost the 
opportunity to articulate a non-supersessionist Christian 
theology that could undergird Mainline Protestant support for 
the State of Israel. One result is today’s Mainline Protestant 
ambivalence towards Israel.  
 
 
 
                                                          
100. Ronald H. Stone, Prophetic Realism, 165.  
Moseley, Reinhold Niebuhr’s Approach to the State of Israel                      Moseley 19  
 
http://escholarship.bc.edu/scjr/vol4 
