AN INVESTIGATION INTO CURRENT ATTITUDES TOWARDS 
ENGLISH AT THE UNIVERSITY OF THE WESTERN CAPE 
Charlyn Dyers 
This work-in-progess paper describes the writer's current research into the language attitudes, 
preforences and usage of the student speech community at the University of the Western Cape. 
It specifically looks at responses to questions on English which formed part of a larger survey 
questionnaire on South African languages, and attempts an analysis of these results. 
Hierdie artikel beskryf die huidige navorsing van die skryftter oor die houdings teenoor tale, die 
verkieslikheid van een taal bo 'n ander en die taalgebruik van studente by die Universiteit van 
Wes-Kaap/and Dit fokus in die besonder op antwoorde tot vrae oor Engels wat deel was van 'n 
grater verkennende vrae/ys oor Suid Afrikaanse tale, en poog om hierdie resultate te analiseer. 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
Language attitudes can be defined as the strong positive or negative emotions experienced by 
people when they are faced with a choice between languages in a variety of situations or are 
learning a language. While language attitudes are often deep-seated and private (and therefore 
very difficult to assess), language preferences are openly expressed, such as a preference for 
conducting business affairs in a particular language. The relevance of research in this area 
cannot be overstated within the context of the new South Africa. After a century of only two 
official languages (English and Afrikaans ), South Africans now have a choice of eleven official 
languages (English, Afrikaans, Xhosa, Zulu, Venda, Tsonga, Pedi, Sotho, Tswana, Ndebele and 
Tswati), and it is very important for language policy-makers and planners to take note of 
people's language attitudes and preferences so that their policies can reflect "the needs of the 
people, and not the interests of any particular language" (Webb, 1996: 186). 
My current field of research is a longitudinal examination of the language attitudes, preferences 
and usage among students at the University of the Western Cape. Most recent studies on 
language attitudes in South Africa have tended to focus largely on attitudes to English 
(Mawasha, 1986; Chick, 1992; Heugh, 1993; Bosch and de Klerk, 1996), and to a lesser extent 
on attitudes to Afrikaans (Young, 1992; Dyers, 1997) and African mother tongues (Msimang, 
1994; Mashamaite, 1992). All the above-mentioned studies have made use of either African or 
Coloured respondents, and all the studies on attitudes to English have indicated a strong positive 
attitude towards English as "a pragmatic necessity" (Bosch and de Klerk, 1996:235), even 
though "the admiration for educated English is tempered by a strong desire to show ethnic 
identity when speaking English" (ibid:235). 
29 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

My research is an attempt not only to find out how the students feel about their own and all other 
South African languages, but also to see whether, over a period of time, language attitudes and 
preferences remain relatively fixed or become more flexible as a result of the influence of a 
variety of factors such as identifying with one's in-group or becoming exposed to a wider range 
of opinions on language. Baker (1988:78) believes that "in attitude change lies one hope for 
language life and resurrection". This observation is particularly pertinent when one considers 
the "privileged and dominant status" of English in South Africa which could lead to the "neglect, 
marginalisation and even ultimate extinction of some or all of the other indigenous languages 
through their lack of functional demand" (Young, 1995:65). 
Changing people's attitudes 
towards both English and all other South African languages may be a means of reversing such a 
trend. 
Over a period of three years, the same UWC students will have been surveyed by me to see 
whether they show any change in their language attitudes and preferences as they progress 
through university, and how such change influences their language use. My central hypothesis 
is that their language experiences and particularly the specific nature ofUWC as a unique speech 
community in the context of the largely Afrikaans-speaking W estem Cape, will lead to either 
slight or significant changes in their attitudes to, and preferences for, languages, and these 
changes will in turn affect their language use. 
While people may hold specific attitudes to languages which may either positively or negatively 
influence how well they learn those languages (Roos, 1990:27), or express distinct preferences 
for the languages they wish to use in different situations (Eastman, 1992:111), their actual 
language use may very well contradict their language attitudes and preferences. 
Gough 
(1994:40) shows this contradiction by pointing out that (among white South Africans) 
"conservative Afrikaans farmers ... reveal the greatest knowledge of African (Bantu) languages ... 
which probably could not be said to be true for white supporters of more progressive parties 
(who may, in fact, see this as politically desirable)". Speakers of African languages, in contrast, 
may reveal strong negative attitudes towards Afrikaans because of its past political connotations 
(Dyers, 1997 :26), but may actually be highly competent users of the language. It is likely that 
my research will give further evidence of this contradiction between attitude/preference and use. 
The first aspect of this research is the question of which languages are most commonly used by 
the students at UWC. Within this community, where English operates as the main lingua 
franca, there are several distinct speech communities. There is the majority Xhosa-speaking 
group, who currently constitute 44.2% of the total student population, the fairly large 
Afrikaans/Bilingual in English and Afrikaans (23.2%) and English-speaking (18.7%) groups, 
and the smaller Zulu-speaking (2.9%) group. There are also small pockets of speakers of other 
languages at UWC. The above figures, obtained from UWC Student Records, apply to the 1997 
student population. 
Particular attention is being given to particular factors which can influence these students' 
responses to the different South African languages, to see whether "the choice and use of 
English or a local language in a particular situation is associated with value connotations of 
status or in-group identity" (Siachitema, 1985:202). Among these factors are: 
English is "the de facto ... main language of teaching and learning at UWC" (Comell 
1996:2) (few lecturers use Afrikaans); 
30 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

3 7.2% of all students come from other provinces (UWC Student Records, 1997) and the 
majority of these now find themselves in a province where (with the exception of the 
English, Afrikaans and Xhosa-speaking groups) their languages are considered to be 
minority languages; 
many students have to deal with overt and covert racism (as reported by several students 
in tutorial discussions and individual interviews) as well as linguicism (Hibbert, 
1995:128). They must also become part of new social groupings on and off campus. 
All these factors may exert a strong influence on language attitudes and language use. 
This article is confmed to an exploration of first-year students' responses to questions related to 
English within a larger survey that dealt with attitudes to all 11 official South African languages, 
as well as an exploration of some of the reasons given for these attitudes during follow-up 
interviews. 
2. 
THE STUDY: DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
This study on first-year student responses to English forms part of a larger study which explores 
the attitudes students have towards their mother tongues, Afrikaans and other South African 
languages. The respondents in the study are all students who did the English 105 course in their 
first year (1996). 
English 105 is UWC's academic literacy course, which aims to provide first-year students with 
the language and study skills they need to cope in an academic environment. I decided to use 
English 105 students because they are drawn from virtually every faculty on campus, and in this 
sense can be said to be representative of the wider student population. I am also a lecturer on 
this course, and therefore have easy access to this large pool of respondents. 
In September of 1996, three English 105 lecture groups took part in the survey, and 25 
randomly-selected students from my own lecture group were interviewed as a follow-up to the 
questionnaire. 344 Multiple-choice answer sheets were collected, of which 252 were valid for 
the purposes of this study. Validity was determined on the basis of respondents having filled in 
the answer sheet correctly, and on whether they were actual first-year students in 1996. Answer 
sheets were invalid if students had darkened more than one of the five circles (numbered a-e) on 
the answer sheet in response to each survey item, or had scratched out one answer and filled in 
another, as the computer would only accept the first darkened circle as the answer. 
The survey questionnaire, entitled Language Attitudes, Preferences and Usage, consisted of five 
sections: 
I. 
Personal Information - this section reveals the respondent's age, sex, matric 
results overall and in languages, and year of study at university. 
31 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

11. 
Language Profile - this section reveals who speaks what languages to whom and 
under which circumstances, as well as their self-reported competencies in all 
South African languages. 
Ill. 
Language Education Profile - this section reveals what languages were learned 
formally at school and university, and what languages have been acquired 
informally. 
IV. 
Language Attitude Profile - this section reveals their general attitudes towards 
English, African languages and Afrikaans. 
V. 
Language in Education Attitude Profile - this section reveals their attitudes 
towards English, African languages and Afrikaans within the educational sphere. 
The first three sections were aimed at building up an overall picture of the respondent and 
his/her language usage as well as language preference. The last two sections, consisting of 33 
statements, focussed mainly on attitude, and to a lesser extent on preference. The respondents 
were asked to indicate whether they 
a. 
agreed strongly 
b. 
agreed 
c. 
were unsure about 
d. 
disagreed or 
e 
disagreed strongly with each statement. 
Students answered the questionnaire by darkening the appropriate symbol (a-e) on a standard 
UWC multiple-choice computer answer sheet, which was then fed directly into the computer in 
order to obtain the results. Great care was taken during the survey sessions to ensure that 
students fully understood the meaning of each statement in order to ensure the accuracy of their 
responses. The follow-up interviews then asked students to give reasons for their responses to 
the attitude statements in sections IV and V. 
3. 
THE STUDY: FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
The findings are presented and discussed in the following order. Firstly, the responses to 
statements related to English language usage in Sections I and 11 of the survey will be presented. 
This will reveal the self-reported English language profile of the 252 students surveyed. 
Secondly, in order to determine the relationship between their English language profile and their 
attitudes towards the use of English in education, their responses to questions on English in 
Section V, "Language in Education Attitudes", will be presented. The results of these three 
sections, as they pertain to English, will then be discussed together. Finally, the results of 
section IV, which focusses on general attitudes towards English, will be presented and 
discussed. 
To simplify the presentation of the results, I have added responses which 
agree/strongly agree together, and done the same with responses which disagree/disagree 
strongly. This will reduce the categories of responses to three: agree, undecided and disagree. 
Comments taken from individual interviews will also form part of this section. 
32 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

3.1 
Language Profile 
Of the 252 respondents, only 6 were English home language users, and a mere 22 used English 
to communicate with friends outside UWC. The vast majority of the respondents (79.8%) were 
Xhosa home language users, with smaller pockets of other language users. Of the total number 
of respondents, 81% had obtained either aD, E or F symbol in English in matric (D:43.1%; E 
and below E:37.5%). Despite these poor matric results, a large number of respondents (64.6%) 
felt that their English was "good to excellent" while only 35.4% classified themselves as 
"average to poor". 88.9% had learned English as their second language at school, and all of 
them were of course doing English 105 at university. 
3.2 
Language in Education Attitudes 
This sub-section shows how students responded to the 6 statements dealing directly with English 
in education. 
"47. The mother-tongue should be used together with English as the medium of instruction at 
primary and secondary school." 
84% agreed; 8% were undecided; 8% disagreed. 
"49. I erifoyed the way English was taught at school." 
76% agreed; 8% were undecided; 16% disagreed. 
"5 I. English should be the only medium of instruction at UWC." 
70% agreed; 7% were undecided; 23% disagreed. 
"59. !feel that I have enough English to enable me to cope with university studies." 
57% agreed; 20% were undecided; 23% disagreed. 
"60. I find it difficult studying my subjects in a language that is not my mother-tongue - in this 
case, English. " 
37% agreed; 11% were undecided; 52% disagreed. 
"64. 
The use of the mother tongue in English 105 tutorials improved my understanding of 
English as well as my confidence in using it. " 
40% agreed; 13% were undecided; 47% disagreed. 
3.3 
Discussion of the results of the language profile and language in education attitudes 
The majority of the students appear to have enjoyed learning English at school, and would like 
to see it used together with mother-tongues from primary school onwards. It is also their 
preferred medium of instruction at UWC. Comments made with regards to this issue during 
follow-up interviews included: 
"Most academic textbooks are written in English. " 
"If you want to study in other countries you need English. " 
33 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

"It would prove too costly and be divisive for everyone to be instructed in his/her mother 
tongue." 
These findings confirm earlier studies (Mawasha, 1996:23; Chick, 1992:31) which show that 
black people in South Africa prefer English as a medium of instruction, even from the earliest 
years of primary schooling. The majority of these students feel comfortable with their level of 
English, and more than half of the respondents feel that they have enough English to cope with 
their university studies. The interviews showed that many of these students felt that the nine 
months they had spent in English 105 had played a significant role in increasing their 
competence in English for academic purposes. 
This confidence is, however, not supported by their poor matric results in English, nor by the 
fact that one of the reasons so many students fail their university studies annually is because 
their level of English is insufficient (Sinclair, 1992:82; Agar, 1990:435-454). In another survey 
done at UWC in 1992 on first-years from the faculties of Law, Science and Community and 
Health Sciences, Volbrecht (1992:30) also concluded that "most students have an unrealistically 
high estimation of their proficiency in English for academic purposes". 
It is interesting to note the results of questions related to tutorials, where one might assume that 
students would be willing to use their mother-tongues. But this is not clearly the case. The 
responses to statement 64 show that students appear to be undecided about whether the mother-
tongue is a help or a hindrance in learning English. In two other statements related to tutorials, 
80% of respondents felt that it caused problems in tutorials when everyone was allowed to speak 
in their mother-tongues, while only 39% preferred to use their mother-tongues during 
discussions in tutorials. Actual class room observations by the writer contradicts these negative 
responses to the use of the mother tongue in tutorials. Most students in English 105 tutorials do 
in fact chat in their mother tongues to fellow mother-tongue speakers, but are, according to this 
survey, reluctant to acknowledge this fact. However, if paired or grouped with speakers of other 
languages for classroom exercises, English, together with some code-switching where needed, 
seems to be the only practical choice to permit mutual understanding. 
The follow-up interviews have also revealed that some students are anxious about creating any 
racial tensions in these tutorials, which might be provoked by small groups insisting on using 
their mother-tongues, to the exclusion of others. For example, non-Xhosa speaking African 
students complain about Xhosa students' insistence on addressing them in Xhosa, Afrikaans 
students are angered by "people who deliberately refuse to speak Afrikaans" and most African 
students are anxious not to exclude Coloured students from discussions (see Dyers, 1996:28-9 
and Hibbert, 1995:129-130). 
3.4 
General Language Attitudes 
This is how students responded to the four statements dealing directly with English in this 
section. 
"33. There should be one common language, and it should be English." 
66% agreed with this statement; 5% were undecided; 29% disagreed. 
"40. There are too many English programmes on SABC 1 and 2. " 
34 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

69"/o agreed; 11% were undecided; 20% disagreed. 
"42. You can't get a good job unless your English is good" 
61% agreed; 9% were undecided; 30% disagreed. 
"45. 
English has been forced on me because of historical reasons and its power as the 
international language. " 
57% agreed; 11% were undecided; 32% disagreed. 
3.5 
Discussion of the results on general language attitudes 
Students showed a distinct preference for English as South Africa's lingua franca (statement 33). 
They also acknowledged it as the language of power and social mobility (statement 42), 
although the majority agreed that they had no choice but to opt for English because of its power 
as the international language (statement 45). 
However, they were not happy with the 
predominance of English on television (statement 40), preferring to hear their own languages, or 
multilingual TV dramas like "Generations" and "Soul City", when they were relaxing at home. 
The response to this statement confirms the findings of Slabbert and Van den Berg's 1994 
survey on people's language choices for TV viewing, which found that English is not widely 
accepted as the most understood language on TV and radio and is less widely spoken than was 
commonly assumed. 
3.6 
Analysis of the Results 
Taking all responses into account, we can say that this particular survey revealed two specific 
trends. Firstly, the results show that the language use of these students is domain-specific, with 
home languages preferred for informal interpersonal communication and relaxation, while 
English is the preferred medium for formal situations like education, politics and business. 
During one interview, a student had the following to say, which seemed to sum up the 
sentiments of the majority of the students surveyedand interviewed: 
I don't want to use my language Xhosa because I want to have friends, to learn more 
about outside world, to have a better job at the end of the day. The only thing that I can 
do with my language is to share my feelings with my family just to know where I'm 
coming .from, my culture and customs will remain now and forever. But in our foture we 
must speak English so that you can communicate with different people in the world If 
you speak English you have got everything that you are looking for. To me English is a 
better life. 
Secondly, the results also demonstrate the contradiction, referred to in the introduction to this 
article, between a largely positive attitude towards English and the actual language usage of the 
students surveyed here. The poor matric results these students obtained in English do not 
therefore stem from a negative attitude towards English, but can be blamed on a number of other 
factors, of which the breakdown in education in many Black schools is one. Another important 
reason is highlighted by the research of Skutnabb-Kangas (1984), Cummins (1979) and 
Akkinaso (1993), which show the direct relationship between first language acquisition and 
second language learning. Past educational policies in South Africa have severely impaired 
sound first language development in Black children, by forcing primary school children to start 
35 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

studying nearly all their subjects through the medium of English from the fifth year at school. 
For this reason, many of these children are unable to transfer literacy skills in their first language 
to literacy skills in the second language, because these skills have not been given the opportunity 
to develop fully. 
4. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Obviously, there are shortcomings in this research- it is not possible to draw firm conclusions 
from one survey only, and it would be necessary to see how these students respond in their 
second and third year at university before we can confidently show firm trends in their attitudes 
towards English. A very interesting aspect of the research has been that students with a good 
command of English can often be found among the minority who argue most fervently for the 
increased use of their mother tongues (in particular, Afrikaans and Xhosa) in lectures and 
tutorials at UWC. If students continue to develop their ability in English as they progress 
through university, they might possibly be able to articulate their position with regards to 
English with more conviction, and may even shift to a less overwhelmingly pro-English stance. 
Another factor that might influence the results, particularly in the interviews, is the fact that they 
are being interviewed by their English lecturer. This unequal power relationship can affect the 
honesty of their responses. Using peer tutors or fellow students to conduct the interviews 
(especially in the mother tongues of the respondents) may produce quite different results. 
The main conclusion that can be drawn from this study is that the majority of the fust-year 
students I have surveyed reflect the most common attitudes towards English in the black South 
African communities. Although their command of English is often inadequate, English is the 
preferred medium of instruction and lingua .franca of the majority of the students surveyed. If 
English is "the language most favoured by the masses" (Kamwangamalu, 1995) then the 
challenge to educators, policy-makers and government is not to waste this positive attitude, but 
to accommodate it in an upgraded and vastly improved system of English language teaching in 
our schools. However, this should not occur at the expense of first giving children a firm 
grounding in their home languages to ensure the development of their primary literacy. 
REFERENCES 
AGAR, D. 1990. Non-traditional students: perceptions of problems which influence academic 
success. SA Journal of Higher Education, Special Edition, p. 435-454. 
BAKER, C. 1988. Key issues in bilingualism and bilingual education. Clevedon: Multilingual 
Matters. 
BOSCH, B. AND V DE KLERK. 1996. Language attitudes and their implications for the 
teaching of English in the Eastern Cape. In De Klerk, V. (ed.). 1996: pp. 231-
250. 
BOUGHEY, J. (ed) 1992. Applied language studies in Southern Africa- visions and realities. 
Selected proceedings from the 11th annual SAALA conference, University of 
Cape Town. 
36 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

CHICK, K. 1992. English as a medium and as a subject in a post-apartheid South Africa. 
Southern African Journal of Applied Language Studies I (I): 29-40. 
CORNELL, C. 1996. Editorial, AD Issues (UWC) Comell, C. and Goodman, K. (eds.) 4(1): 2 
CUMMINS, J. 1979. Linguistic interdependence and the educational development of bilingual 
children. Review of Educational Research 49. 
DE KLERK, V. (ed.) 1996. Varieties of English around the world General Series 15: Focus 
on South Africa. Amsterdam: John Benjamin Publishing Co. 
DYERS, C. 
1996. Language attitudes among first year students at the University of the 
Western Cape. AD Issues 4(1): 27-29. 
DYERS, C. 1997. Uncovering attitudes towards Afrikaans at UWC. Karring, 24-27. 
GARDNER, R. 1982. Language attitudes and language learning. In Ryan, EB and H Giles 
(eds.) Attitudes towards language variation, social and applied contexts. 
London: Edward Amold: 132-14 7. 
GOUGH, D. 1994. Myths of multilingualism: demography and democracy. BUA! 9(3): 9-11. 
HEUGH, K, A SIEGRUHN, P PLUDDEMANN. 1995. Multilingual education for South 
Africa Johannesburg: Heinemann. 
HEUGH, K. 1995. Disabling and enabling: implications of language policy trends in South 
Africa. In Meshrie, R. (ed.): 329-350. 
HIBBERT, L 1995. Xhosa in the English Tutorial- Bridge or Barrier? in AD Dialogues 4: 119-
134. 
KAMW ANGAMALU, N. 1995. English in language planning in the new South Africa. In 
Constitutionally Enshrined Multilingualism: Challenges and Responses. 
Proceedings of the 15th Annual Conference of the South African Applied 
Linguistics Association. University ofStellenbosch: 85-107. 
MASHAMAITE, K. 1992. Standard and non-standard: towards finding a suitable teaching 
strategy. In South African Journal of African languages, supplement 1(12): 47-
55. 
MA W ASHA, A. 1996. Sample views of African post-graduate students regarding English and 
the African Languages as media of education in African Schools in South Africa. 
Per Linguam 12(1): 15-23. 
MESHRlE, R. (ed.) 
1995. 
Language and social history: Studies in South African 
Sociolinguistics. Cape Town, David Phillip. 
37 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za

MSIMANG, C. 1994. Language attitudes and the harmonisation ofNguni and Sotho. In South 
African Journal of Linguistics. Supplement 20: Language, text and the Southern 
African context: 147-167. 
ROOS, R. 1990. Language Attitudes in the Second Language situation. Per Linguam 6(2): 25-
30. 
SIACHITEMA, A. 1985. Attitudes towards the use of English in three neighbourhoods of 
Lusaka in Language in Education in Africa. In Davies, A. (ed.). Centre for 
African Studies, University ofEdinburgh: 201-229. 
SIN CLAIR, A. 1992. Reading and not understanding: the encoding problems in English of non 
English-speaking first year students. In Boughey ( ed): 82-96. 
SLABBERT, S. AND I VAN DEN BERG. 1994. Quantitative language study. Management 
Report. Prepared for Broadcasting Research Unit, SABC. 
SKUT1NAB-KANGAS, T. 1984. Bilingualism or not: the education of minorities. Clevedon: 
Multilingual Matters. 
VOLBRECHT, T. 1992. Report on language orientation attitude survey 1992. Unpublished 
Report, Academic Development Centre, UWC. 
YOUNG, D. 1995. The role and status of the first language in education in a multilingual 
society. In Heugh et al (eds.): 53-62. 
WEBB, V. 1996. English and language planning for South Africa: the flip side. In De Klerk, 
V. (ed.): 175-190. 
38 
http://perlinguam.journals.ac.za
