a m s t e r d a m  u n i v e r s i t y  p r e s s
South Asian Partition 
Fiction in English
From Khushwant Singh 
to Amitav Ghosh
R i t u p a r n a  R o y

South Asian Partition Fiction in English

Publications Series
General Editor
Paul van der Velde
Publications Officer
Martina van den Haak
Editorial Board
Prasenjit Duara (University of Chicago) / Carol Gluck (Columbia University) /
Christophe Jaffrelot (Centre d’E´tudes et de Recherches Internationales-Sciences-
po) / Victor T. King (University of Hull) / Yuri Sadoi (Meijo University) / A.B.
Shamsul (Institute of Occidental Studies / Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia) /
Henk Schulte Nordholt (Royal Netherlands Institute of Southeast Asian and Car-
ibbean Studies) / Wim Boot (Leiden University)
The IIAS Publications Series consists of Monographs and Edited Volumes. The
Series publishes results of research projects conducted at the International Insti-
tute for Asian Studies. Furthermore, the aim of the Series is to promote interdis-
ciplinary studies on Asia and comparative research on Asia and Europe.
The International Institute for Asian Studies (IIAS) is a postdoctoral research centre
based in Leiden and Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Its objective is to encourage
the interdisciplinary and comparative study of Asia and to promote national and
international cooperation. The institute focuses on the humanities and social
sciences and, where relevant, on their interaction with other sciences. It stimu-
lates scholarship on Asia and is instrumental in forging research networks
among Asia scholars worldwide.
IIAS acts as an international mediator, bringing various parties together, working
as a clearinghouse of knowledge and information. This entails activities such as
providing information services, hosting academic organisations dealing with Asia,
constructing international networks, and setting up international cooperative pro-
jects and research programmes. In this way, IIAS functions as a window on Eur-
ope for non-European scholars and contributes to the cultural rapprochement be-
tween Asia and Europe.
For further information, please visit www.iias.nl.

South Asian Partition Fiction in
English
From Khushwant Singh to
Amitav Ghosh
Rituparna Roy

Publications Series
Monographs 4
Cover illustration: Gargyee Bhattacharya Roy
Cover design: Maedium, Utrecht
Layout: The DocWorkers, Almere
ISBN
978 90 8964 245 5
e-ISBN 978 90 4851 283 6
NUR
692 / 617
© IIAS / Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam 2010
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright re-
served above, no part of this book may be reproduced, stored in or in-
troduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise)
without the written permission of both the copyright owners and the
editors and authors of the book.

To my parents,
Prof. Birendra Narayan Roy & Prof. Kalpana Roy
… the only gift I can give…


Contents
Acknowledgements
9
Introduction
13
Theories of partition – why/when/ironies
13
Historiography of the Partition
18
Representation in literature
20
The IE Novel – Gandhian whirlwind/partition preoccupation/
Punjab bias
21
The six novels studied in this book
24
Novels not selected for study
28
Filling up a lacuna
29
1
Partition: The Holocaust
33
Iconic status of Train to Pakistan
33
Symbolic significance of trains
35
The five events of the narrative
37
Flaws/Jugga, and Singh’s redeeming vision
44
Manohar Malgonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges
47
Malgonkar’s fascination with history
48
Double-hero/pluralistic method
49
The Hindu-Muslim question
50
Revolutionary terrorism vs. non-violence
53
The failure of both ideologies
61
2
Women during the Partition: Victim and agent
63
The Pakistani version of the partition
64
The Partition in Bapsi Sidhwa’s novels
66
Ayah’s Circle, Ice-candy man and Ayah’s abduction
67
Gurdaspur and Lahore
72
‘Recovery and rehabilitation’ – Hamida and Ayah
74
Lenny’s awakening consciousness
78
Agency to women
79
Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day
80
Desai stereotyped
80
Critics on the novel
81
Clear Light of Day as a Partition novel
82

Bim enabled
87
Desai’s revisioning of the traditional Partition narrative
87
3
The making of a nation: Religion or language?
89
Midnight’s Children: A watershed
89
Two aspects of the novel’s representation of history
usually missed
91
Freedom at midnight: The moment of birth
92
Bombay-Karachi-Dhaka
98
1971 Bangladesh Liberation War
101
Rushdie and Ghosh
108
4
Imagined communities: Questioning the border
111
Proust and the anti-Sikh riots
111
Midnight’s Children and The Shadow Lines
112
Four ways to read the novel
112
Of borders and lost histories
113
The Shadow Lines and the aftermath of the Partition
114
Why Tribib got killed in Jindabahar Lane
118
Meaninglessness of borders – colonial and post-colonial
perspectives of the nation
122
Imagined communities
124
Warring critics, and an author in denial
126
Ghosh’s real antecedents
128
Conclusion
131
Three factors determining the thrust of the narratives
132
Interflows of images/motifs
135
Glossary
139
Notes
141
Bibliography
163
Index
171
8
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Acknowledgements
I was greatly fascinated by the story of ‘India’s struggle for indepen-
dence’ in secondary school and cheerfully devoured entire sections of
the History syllabus for my exams. Much later, I learnt that what I so
loved reading at school was the ‘nationalist narrative’ of modern Indian
history – and that it told an incomplete story. History gave me all the
facts about Independence at school, but it was at university that litera-
ture introduced me to the Partition.
The original idea for this work came while I was doing my post-grad-
uate studies at Calcutta University (1995-97) in English Literature with
a specialization in Indian Writing in English. That is when it struck me
how many of the most significant Indian-English novels dealt with the
theme of partition – and how differently. Hence, when I landed a doc-
toral fellowship soon after, I knew exactly what to work on.
This work – from the nascent idea of the original thesis to the fin-
ished manuscript of the monograph based on it – has spanned an en-
tire decade, and became associated with all the landmarks of my perso-
nal and professional life. It also went places – starting from Calcutta, it
travelled with me briefly to Bangalore and Chennai, and finally, leaving
India’s shores, ended its (tortuously long, bumpy, jerky and singularly
unpredictable) journey in Amsterdam.
Along the way, my debts have accumulated – both to individuals and
institutions.
I would first like to thank my supervisor, Dr Esha Dey, who not only
oversaw my work over a long period of time, but as a teacher at Calcutta
University was instrumental in kindling my interest in this literature in
the first place.
Calcutta University deserves special thanks for being my host institu-
tion throughout the period of my research. In particular, I would like to
acknowledge the debt I owe to my teachers at the Department of Eng-
lish – Prof. Krishna Sen, Prof. Jharna Sanyal, Prof. Tapati Gupta and
Prof. Dipendu Chakraborty – who went far beyond the call of duty to
help me and facilitate matters at various phases of this work.
I started my PhD with a student fellowship (JRF – Junior Research
Fellowship) and completed it with a Teacher Fellowship (under the Fa-
culty Improvement Program, FIP, of the Xth Plan) – both granted by

the University Grants Commission (UGC) of India. Without these fel-
lowships it would not have been possible for me to sustain my re-
search.
For this, I owe a special debt of gratitude to Basantidevi College,
Kolkata, for sanctioning the two-year leave. In this regard, I would espe-
cially like to thank the then principal, Dr Bijoy Lakshmi Mukherjee, for
her kindness; and my colleagues in the English Department – the then
Head, Dr Sreemati Mukherjee, Dr Ralla Guha Niyogi and Malobika
Sarkar – for their love and generosity. They actively supported and en-
couraged me even when, given the realities of college teaching in Cal-
cutta, my absence made their own work more difficult. I would also like
to thank my first HOD, Kalyani Ghosh, for her continuing wise counsel
and concern even after retirement.
Apart from the university that I studied at and the college I taught at,
I would also like to thank the Shakespeare Society of Eastern India
(SSEI), for giving me several presentation and publication opportunities
which helped me a lot at a crucial phase of my work.
It is, however, to a foreign institution to which I am most indebted
for the publication of this thesis – the International Institute for Asian
Studies (IIAS) at Leiden. To IIAS and its post-doctoral fellowship, I owe
a new lease of life. I can never thank the institute enough for its open-
ness, generosity and kindness towards me in a most difficult period of
my life.
My special thanks to the staff of IIAS and the editorial team at AUP
– particularly to its ex-director, Prof. Max Sparreboom, for awarding me
a much-needed fellowship; to deputy director, Manon Osseweijer, for
being not just a good administrator but, more valuably, a friend; to the
Managing Editor of the IIAS Newsletter, Anna Yeadell, for boosting my
confidence in writing; and most importantly, to Paul van der Velde, for
his early interest in my work and his prompt acceptance of my proposal.
The IIAS Fellowship itself would not have been possible without the
crucial recommendation of Prof. Peter Liebregts, kindest of souls, to
whom I owe a deep debt of gratitude for considerably easing my abrupt
academic transition from India to Holland.
Other individuals whom I would like to thank include Dr Dhurjati-
prosad De (for the help he has extended to me throughout in his capa-
city as the Secretary, Faculty Council for Post-Graduate Studies in Arts
& Commerce, Calcutta University); the late Prof. Shanti Ram Chatterjee
(beloved tutor, much missed, for always giving me hope); Dr Nandini
Bhattacharya (for crucial opinions/advice at important moments); Prof.
Subhas Ranjan Chakraborty (for helping me understand certain knotty
problems of Indian nationalist history better); Prof. Theo Damsteegt
(for being the very first person to give me personal feedback on my
submitted thesis); and my friends and fellow travellers on the PhD
10
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

highway – Sanmita Ghosh (for insisting in 1998 that I apply for JRF),
Paromita Mukherjee (for those unfailing ISD calls over a decade), and
Swaty Mitra (for goading me with her never-say-die attitude). And a spe-
cial vote of thanks is due to Gargyee Bhattacharya Roy, bosom pal, for
designing just the book cover I wanted.
This monograph could not have taken shape without the active sup-
port and sustained intervention of Prof. Subir Kumar Dhar – mentor,
friend, and guardian angel without wings. I want to take this opportu-
nity to thank him for showing me the way when I was lost in the wild-
erness, and for always being there for me ever after.
My research, like any other scholar’s, would not have been possible
without access to good libraries. In Calcutta, I am especially indebted to
the CU Central Library, the National Library, and the Ramkrishna Mis-
sion Library; and in the Netherlands, to the Library of the Kern Institute
at Leiden.
Apart from libraries, a few bookshops have been invaluable in the
course of my research. I would like to mention Seagull (Bhawanipur)
and, particularly, Amitava Deb’s Indiana Bookshop (College Street) in
Calcutta; and the American Book Centre (Amsterdam) and Boekhandel
Veenstra (Amstelveen) in the Netherlands.
My deepest debts for this entire period are, however, to my family. I
formally started my research and got married in the same week – and
quite inevitably, each has had a bearing on the other. I wish to thank
my in-laws for their love and affection and for always wishing me well.
Special thanks are due to my sister for her impossible confidence in
me and for always reminding me that I can.
But the three persons who (in their own ways) have lived this thesis
with me are my parents and my husband. My relationship with my par-
ents goes much beyond the filial – they have been my teachers, my
friends, and my chief source of sustenance (increasingly, over the last
few years). I want to thank them for their utter selflessness, their un-
conditional love, and unwavering faith in me.
Above all, I want to thank my husband – for his love and patience
and his unstinting support and encouragement over the years. I am
very grateful to him for sharing this long journey with me.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
11


Introduction
Undivided India, which freed itself from the colonial yoke, and the
event of the Partition of the subcontinent are inextricably bound to-
gether. Thus, no post-colonial denizen of the subcontinent possessing a
sense of history and living in the post-independence era can ignore the
pervasive influence and impact of the Partition on contemporary life.
Undoubtedly the most important determining factor in India, Pakistan
and Bangladesh’s destiny, the Partition is much more than a historical
fact, however, for it has served and continues to serve as a compelling
literary theme that has engendered a substantial body of fiction on the
subcontinent, fiction that is startling in terms of its diversity of focus,
style and treatment.
This book will attempt to study a wide cross-section of Partition no-
vels spanning three-and-a-half decades of the literature written in Eng-
lish on the subcontinent, novels written between the mid-1950s and late
1980s. The aim of this study will be to explore the variety of this body
of fiction and thereby to try and uncover the manifold intentions that
prompted the different novelists to write about the Partition in the way
that they did. The novels which will form the subject matter of this in-
vestigation are Khushwant Singh’s Train to Pakistan (1956), Manohar
Malgonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges (1964), Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-
Man (1989), Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day (1980), Salman Rushdie’s
Midnight’s Children (1980) and Amitav Ghosh’s The Shadow Lines
(1988). But before embarking on a detailed discussion of the represen-
tation of the Partition in the six novels mentioned above, it is important
to look at some of the theories of partition that have been advanced by
historians, the reason they think why it happened.
Theories of partition – why/when/ironies
Official histories of Pakistan subscribe to the ‘two nations’ theory and
argue that the Pakistani nation was the inevitable crystallization of the
desire of the Muslims of the Indian subcontinent to remain a distinc-
tive community, separate from the Hindu population around them. A
characteristic and particularly passionate articulation of this theory is to

be found in Aitzaz Ahsan’s The Indus Saga and the Making of Pakistan.1
According to Ahsan, the Indian subcontinent is made up of two civiliza-
tions, Indus and Indic (or Gangetic), and ‘Indus has been one large, in-
dependent, politico-economic zone for the past countless centuries (…)
[It has had] a rich and glorious cultural heritage of its own (…) [and is] a
distinct and separate nation’ (1996: 18).
Completely differently, the community of historians belonging to the
main current of Indian nationalism blamed Imperialism for tearing the
two communities apart, disrupting the bonds that had joined them to-
gether for centuries. According to this perspective, the Partition of the
Indian subcontinent was the logical conclusion of the ‘divide and rule’
policy of the British by which they had insidiously played off the Hin-
dus against the Muslims in India. According to some of India’s most
notable historians (including A.K. Banerjee2, Sumit Sarkar3 and Bipan
Chandra4), this was a political strategy that the British had hit upon
from the time of the Partition of Bengal in 1905 and had pursued with
a single-minded zeal ever since. However, it is important to note that
while both these theories, propounded as part and parcel of the ideology
of post-colonial nation states, have had wide popular support, neither of
them can provide an adequate explanation of the central event of the
Partition in modern South Asian history. Many British observers, of
course, saw the whole thing quite differently. British imperialists in par-
ticular prided themselves on their fostering of the unity of India during
British rule, and blamed primordial divisions among the Indians them-
selves for the division and bloodshed that marked the last days of the
empire.
Intimately related to the issue of why the Partition happened is the
question of who was (or were) responsible for it. And among the most
prominent Indian leaders of the time, more often than not, the finger
is usually pointed at Mohammad Ali Jinnah. In India, he is seen not as
the father of Pakistan but as a collaborator of the Raj; a man who, in
his capacity as the leader of the All India Muslim League, precipitated
the division of India by being willing to accept nothing short of a sover-
eign state for the Muslims in the subcontinent in the final negotiations
with the British that led to the transfer of power in 1947.5 Rather differ-
ently, Pakistani historian Ayesha Jalal, in a pioneering study of the
statesman6, has proposed a counter-thesis to this notion by saying that
the Partition was forced upon Jinnah by the Congress High Command
in the penultimate phase of the British rule in India. According to her7,
the actual reason behind the Partition was not the scheme of the British
but the constitutional tussle for greater representational power in the
government that had gone on for close to four decades, between the
Congress and the Muslim League.8 Yet, the man who remains the most
controversial figure of that epochal time on the subcontinent is not any
14
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Indian leader, but the British Viceroy himself, Lord Louis Mountbatten.
From Alan Campbell-Johnson in the early 1950s9 and Philip Zeigler in
the mid-1980s10, down to Stanley Wolpert in 200611, Mountbatten con-
tinues to interest and intrigue historians (mostly British). However, over
the past six decades, his reputation has suffered, a change that is re-
flected in the very titles of his biographies/portraits – from Alan Camp-
bell-Johnson’s very earnest Mission with Mountbatten to Andrew Ro-
berts’ sarcastic ‘Lord Mountbatten and the Perils of Adrenalin’.12
The most recent attack on Mountbatten has been mounted by Sir
Stanley Wolpert in Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire
in India, where he declares:
If for no other reason than to counter the many laudatory, fawn-
ing accounts of Lord Mountbatten’s ‘splendid’, “historically un-
ique’, ‘brilliant and wonderful’ viceroyalty that have for more
than half a century filled shelves of Partition literature and
Mountbatten hagiography, I feel justified in adding my Shameful
Flight to history’s list of the British Raj’s last years. [For among
all the important players of that time] none (…) played as tragic
or central a role as did Mountbatten.13 (2006: 2)
Yet another theory, advanced with great persuasion by Narendra Singh
Sarila14 (who was ADC to Lord Mountbatten), claims that there was a
crucial link between India’s Partition and British fears about the USSR
gaining control of the oil fields of the Middle East. In other words, it
was important to partition India to safeguard and consolidate British
strategic interests in the Middle East. According to this theory, once the
British leaders realized that the Indian nationalists (i.e. the Congress)
would not join them to play the Great Game against the Soviet Union,
they settled for those willing to do so (i.e. the Muslim League). In the
process, they did not hesitate to use the Muslims of India as a political
tool to fulfil their objectives.
The British historian, Nicholas Mansergh, interestingly has an en-
tirely different take on the whole issue of the Partition. He is of the opi-
nion that it was not so much the complexity of the communal situation
as the nature of the political relations then existent in India that caused
the catastrophe of 1947. To quote him,
The more important of those [political] relations were without ex-
ception triangular. There were the three principal communities,
the Hindus, the Muslims and the Sikhs, in descending order of
magnitude; there were the three political groups, the princes, the
Muslim League and the Indian National Congress in ascending
order of importance; and there were the three arbiters of national
INTRODUCTION
15

destiny, the British, the Congress and the League. In each trian-
gle there was the predisposition – it is almost a law of politics –
of the lesser to combine against the greatest.15 (1999: 220)
It is interesting to note that not only is there disagreement about who
or what was responsible for the Partition, there are also differences
among historians as to when it all started – the journey towards Parti-
tion – and which province (i.e. Punjab or Bengal) played the more deci-
sive role in the enfolding drama.
According to David Page, in his work Prelude to Partition: The Indian
Muslims and the Imperial System of Control 1920-193216, the 1920s were
a crucial period in the shaping of the subcontinent, in preparing the
ground for the emergence of Pakistan and in casting the character of
Indian nationalism. Page is of the opinion that a study of colonial strat-
egy and structures at this time helps to explain how the building blocks
of Pakistan were put in place, how it became possible for the various
Muslim communities situated in different parts of India to see it as a
common goal; and to understand the kind of contradictions involved
during the Pakistan movement. The most startling proposition made in
this book is, however, the argument that the development of representa-
tive institutions at this time (which provided first partial and later sub-
stantial provincial autonomy) should not be seen simply as concessions
by the Raj to Indian nationalism but rather as a means of offsetting the
nationalist challenge and the perpetuation of Imperial control.
Anita Inder Singh in The Origins of the Partition of India 1936-194717
puts forward the thesis that:
1936 is a useful starting point [to discuss the Partition of India] as
it furnishes the immediate background to the coalition contro-
versy between the Congress and the League in UP in 1937, re-
garded by many as a milestone on the road to partition.18 (1987: v)
While Singh concedes that the Muslim League’s demand for a sover-
eign Muslim state at its Lahore session in March 1940 was a great leap
forward for the Pakistan cause, she argues that the most decisive step
taken in this direction was the League’s election campaign in the Pun-
jab and its attempt to gain power in that province between 1944-47.
She is of the opinion that unlike Bengal (where the League ministry
had already been able to cultivate grass-roots support during the Second
World War), the greatest electoral battles of the mid-1940s were fought
in the Punjab, because ‘the possibility of an intercommunal coalition in
the Punjab posed the greatest threat, in the eyes of the League, to the
emergence of Pakistan’19 (1987: vii).
16
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

On a different note, Joya Chatterji, in her book Bengal Divided: Hindu
Communalism and Partition 1932-194720, focuses her research on the
political scenario in Bengal, and identifies the 1930s as the decade
when the communalization of politics reached a new high in the pro-
vince. Chatterji shows clearly how the prospect of a permanent subordi-
nation to a Muslim majority converted many Hindus to the idea that
Bengal must be partitioned, and that Nehru and Patel in opting for a
truncated Pakistan had the strong support of the provincial Congress in
Bengal. Overturning popular notions about the state of Bengal politics
at this time, Chatterji argues:
Bengalis were not passive bystanders in the politics of their pro-
vince; nor were they victims of circumstances entirely out of
their control, forced reluctantly to accept the division of their
‘motherland’. On the contrary, a large number of Hindus of Ben-
gal, backed up by the provincial branches of the Congress and
the Hindu Mahasabha, campaigned intensively in 1947 for the
partition of Bengal and for the creation of a separate Hindu pro-
vince that would remain inside an Indian union.21(1994: 227)
It may be noted here that Bengal Divided was part of a new trend in par-
tition studies (since the 1980s) which focused on regional instead of na-
tional politics22; and where the primacy of all-India perspectives was re-
placed by a new importance given to regional and provincial contexts.23
As Chatterji succinctly puts it in her ‘Introduction’:
This is not an argument that the determination of Bengali Hin-
dus to see their province partitioned explains the decision to par-
tition India. It suggests instead that the study of a provincial se-
paratist demand may enrich our understanding of Partition, pro-
viding the subtext to a story too often reduced to an account of
the priorities of statesmen in Delhi and London.24 (1994: 17)
All these diverse viewpoints notwithstanding, it is an indubitable truth
that the Partition of the Indian subcontinent, apart from being tragic,
was also profoundly ironic as none of the three major players got what
they wanted. Shorn off eastern Punjab and western Bengal (including
Calcutta), Jinnah only got the ‘maimed, mutilated and moth-eaten’25 Pa-
kistan which he had rejected out of hand in 1944 and then again in
1946. For the Congress, the final release from the British Empire came
‘only by compromising on the two main principles of the Indian nation-
alist creed since the late 1920s – unity and full independence.’26 For
not only was India partitioned when she finally gained her freedom (en-
tailing a total reversal of all that the Indian National Congress had stood
INTRODUCTION
17

for), but her leaders also accepted ‘Dominion Status’ rather than the full
independence to which they had been committed since the adoption of
the ‘Purna Swaraj’ resolution at Lahore in 1929.
On their part, the British had definitely not envisaged the bloody
transfer of power that eventually took place. The Partition of India was
patently not in their interest, and neither the Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten
nor the then Prime Minister, Clement Atlee, were in favour of it.27
However, when it became clear to them that Partition was inevitable,
the British, confident about the strength of their administration in In-
dia, decided on an organized operation. This was a most deplorable lack
of foresight on their part, for they did not take into consideration the
primordial communal passions that would be (and came to be) involved
in forcibly uprooting people from the land they had been attached to for
generations, and it was too late when they realized that the drawing of
arbitrary borders was much more than an administrative exercise.28
Consequently, they witnessed a complete breakdown of their own ad-
ministration with most British officers of the British Indian Army and
the Indian Civil Service having already left or in the process of leaving
India, the Indian officers leaving their ranks (and sometimes joining
the communal forces); and above all, the mass frenzy of the common
populace, sworn to wreak havoc on each other. It brings to mind the
very ironic words that Shahid Hamid (in Disastrous Twilight) quotes an
unknown British Magistrate as saying: ‘The British are a just people.
They have left India in exactly the same state of chaos as they found
it.’29 Indeed, if the possession of India was the crowning glory of the
British Empire, the Indian dominions ‘the jewel in the crown’, then the
relinquishing of this empire, the way that the power was transferred
from British to Indian hands in 1947, represented the crowning failure
of that most steadfast pillar of the British Empire – its administration.
Historiography of the Partition
Today, the legacy of 1947 looms larger than ever before on the subconti-
nent. Partition has actually proved to be a trauma from which the sub-
continent has never fully recovered. But sadly, this is not reflected in its
history writing, a fact that is lamented by many. Alok Bhalla, for in-
stance, in his ‘Introduction’ to a collection of Partition stories in English
translation states that when it comes to Partition, ‘there is not just a
lack of great literature, there is, more seriously, a lack of great history’.30
Indeed, if this is true to any extent, this is perhaps because Indian his-
toriography has focused more on Independence than on Partition, more
on the unifying force of nationalism than the divisive forces that rent
the country in 1947. For a long time, Indian history writing followed
18
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

the traditional nationalist discourse in which the role of the great Con-
gress leaders and the importance of national integration were always gi-
ven pride of place. This particular discourse has been termed the ‘Neh-
ruvian narrative’ of Indian history, and one cannot overemphasize the
importance of Nehru’s own books in fashioning this discourse. Such
works of Nehru’s as An Autobiography31 and The Discovery of India32
show how he viewed Indian history and how he reinterpreted it to cre-
ate a modern secular nationalist discourse for the emerging indepen-
dent state of India.
But while Nehru’s commanding influence during the first two dec-
ades of Independence ensured that his vision held sway, after his death
and with the steady decline in the power of the Congress Party, there
was a gradual questioning of this discourse, particularly by the histor-
ians of the Subaltern school, which emerged in the late 1970s. Drawing
their inspiration from the work of the Italian Marxist Gramsci, they
sought to provide a counterbalance to traditional elite histories of na-
tionalism by looking at the role of subordinate groups, whether as parti-
cipants in the nationalist movement or as rebels against it.
It is important to note that while the Subalterns no doubt offered a
useful critique of Indian nationalism, it is a fact that both elite historio-
graphy and subaltern history were geared towards nationalism and In-
dependence. What got left out from the narratives of both was Partition.
The nationalist narrative essentially told a story of the series of causes
and happenings that led to Independence; the divisive forces that led to
the Partition were by and large left untold. While the Subaltern School
did try (in the words of David Page) to, ‘search for alternative models
that focused less on the unity which was imperative in confronting the
Raj and more on the diversity which often underlay it’33, one important
strand was left out even by them – the experiences of women at the
time of Partition. Later, however, the feminist perspective that gained
prominence in the 1990s sought to address this long-standing lacuna
in history writing in India.
This new approach was pioneered mostly by women authors, who
saw Partition as a male narrative, in which women were sacrificed or
abducted or recovered in a conflict which gave primacy to community
and hierarchy at the expense of individual rights. Their work first at-
tracted attention in 1993 with the publication of two articles in the Eco-
nomic and Political Weekly looking at the role of the Indian state in the
recovery of women abducted during Partition.34 These articles high-
lighted the extraordinary sufferings that women went through at that
time – in some cases killed by their own families to prevent them from
falling into the hands of the other community; in other cases, raped
and abducted, then recovered and rejected by their original families; in
yet others, settling for a new life with their abductors only to have their
INTRODUCTION
19

choices overturned by tribunals set up by agreement between the two
new states.35 This concentration on the role of women – as sufferers
and victims – during Partition violence may rightly be regarded as con-
stituting a new chapter in history writing in India.
Representation in literature
But even after noting and validating this new direction in historiogra-
phy, historians generally agree that literature represented Partition bet-
ter. For example, Ayesha Jalal and Sugata Bose, in their book on South
Asian history, opine that:
The colossal human tragedy of the partition and its continuing
aftermath has been better conveyed by the more sensitive crea-
tive writers and artists – for example in Saadat Hasan Manto’s
short stories and Ritwik Ghatak’s films – than by historians.36
(2004: 164)
But yet, here too, there was a long silence. Evidently, writers were at
first unable to articulate the enormous tragedy that had unfolded in
front of their eyes. And when they did, all they could write about initi-
ally was the violence that was the most distinctive feature of the time.
Some of the earliest stories about the Partition written in Hindi and
Urdu, for example, are clearly much too focused on scenes of carnage
to produce anything other than a feeling of disgust in the reader, for all
they seem to portray is the demented hatred between the Hindus and
the Muslims at that time in India37; and more often than not, they be-
tray a bias in favour of one community over another.
Not all writers, of course, wrote in this way. Saadat Hasan Manto, for
example, was free from any communal bias. This is amply evident from
the slim volume of sketches or vignettes called Siyah Hashye that he
published soon after the division of the country.38 In this volume, ex-
cept in one instance, none of the participants in the bloody drama of
Partition is identified by religion, ‘(…) because, to Manto, what mattered
was not what religion people had, what rituals they followed or which
gods they worshipped, but where they stood as human beings’39 (1997:
xx).
As Alok Bhalla rightly notes,
Manto’s stories about the partition are more realistic and more
shocking records of those predatory times [than those of his con-
temporaries]. They are written by a man who knows that after
20
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

such ruination there can neither be any forgiveness nor any for-
getting.40 (1994: xvii)
It is also good to remember that the Urdu title Siyah Hashye which
Manto gave his book means ‘black fringe’. In other words, this was how
Manto regarded the massive upheaval involving millions of refugees
from both sides that preceded and followed Independence. If Indepen-
dence, Manto seemed to say, was something bright and good, then it
was fringed with black.
The IE Novel – Gandhian whirlwind/partition preoccupation/
Punjab bias
While Manto may have been the most well-known name to write on
Partition, he was certainly not the only one. Besides him and a few of
his contemporaries who wrote soon after Partition, there were many
others who wrote much after the event. In fact, as has been pointed out
by Meenakshi Mukherjee, the theme of Partition has been a ‘pervasive’
one in Indian bhasha literatures.41 This is true even of the Indian novel
in English, though of course, English has had a totally different trajec-
tory as a literary language in India. English, it must be remembered,
was not a major language of literary production in colonial India in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. While it established itself as
the language of administration and higher education in India, the novel
in the country flourished in Hindi, Urdu, Bangla, Marathi and other
bhashas. Only towards the end of British rule did this scenario change
and that, too, very slowly. For even though the first Indian novel in Eng-
lish was published as far back as 1864 (Bankim Chandra Chatterjee’s
Rajmohan’s Wife)42, and literary production in English continued
throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries with vary-
ing degrees of success, it was only in the 1930s that it became an estab-
lished category.
There is a slight disagreement among scholars about the volume of
literary output produced in English in India in the early decades of the
twentieth century. According to Mukherjee Meenakshi, ‘The Indo-An-
glian novel made a different appearance in the nineteen twenties, then
gradually gathered confidence and established itself in the next two dec-
ades’.43 (2002: 19) Shankar Bhattacharya in the ‘Introduction’ to his
book Manohar Malgonkar: A Study of His Mind & Art, argues however:
As against the assertion of Dr Mukherjee that there are ‘hardly
half a dozen Indo-Anglian novels’, Gobinda Prasad Sharma in
his book Nationalism in Indo-Anglian Fiction, has referred to
INTRODUCTION
21

more than two dozen novels written and published before
1920.44(1994: 2)
There is, however, no disagreement among critics about the signifi-
cance of the 1930s in the development of the Indian-English novel. It
emerged as a new creative force at that time, and the reasons for it were
as much literary as political.
As is well known, the novel as a genre has traditionally been impli-
cated in the construction and consolidation of the idea of the nation.
The Indian novel in English has also in its brief history been visibly
concerned with defining such a national identity. In fact, it is not ‘(…) a
coincidence that the novel in English emerged in India in the 1930s,
the decade prior to independence, when there was an urgency to fore-
ground the idea of a composite nation’ (2002: 173).45 Indeed, it was not
only political leaders, but also writers who helped in the foregrounding
of this idea. It is important to emphasize here that the nationalist move-
ment was not merely a political struggle but an all-pervasive emotional
experience for Indian writers in the 1930s and 1940s. It had a tremen-
dous impact on them, and they responded to the social and political tur-
moil of the times, albeit in different ways. In most of their work, there
is a direct engagement with the Gandhian movement, a phenomenon
that has been termed ‘the Gandhian whirlwind’46 in Indian-English fic-
tion, and this trend actually continued till well after Independence.47 If
the struggle for freedom against the British was an all-pervasive emo-
tional experience for all Indians living at the time, then the Partition of
the country was a defining moment both in the life of the newly created
nation as well as that of her citizens. It was therefore perhaps inevitable
that ‘the Gandhian whirlwind’ would be followed by a literary preoccu-
pation with Partition. And in this respect, at least (as already stated), the
Indian novel in English has not had too different a history from that of
the novel in the other languages of India. From Khushwant Singh’s
Train to Pakistan (1956) to Shauna Singh Baldwin’s What the Body Re-
members (2000)48, the Partition has been a recurrent theme in Indian
English fiction, with a new perspective on the event emerging in each
succeeding decade. This book will endeavour to reflect upon this devel-
opment, just as it will try to show how from the 1950s to the 1980s the
Partition, in the minds of writers, no longer remained just a cataclysmic
event that needed to be recorded, but more a phenomenon to be ex-
plored and even theorized about as something that informed and de-
fined the social, political, cultural and religious realities on the Indian
subcontinent.
However, it is a fact that equally in history and in literature, both the
documentation and the representation of the Partition are tilted to the
Punjab side, in the sense that both historians and novelists appear to be
22
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

more concerned with and interested in the events that took place in
Punjab in 1947.
It needs to be stressed, however, that the Partition experience actually
turned out to be quite different on the Punjab and Bengal borders. The
crisis in Punjab was seen as a national emergency, to be tackled on vir-
tually a war footing. This obviously had a great deal to do with Punjab’s
strategic defense position on the western frontier of India, but there
was also another crucial factor at play here. As the communal violence
in the Punjab came close to being genocide, the government felt a
moral responsibility in promptly initiating rehabilitation measures for
the refugees. This sense of immediacy was totally lacking when it came
to the eastern border. As the incidents of communal violence in the east
were arguably less significant when compared to the sheer magnitude
and scale of the violence in the west, Hindu minorities in East Bengal
were not considered to be in grave danger, and the flight of these refu-
gees westwards was regarded mostly as the product of imaginary fears
and baseless rumours. In fact, well after it had begun, Nehru continued
to believe that the exodus in the east could be halted and even reversed,
provided the government in Dacca could be persuaded to deploy ‘psy-
chological measures’ to restore confidence among the Hindu minori-
ties.49 This difference in attitude and perception of the central govern-
ment in India regarding the nature of the crisis existent on the two bor-
ders translated itself into a striking difference in its per capita
expenditure on refugees in the west and the east – a difference that
would have permanent and debilitating consequences for the economy
of Bengal.50
Interestingly enough, even when one leaves aside the province of pol-
itics and administration and considers the question of literature, a simi-
lar difference can be seen. As far as Partition literature in the subconti-
nent is concerned, both Punjab and Bengal produced a substantial body
of work in the languages of the respective provinces. But unfortunately,
they have not been equally available. As vernacular literatures within In-
dia engage with each other to a great extent through the medium of
English, English translations of Partition stories and novels are of para-
mount importance in making these works available. Translation work in
this area certainly took some time to start in India, but when it did
(especially at the time of the Golden Jubilee celebration of Indepen-
dence in 1997), it was mostly from Hindi and Urdu to English, while
Bangla Partition novels and short stories were largely neglected.51 And
not only this, for even when it comes to the Indian novel in English,
one can discern a similar slant towards the Partition experience in the
Punjab. Inevitably then, this book reflects this Punjab bias as well, for
five out of the six novels considered herein deal with the Partition on
the Punjab border. The situation in Bengal is merely mentioned in
INTRODUCTION
23

some of them. In fact, while Rushdie admittedly deals at length with
the Bangladesh War of Independence (in Book III of Midnight’s Chil-
dren), an event which can be regarded as the second Partition52 of the
subcontinent, it is only Amitav Ghosh who in The Shadow Lines focuses
exclusively on the aftermath of the 1947 Partition on the Bengal border.
The six novels studied in this book
The first novel that will be discussed is Khushwant Singh’s Train to Pa-
kistan, which shows how Mano Majra, a sleepy little village on the fron-
tier between India and Pakistan, suddenly wakes up to unprecedented
violence and horror on the eve of the Partition. Sikhs and Muslims,
who had for generations lived peaceably together as ‘brothers’, can no
longer trust each other after they are made to burn a train-load of dead
Sikhs, and Muslims are threatened with retaliation. The violence that
erupted during the Partition has been frequently highlighted in fiction,
but nowhere with a more naked power than in Train to Pakistan. Stark
in style and matter-of-fact in tone, Khushwant Singh’s narrative is im-
personal to the point of being cold and, yet, is immensely gripping.
As the first Partition novel to be published in English (in 1956), it
has come to attain an iconic status.53 Critics across five decades unani-
mously agree on the power and popularity of the novel, however much
they may differ in their opinions as to its literary quality. The most sig-
nificant aspect of the novel is that, though its author deals with the car-
nage in the Punjab in 1947 with pitiless realism, unlike other bhasa
writers of the time, he is not completely taken up with just the violence,
for he also redeems a sense of faith in essential humanity at the end of
the novel through the figure of Jugga. Indeed, it must have been very
difficult to take such a stance at the time the novel was written, a diffi-
culty that is borne out by the fact that very few of his contemporaries
were able to do this. In fact, the greatness of the novel lies in this ability
of Singh to rise above parochialism, and not so much for the realistic
depiction of those times for which he has been universally praised.
The Maharashtrian author Manohar Malgonkar’s novel, A Bend in the
Ganges, shares with Khushwant Singh’s Train to Pakistan a preoccupa-
tion with political events, but it otherwise stands as a study in contrast.
These two novels, which are examined in Chapter I (‘Partition: The Ho-
locaust’) of this book, have some common aspects, but their literary
fates could not have been more different. Though he is far more
competent as a novelist, Malgonkar’s Partition novel has never enjoyed
the kind of popularity that Khushwant Singh’s novel has, but this has
not stopped Malgonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges from being extensively
studied by critics. It is perhaps ironic that this should be so, because
24
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

racy and packed with events as it is, Malgonkar’s novel has all the ingre-
dients of a bestseller. But the novelist’s real aim here is not to excite but
to provoke thoughts on the ‘whys’ of Partition and Independence.
Central to A Bend in the Ganges are two fundamental questions that
Malgonkar explores at great length – first, whether Hindus and Mus-
lims could really ever be united; and second, whether non-violence
could be a plausible and practical way of life. The answers to these
questions are presented through Malgonkar’s depiction of the two
heroes in the novel, Devi Dayal and Gian Talwar, who represent the op-
posing political ideologies of revolutionary terrorism and non-violence,
respectively. With great élan, Malgonkar shows how the initial clash be-
tween Indian Nationalism and British Imperialism gave way to com-
munalism in the last phase of the British rule in India, when friends
and neighbours became enemies virtually overnight, and Gandhi’s
‘non-violent’ India suddenly seemed to delight and indulge in an orgy
of violence. Yet, A Bend in the Ganges is not a novel about the violence
that erupted at the time of the Partition. It is far more an examination
of violence taken up as a creed. The orgy of violence that exploded dur-
ing the Partition was basically a drama of revenge. But what Malgonkar
explores in A Bend in the Ganges is the philosophy of violence as pro-
pounded by the terrorist movement, where violence was used not as an
instrument of revenge but employed as a political strategy by a subject
nation to achieve a positive political goal. The novelist thus explores two
kinds of violence in the course of the novel, the violence of revolution-
ary terrorism and that of communal violence, and shows how the one
mutated into the other during the period of the Second World War in
India.
Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man finds a place in this work by virtue of
its being arguably the most important and the most representative of
the Partition novels written by a Pakistani author.54 This novel happens
to be Sidhwa’s most popular novel, the work she is most readily identi-
fied with, aided in no small measure by the success of the film version
which was titled 1947: Earth and directed by the diasporic Indian film-
maker Deepa Mehta, who introduced it to a wider audience globally.55
The novel is about an eight-year-old Parsee girl, Lenny, whose world
falls apart when her beloved Ayah (who is a Hindu) is abducted, never
to come back in her life again. In the most crucial incident in the book,
Lenny, trusting the Ice-Candy-Man, betrays Ayah’s hiding place – and
the residual guilt of this betrayal never leaves her. This is the one inci-
dent that changes her life forever.
The violence with which Singh’s and Malgonkar’s novels are so pre-
occupied features in Ice-Candy-Man too, but here, it has a very different
appeal. In this novel we see everything through the eyes of Lenny, who,
though sharp and inquisitive, is after all only a spectator, living in the
INTRODUCTION
25

midst of, but apart from, the rising tensions among the Hindus, Mus-
lims and Sikhs of Lahore in 1947. The narrative of Ice-Candy-Man is
also different from that of Singh’s and Malgonkar’s in that it is a wo-
man-centric one, with its focus on Lenny’s Hindu Ayah, her abduction,
and later recovery and rehabilitation (which is possible only with the in-
tervention and sustained efforts of other sympathetic women). The
novel, thus, basically shows how the Partition and its trauma affected
women – both those who were victimized by its violence and those who
fought on their behalf.
Interestingly, the novel’s focus on women parallels a development in
Indian historiography, because it was not until the 1980s that women
found a proper representation in the Partition history. In fact, the most
seminal books written on the subject of women and the Partition were
actually published only in the 1990s56, and so, in a way, Ice-Candy-Man
may be said to have anticipated them. Additionally, Ice-Candy-Man also
parallels a development in Urdu literature, namely its representation of
rape. Instead of concentrating on the act of violation itself, the novel fo-
cuses on its aftermath, the trauma of the victim, and the way she tries
to cope with it and come out of it.57
In Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day, which along with Ice-Candy-Man
forms Chapter 2 (‘Women during the Partition: Victim and agent’) of
this book, the Partition is the backdrop to an emotional crisis that a pair
of siblings faces in their relationships and the ensuing change in their
personal equations. Political history is inextricably bound up with
personal history in this novel as the Partition changes the very profile
of the family and forces the siblings of the story – Bim, Raja and Tara –
to make emotional and intellectual adjustments in their lives. One of
the most celebrated novels of Anita Desai, Clear Light of Day also marks
a transitional point in her career. Like most of her earlier novels, the
alienation of the protagonist is a central concern here, too, but unlike
them, it does not lead to the annihilation of the self at the end, but to
its rejuvenation and reidentification with the milieu. Desai’s novels
have generally more to do with private selves than public lives – but in
Clear Light of Day, the two merge and mesh. Also, though this novel
has not been critiqued sufficiently from its Partition angle, a close ex-
amination of the text reveals that far from it having only a tenuous link
with the Partition, the event is actually crucial to both its plot and char-
acterization. It may be said indeed that the uniqueness of this novel lies
in the fact that it shows how the Partition affected even the lives of
those who were neither (even remotely) involved with nationalist poli-
tics, nor (and perhaps more significantly) were the victims of exile or
displacement after the Partition. The characters themselves suffer no
loss – albeit physical – of life and property at the time of the Partition.
There is no dislocation in their lives, only disruption, for Raja’s shifting
26
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

to Hyderabad is voluntary – propelled by desire and not compulsion. Fi-
nally, it will be an argument of this study that the novel also highlights
the ‘liberatory potential’ of the Partition, at least as far as women are
concerned. Being mainly about a woman (Bim) who is not a refugee or
a victim of Partition violence, but a victim of familial pressures and ob-
ligations, the novel shows how she finally comes into her own in the
summer of 1947 after being abandoned by her family.
Chapter 3 (‘The making of a nation: Religion or language?’) of this
book deals with Salman Rushdie’s magnum opus Midnight’s Children,
which changed the history of Indian writing in English forever. The
first novel by an Indian to win a Booker Prize58, it has enjoyed a phe-
nomenal success both in India and abroad right from the time it was
published in 1981, its cult status being attested repeatedly when it won
the ‘Booker of Bookers’ (adjudged to be the best book to have won the
prize in the first 25 years of its history) in 1993; and again, the prize for
the best Booker of 40 years in 2008. There are two protagonists in Mid-
night’s Children – Saleem Sinai and independent India, both born at the
midnight hour of August 15, 1947. Together, in this phantasmagoric
saga, nation and child go through the pangs of birth, the tantrums of
childhood, the traumas of adolescence, and the anomie of adulthood.
And the novel portrays how Saleem’s personal story becomes inter-
linked with the three partitioned States of India, Pakistan and (later)
Bangladesh.
The novel has spawned a most prodigious amount of critical com-
mentary in the almost three decades of its famed existence. It has been
celebrated as the quintessential postmodern text59 for Rushdie’s use of
‘magic realism’, and much else. But strangely enough, Rushdie’s very
unique representation of the Partition in the novel seems to have some-
how missed the attention of the critics. In fact, it may be said that there
are three aspects about the treatment of the Partition in Midnight’s Chil-
dren that sharply differentiate it from the other novels discussed so far.
The first is that it is the only novel that takes within its ambit both the
Partition of 1947, which divided the subcontinent into a secular India
and an Islamic Pakistan, as well as the later division of the two wings
of Islamic Pakistan into two separate nations, Pakistan and Bangladesh,
in 1971. The novel’s second unique aspect is that unlike the other Parti-
tion novels mentioned so far, its characters inhabit all three partitioned
states of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. And finally, the novel stands
out in the special way in which it represents the precise moment of the
Partition. Indeed, Midnight’s Children’s depiction of the Partition is not
only interesting and unique, but also extremely significant as it raises
some of the most profound questions about Indian politics regarding
the issues of nationalism and secularism, the politics of religion and
language, and the failures of 1947.
INTRODUCTION
27

Completely different from Midnight’s Children is Amitav Ghosh’s The
Shadow Lines, a novel that shows the far-reaching consequences of the
Partition, even two generations after the event. Ghosh focuses here on
the absurdity of the Partition and its ability to unleash endless ripples
of violence through a crucial incident in 1964 when the protagonist’s
uncle, Tridib, falls victim to a rioting mob’s fury in Dhaka. The novel
won the Sahitya Academy Award in 1988, and its popularity with read-
ers and critics alike has never abated since60; and it has also been on
college and university courses syllabi across the world.
The analysis of Ghosh’s text in Chapter 4 (‘Imagined communities:
Questioning the border’) reveals that it is not as much about the Parti-
tion per se as the idea of a nation, and about the concept of the narrative
of the nation. In one way, its concern is more with historiography than
history. In fact, it dramatizes what Milan Kundera says in The Book of
Laughter and Forgetting, that ‘the struggle of man against power is the
struggle of memory against forgetting’.61 In his own novel, Ghosh pits
the memory of communal riots in the subcontinent against the docu-
mented history of its wars. He also examines the nature of the relation-
ship between the modern nation state and its citizens, and exposes the
limits of that relationship. Equally, as this study will attempt to show,
The Shadow Lines is the only novel not only to deal exclusively with the
aftermath of the Partition, but also with the Partition on the Bengal bor-
der. In this context, it is important to note that Ghosh happens to be
the only major Indian-English novelist who is preoccupied with the
Bengal Partition, vis-à-vis the exilic movements that it led to. Three of
his novels (The Circle of Reason, The Shadow Lines and The Hungry Tide)
address, in varying degree, the aftermath of the 1947 Partition in Ben-
gal, and look at the continual refugee problem that it led to, thus high-
lighting one of the most vexed and long-standing unresolved issues of
post-Independence/Partition subcontinental politics.
Novels not selected for study
The six novels discussed above have been selected for study because
they are not only landmarks (in many cases) in the history of Indian-
English fiction, but more importantly also represent distinct trends as
far as the Partition theme is concerned.
There are actually quite a few others which are taken up with the In-
dian Nationalist/Gandhian movement of the early decades of the twenti-
eth century; and some of them even lead up to the Partition and its im-
mediate social aftermath. The most celebrated among them are Kantha-
pura by Raja Rao (1938)62; Waiting for the Mahatma by R.K. Narayan
(1956)63; Sunlight on a Broken Column by Attia Hossain (1951)64; Inqui-
28
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

lab by Khwaja Ahmed Abbas (1955)65; Some Inner Fury by Kamala Mar-
kandaya (1956)66; A Time to be Happy by Nayantara Sahgal (1957)67;
Azadi by Chaman Nahal (1975)68; and Looking Through Glass by Mukul
Kesavan (1995).69
But it needs to be noted here that though all these novels collectively
can be said to deal with the Indian nationalist movement in general,
each of them actually focuses on a particular landmark on the road to
freedom. They are, variously, the Non-Cooperation movement (1920);
the Civil Disobedience movement (1930); the ‘Quit India’ movement
(1942, one of the most popular of the mass movements launched by
Gandhi – a fact that is reflected in quite a few novels); and finally, Inde-
pendence, Partition (1947) and its immediate consequences.
This study, on the other hand, has chosen novels that are more fo-
cused on the Partition, engage with it in direct ways and offer fresh per-
spectives on the event and its meanings.
Filling up a lacuna
The Partition is a historical legacy handed down unwanted to the chil-
dren of the three nations India, Pakistan and later Bangladesh. The
memories of the pain suffered in those times, of the splits that frac-
tured and refractured the subcontinent, the remembrance of the scale
and the intensity of the human suffering that the Partition caused, are
the stuff that fill the pages of the novels studied in this book. Yet, as the
following analyses of the selected Partition novels will attempt to indi-
cate, individually, each novelist’s treatment of the Partition is different
from the others’, even as over time they collectively plot a curve of de-
velopment as far as attitude and perspective are concerned. It is this
particular aspect – i.e. tracing the evolution of the Partition theme in In-
dian-English fiction over a period of three decades – which may be a va-
luable contribution of this book to its field. It is important here to take
a brief look at the existing body of criticism on the Indian-English no-
vel.
The novel happens to be the most successful genre in Indian-English
literature. And ever since its study was instituted in universities all over
India, there has been no dearth of criticism on this genre. But they
mostly fall into two categories – they are either author-based mono-
graphs that study the works of any one novelist (often very early in their
careers); or, more frequently, they are anthologies of essays on Indian-
English fiction as a whole. At any given period of time, it is the latter
that outweighs any other form of criticism on Indian-English literature.
An interesting feature of these anthologies is that they are usually fo-
cused on recent publications. Thus, an anthology edited by R.K. Dha-
INTRODUCTION
29

wan in 1982 is titled Explorations in Modern Indo-English Fiction70; and
another edited by R.S. Pathak a whole decade later, Recent Indian Fiction
(1994).71 Even when the focus is narrowed to a particular theme, the
emphasis is still on the contemporary. Two such recent examples would
be P.S. Ravi’s Modern Indian Fiction: History, Politics and Individual in
the Novels of Salman Rushdie, Amitav Ghosh & Upamanyu Chatterjee72
and M.K. Bhatnagar’s Modern Indian English Novel: A Critical Study of
the Political Motif, both published in 2003.73 Makarand Paranjape has
very perceptively analyzed this trend in Indian-English criticism thus:
As we approach the end of this century, nay millennium, there
seems to be an acceleration of time, a sort of telescoping of his-
tory. We seem to be overtaken by the present, deluged by the
now, swallowed up by the contemporary (...). So far as IE fiction
is concerned, this has resulted in the peculiar highlighting of the
latest over all the rest. In an essay called ‘Myths and Misconcep-
tions about IE Literature’, I have labelled this phenomenon as
the fallacy that the latest is the best. This idea, at least partly,
stems from the world of consumer goods in which the latest
usually is the best because it is technologically more advanced.
Similar notions of technological advancement inform the dis-
course which considers the newest literary sensation as signal-
ling a new masterpiece. Of course, such an ideology ends up
supporting the market forces which, increasingly, regard a novel
as a consumer product, not an artistic one. The promoting,
packaging, and marketing of culture, then, is merely a subset of
the larger phenomenon of consumerism.74 (2000: 122)
Not surprisingly, then, Paranjape himself is one of the very few Indian
critics not only to have studied the genre of the Indian-English novel as
a whole, but to have undertaken no less a task than articulating a poe-
tics of the genre in Towards a Poetics of the Indian English Novel
(2000).75
Before him, Meenakshi Mukherjee was the first to specifically study
the themes and techniques of the Indian-English novel over a substan-
tial period of time in her seminal work, The Twice-born Fiction: A Study
of the Themes and Techniques of Indian Novels in English 1930-1964.76 Yet
the only work to undertake a detailed study of the critical discourse of
the Indian-English novel is by a foreigner. Dieter Riemenschneider’s
The Indian Novel in English: Its Critical Discourse 1934-2004 (2005)77 is
an important contribution to an academic field where, till now, regretta-
bly, quantity has always overwhelmed quality.
Even when we leave aside the genre of the Indian-English novel as a
whole and come to the specific theme of ‘the Partition’ – which has de-
30
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

veloped into a kind of subgenre over six decades – we will notice the
same critical tendencies discussed above. Thus, though all the authors
dealt with in this book are both very well known and have been thor-
oughly researched, their Partition novels are seldom placed in a tradi-
tion of Partition literature – they are, once again, either part of single-
author studies (which place them in the author’s overall oeuvre) or else
part of anthologies where miscellaneous essays are strung together on
the common theme of the Partition. Recent examples of the former
would be Pramod Kumar Singh’s The Novels of Khushwant Singh: A Cri-
tical Evaluation (2005)78 and Anshuman Mondal’s Amitav Ghosh,
2007.79 Two very recent anthologies on Partition literature to which I
have myself contributed are Narinder Neb and Tejinder Kaur (eds.) Per-
spectives on the Partition Fiction of the Subcontinent (2006)80 and R.K.
Dhawan and Neena Arora (eds.) Partition and Indian Literature, Vol. 2
(2010).81 Partition is currently a favourite topic with Indian scholars, a
fact reflected by the addition of two more titles on the subject in 2008,
N. S. Gundur’s Partition and Indian English Fiction82 and Dr. D.R.
More’s The Novels on the Indian Partition.83
Novelists and the question of theme aside, when we come to the six
specific texts that are discussed in this book, it is useful to remember
that, apart from being penned by well-known writers, they are also very
popular themselves; and in fact, in four (Train to Pakistan, Ice-Candy-
Man, Midnight’s Children, and The Shadow Lines) out of the six cases,
they happen to be their authors’ best-known works. Consequently, they
not only regularly turn up as pieces for anthologies, but sometimes
have entire critical books devoted to them. The most well-known among
the latter are Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children: A Book of Readings (1999)
edited by Meenakshi Mukherjee84, The Shadow Lines: Educational Edi-
tion (2002)85, and Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man: A Reader’s Companion
(2004) edited by Rashmi Gaur.86 Yet, none of the above categories of
critical books, single-author studies, anthologies on the theme of the
Partition, or exclusive anthologies devoted to certain texts, deal with the
evolution of the Partition theme itself. This book hopes to fill this lacu-
na.
INTRODUCTION
31


1
Partition: The Holocaust
Iconic status of Train to Pakistan
‘Khuswant Singh’s searing novel Mano Majra (Train to Pakistan, New
York, 1956), first made me aware of the human impact of Partition’s
tragedy on Punjab’ (2006: ix). This is Stanley Wolpert’s first statement
of ‘Acknowledgements’ in Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British
Empire in India.1 Wolpert, one of the most reputed historians of the Par-
tition of the Indian subcontinent, acknowledges this intellectual debt in
2006, exactly fifty years after Train to Pakistan was first published; and
his comment, in a way, sums up the stature of Singh’s novel as a Parti-
tion text.
Train to Pakistan2 was the first English novel to be written on the
theme of Partition, and it also happened to be Khushwant Singh’s first
book. Singh himself was trained as a lawyer and practised in Lahore
High Court till the Partition took him away from his beloved city and
landed him, like hundreds and thousands of other Sikhs and Hindus at
the time, in Delhi. In the six decades since then, he has donned many
hats – that of diplomat, eminent journalist/columnist3, reputed histor-
ian4, distinguished publishing editor5, and one of India’s most re-
spected (and controversial) public figures.
All through this long career in writing and publishing, Khushwant
Singh wrote several novels, especially Train to Pakistan (1956), I Shall
Not Hear the Nightingale (1959)6, Delhi (1983)7, In the Company of Wo-
men (1999)8, and most recently, Burial at Sea (2004).9 Among these,
Train to Pakistan remains the best and also the most well-known Parti-
tion novel in English to date. No other novel that came after it (and
there have been many), however famous or brilliant, has been able to
supplant it in popularity. And even when it comes to commentators and
critics, it has had a phenomenal track record. In this respect, it is inter-
esting to note that even novelists who have themselves written on the
subject of the Partition have praised it highly. Salman Rushdie for in-
stance praised it as ‘the only good book on the theme [of Partition]’10,
while Amitav Ghosh has acknowledged it as ‘a classic’.11 Critics of the

Indian-English novel, from K.R. Srinivasa Iyengar12 and Meenakshi Mu-
kherjee13 to William Walsh14 and Paul Brians15, have also felt it neces-
sary to devote a great deal of critical space and attention to Train to Pa-
kistan. This already existing copious criticism notwithstanding, Train to
Pakistan cannot be ignored in any study that attempts to explore the de-
velopment of the Partition theme in the Indian-English novel. Hence it
will be the first novel to be examined in this book.
Train to Pakistan is a vignette – the depiction of a sleepy little village
called Mano Majra, situated on the declared border between the still-to-
be-formed nations of India and Pakistan, suddenly waking to unprece-
dented violence and horror on the eve of the Partition. The action
covers only a few weeks and deals mainly with the predicament of a
quite innocent and completely unpolitical people caught up in the
whirlwind of the Partition. It is noticeable that there is a certain symme-
try to the action depicted in that both at the beginning and end of the
novel there are identical situations: a trainload of dead bodies (all of
them Sikhs) comes from Pakistan at the beginning, and it is decided
that a trainload of dead (all of them Muslims) should go over to Paki-
stan at the end. Only, in the latter case, this is prevented at the last min-
ute by the cunning of one man and the sacrifice of another.
In his autobiography, Truth, Love & a Little Malice: An Autobiogra-
phy16, Khushwant Singh recounts that while he was practising law in
Lahore, he became part of a literary circle, and that he used his ‘visits
to Sikh villages from where [his] clients came as backgrounds for [his]
stories’ (2002: 102)17. He also recalls how, on the eve of the Partition,
he had narrowly missed being murdered on his way to Lahore from Ab-
botabad via Taxila, and how the day after he reached Lahore, he had
‘(…) learnt from the papers that the train by which [he] had travelled
had been held up at the signal near Taxila station and all the Sikh pas-
sengers in it dragged out and murdered’ (2002: 108)18.
Two things clearly emerge from these reminiscences: first, that by
1956, Khushwant Singh had already written fiction that used the village
as a backdrop; and second, that he had himself (even if he had not actu-
ally faced violence) known of many instances of train-related killings on
the Punjab border on the eve of the Partition. It needs to be noted too
that as an amateur historian, Singh could not but have been conscious
of the momentous age of Indian history that he had lived through. This
must have prompted him to write fiction, for he probably found fiction
to be a better medium than history to reflect on contemporary realities.
However, his instincts as a historian, together with his own experiences
at the time of the Partition, combined with his budding skills as a fic-
tion writer, all came together to produce Train to Pakistan. The novel it-
self (entitled Mano Majra in the American edition) was first published
in 1956, within a decade of India’s Independence. As K.R. Srinivasa
34
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Iyengar remarks: ‘It could not have been an easy novel to write. The
events, so recent, so terrible in their utter savagery and meaningless-
ness, must have defied assimilation in terms of art’ (1962; 1996:
502)19.
Yet, whatever may have been the specific difficulties, aesthetic or
otherwise, faced by the novelist, it is undeniable that Singh succeeded
in writing a novel of abiding popularity. One of the most distinctive as-
pects of the novel is its preoccupation with political events. ‘Events’ in
themselves occupy an important place in this novel, even to the exclu-
sion of such features as psychological insight, probably because the
author lived too near to the events he describes. This is the case, in fact,
with not only Train to Pakistan but also Manohar Malkgonkar’s Parti-
tion novel A Bend in the Ganges. First published in 1956 and 1964, re-
spectively, these two works of fiction can almost be taken as direct poli-
tical and social documents of the Partition. Yet they are radically differ-
ent not only in their focus, but also in their selection of events and in
their styles of narration, as will become clear in the later section of this
chapter, which will consider Malgonkar’s novel.
Symbolic significance of trains
Before moving on to an analysis of Singh’s novel and its depiction of
events, it is important to pause and reflect on the symbolic significance
of trains with regard to the Partition in general and Partition literature
in particular. Trains happen to be one of the most enduring images of
the Partition of the subcontinent. An image of overloaded trains, with
people pasted on to every possible part of its body – clinging on to the
windows, perched precariously on footboards, hanging between the buf-
fers, crowding on the roofs – is what immediately comes to mind while
thinking of the Partition. It is an image that has been permanently im-
printed on the nation’s collective imagination; and has become, over
the decades, a convenient shorthand to refer to the Partition. To give a
ready example of this, it may be pointed out that as many as three
books relating to the Partition published within the last decade in India
have, on their front covers, pictures of such trains.20
When it comes to the representation of trains in written texts or lit-
erature, Khushwant Singh’s novel is definitely not the only one that
deals with this theme or has a train as one of its motifs. Quite a few
celebrated Hindi and Urdu short stories, for example, revolve around
this too, and mention may be made of Bhisham Sahni’s ‘We have ar-
rived in Amritsar’, Krishan Chander’s ‘Peshawar Express’ and Amrit
Rai’s ‘Kichar’.21 All these stories use the train as a trope to conceptua-
lize the fragility of life, and to articulate the idea of the uncertainty of
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
35

being able to reach one’s destination. But each of them does this in its
own distinctive way. In Bhisham Sahni’s story, a Hindu weakling shifts
from being in a perpetual state of terror while living in a Muslim major-
ity area to a state of revengeful and homicidal arrogance in a Hindu ma-
jority area. Rather differently, Krishan Chander assigns the narrator’s
role to the Peshawar Express, traversing the blood and gore of the vast
terrain of the north-western region. Passing from one warring territory
to another, the train carries not just dead bodies, but horrific tales and
rumours as well. Thus, the train acquires the status of a reporter, travel-
ling far and wide to report on the violence stalking the country during
the dark days of the Partition. On a different note, those sitting in the
train compartment in Amrit Rai’s story ‘Kichar’ are not uprooted refu-
gees but well-heeled members of society, ensconced in their middle-
class comforts. They talk about ‘national’ (Hindu-Muslim) and ‘interna-
tional’ (India-Pakistan) issues with the same nonchalance as they talk
about the hike in the food price at a local restaurant. The murders in
East Punjab are reduced to statistics in their conversation, and pride is
taken in the fact that the Partition has brought to the fore the militancy
of the Hindus, who are now considered to be no more the punching
bags of the ‘eternally aggressive Muslims’, since the ratio of killings is
now reported to be 3:2. And to the men, the tales of violation of women
are nothing more than pornography written on an epic scale. Rai’s story
thus records with anguish the patriarchal snobbery and vicariousness
underlying all narrations of abduction, rape and other forms of violation
against women.
In striking contrast, in Train to Pakistan the violence that erupted at
the time of the Partition is represented in a very unusual way. There is
no detailed description in the novel of the train journey undertaken by
the refugees – in terms of neither the practical difficulties faced nor the
dangers involved. More importantly, we are also not shown the violence
happening; for there is not even a reported description of the incidents
in the novel. We are just informed about the end result of the violence:
the trainloads of corpses that arrive at Mano Majra. What is detailed by
Khushwant Singh is the aftermath of the violence, that is, how the
trainloads of the dead are successively disposed of; how it changes
everything in the village; and how another similar event is prevented
from happening. The train, in fact, has a completely different symbolic
value in Singh’s text inasmuch as it represents an otherwise insulated
village’s tenuous link with the outside world. Most importantly, the
trains running to and from Mano Majra are shown to regulate the life
of the village and its inhabitants. Thus, the disruption in the railway
schedule after the Partition functions in the novel as a sign of social
chaos, as the following passage makes clear:
36
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Early in September the time schedule in Mano Majra started
going wrong. Trains became less punctual than ever before and
many more started to run through at night. Some days it seemed
as though the alarm clock had been set for the wrong hour. On
others, it was as if no one had remembered to wind it. Imam
Baksh waited for Meet Singh to make the first start. Meet Singh
waited for the mullah’s call to prayer before getting up. People
stayed in bed late without realizing that times had changed and
the mail train might not run through at all. Children did not
know when to be hungry, and clamoured for food all the time. In
the evenings, everyone was indoors before sunset and in bed be-
fore the express came by – if it did come by. Goods trains had
stopped running altogether, so there was no lullaby to lull them
to sleep. Instead, ghost trains went past at odd hours between
midnight and dawn, disturbing the dreams of Mano Majra.22
(Singh 1956; 1988: 91-92)
This is just the prelude to the nightmare that the villagers of Mano Majra
have to undergo in the next few weeks in the wake of the Partition. There
is a succession of violent and unprecedented events that follow each
other rapidly in the summer of 1947, leaving the villagers totally helpless
and disoriented. Bhai Meet Singh, the priest of the Gurudwara, very
aptly sums up what the villagers go through towards the end of the
novel. Updating Iqbal (a communist agent just released from jail) on the
recent events in Mano Majra, the Bhai tells him:
What has been happening? Ask me what has not been happen-
ing. Trainloads of dead people came to Mano Majra. We burned
one lot and buried another. The river was flooded with corpses.
Muslims were evacuated, and in their place, refugees have come
from Pakistan. (pp. 191-192)
These words are of crucial significance as they detail the five key
‘events’ around which the narrative of Train to Pakistan is woven.
The five events of the narrative
Of all these ‘events’, it is the third event, that is, the eviction of the
Muslims from their own village, that is accorded a place of primacy in
the narrative. Certainly, it is the most poignant part of the whole book.
It is pathetic the way Chacha Imam Baksh comes to the Sikh assembly
and asks their verdict on the sudden decision of the local administra-
tion to evacuate the Muslim villagers of Mano Majra in the faint hope
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
37

that they will ask him and his fellow Muslims to stay. He is reassured,
only to be disappointed, for everybody understands the purport of the
lambardar’s words when he says:
Yes, you are our brothers. As far as we are concerned, you and
your children and your grandchildren can live here as long as
you like… But Chacha, we are so few and the strangers coming
from Pakistan are coming in thousands. Who will be responsible
for what they do? (p. 147)
The Chacha accepts his fate, though with a heavy heart, but his daugh-
ter Nooran simply refuses to leave the place of her birth. She is fierce
in her assertion of her rights as opposed to the emotional outburst of
her father in the Sikh gathering. Chacha tells her that if she does not
leave by herself, then she will be ‘thrown out’. And in fact, that is ex-
actly what happens to the Muslims in Mano Majra, for they are ‘thrown
out’ by their fellow villagers.
By themselves and as a community, the villagers are naïve and ignor-
ant people with very little political awareness and with even less knowl-
edge of what was happening in India at the time. Independence and
the Partition had not affected their lives till then, just as the struggle for
freedom had made no difference in their day-to-day affairs. They could
not even understand what the fuss about Independence was all about.
As the lambardar asks a startled Iqbal (who, after having caused a good
deal of confusion in the village as to his religious identity23, was trying
– unsuccessfully – to share communist thoughts with the elders of the
village):
Freedom must be a good thing. But what will we get out of it?
Educated people like you, Babu Sahib, will get the jobs the Eng-
lish had. Will we get more lands or more buffaloes? 24 [And then
goes on to reply himself] No… Freedom is for the educated peo-
ple who fought for it. We were slaves of the English, now we will
be slaves of the educated Indians – or the Pakistanis. (p. 62)
When such a community of people who seem to have no dealings with
the political life of the nation whatsoever are suddenly thrust into the
vortex of a political cataclysm, it is but natural that it would not register
on them at first. As Singh shows in the novel, it is through the medium
of the refugees that the people of Mano Majra first come to know of the
violence just outside the confines of their little world, a violence that
was spilling over and now spreading into the heart of their own village.
But they were ignorant of the extent of the savagery that was now ram-
pant all across the western and eastern borders of India (the areas
38
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

where the migrations took place, where there were whole-scale ex-
changes of population). That they were ignorant even after having burnt
a trainload of corpses is because of the fact that though they were
shocked and stunned by such a happening, they had taken it to be an
exception and could not believe it to be the rule. That is why the Sikh
officer’s merciless, sarcastic words at the time of the Muslim evacuation
come as a blow to the villagers. When Meet Singh expresses his dis-
comfort with the idea of being entrusted with the custody of the evacu-
ated Muslim villagers’ property, saying that it might later lead to misun-
derstandings between friends, the Sikh officer replies,
You are quite right, Bhaiji, there is some danger of being misun-
derstood. One should never touch another’s property; one should
never look at another’s woman. One should just let others take
one’s goods and sleep with one’s sisters. The only way people
like you will understand anything is by being sent over to Paki-
stan; have your sisters and mothers raped in front of you, have
your clothes taken off, and be sent back with a kick and spit on
your behinds. (pp. 157-8)
This is actually a blow that is even worse than the evacuation of the
Muslims. At least the evacuation was for something good, the villagers
of Mano Majra thought – their friends and neighbours reaching safety;
while what the Sikh officer was talking of was a scenario devoid of all
sanity and humanity. Gradually, the novel records the progressive dar-
kening of their vision as they are stripped, one by one, of all their illu-
sions. And nowhere does this transpire better than in the actual act of
the evacuation of the Muslim inhabitants of Mano Majra.
To begin with, the Muslims of the village of Mano Majra thought they
were going to the neighbouring Chandannagar camp only for a few
days, locking their houses and leaving their cattle under the care of the
Sikhs. But soon they learn that though they will be staying at the Chan-
dannagar camp for a few days, afterwards they will have to proceed to
Pakistan. The truth now strikes them that they have been moved to go
to Pakistan, and not (as they had earlier thought) to halt and then come
back to Mano Majra once the storm has blown over. But an even greater
shock awaits them, and this is the realization that they cannot take their
belongings with them, and that they can only take what they can carry
in their hands. What is more, they are forced to leave everything not
under the care of their fellow villagers, as they had thought, but in the
custody of Malli (a dacoit of the neighbouring village) and his gang and
a few refugees, and everybody knew what these people would do with
their belongings. Still, a pretension is kept up by the police that their
goods will be returned to them in due course, and so, a mock list is
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
39

made of the items left behind. Both the Muslim and Sikh officers in-
volved in this operation know, of course, that the Muslims are going to
Pakistan forever (if they do not get killed on the way, that is); and that
nothing will remain of their belongings, which will either be looted or
destroyed.
Hence in a matter of hours, the world of the Muslims in Mano Majra
falls apart forever. They are stripped of all their hopes, begin to realize
that they are about to lose everything, and yet are powerless to do any-
thing about this. It is unique the way this ironic building up of loss is
dramatized in the novel, showing the utter helplessness of ordinary
people overwhelmed by historical forces that are simply beyond their
control, or even their comprehension.
But the most poignant part of the entire episode is of course the fare-
well, or rather the lack of it. As the narrator says:
There was no time to make arrangements. There was no time
even to say good-bye. Truck engines were started. Pathan soldiers
rounded up the Muslims, drove them back to the carts for a brief
minute or two, and then on to the trucks. In the confusion of the
rain, mud and soldiers herding the peasants about with the muz-
zles of their sten guns sticking in their backs, the villagers saw
little of each other. All they could do was to shout their last fare-
wells from the trucks… The Sikhs watched them till they were
out of sight. They wiped the tears off their faces and turned back
to their homes with heavy hearts. (p. 159)
The chapter in which this happens is not only a very crucial one in the
novel, but also a representative one, for what is shown as happening
here was actually happening all around in the Punjab and Bengal in
1947. As Iyengar perceptively comments: ‘What is recorded with such
particularity was but a speck in the dust-whirl that was the Partition’
(1988: 501)25. This episode, in fact, effectively dramatizes what the nar-
rator himself records on the very first page of the novel:
Hundreds of thousands of Hindus and Sikhs who had lived for
centuries on the Northwest Frontier abandoned their homes and
fled toward the protection of the predominantly Sikh and Hindu
communities in the east. They travelled on foot, in bullock carts,
crammed into lorries, clinging to the sides and roofs of trains.
Along the way – at fords, at crossroads, at railroad stations – they
collided with panicky swarms of Muslims fleeing to safety in the
west. The riots had become a rout. By the summer of 1947,
when the creation of the new state of Pakistan was formally an-
nounced, ten million people – Muslims and Hindus and Sikhs –
40
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

were in flight. By the time the monsoon broke, almost a million
of them were dead, and all of northern India was in arms, in ter-
ror, or in hiding. (p. 9)
We find similar reflections in a number of other Partition novels as
well. There are almost identical passages in, for example, Manohar Mal-
gonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges and Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man. But
what is more important to note is that all such reflections highlight the
fact that at the time of the Partition, most common people living on the
borders suffered from the illusion that all the looting and killing was
happening ‘elsewhere’, and that they themselves would remain un-
scathed or at least would be able to avoid it. Teckchand, in Malgonkar’s
novel, for instance, bitterly regrets not accepting his wife’s advice of
leaving Duriabad, their hometown, for the safety of the Hindu-majority
Allahabad. At the end of the novel, he is stranded in his own house
waiting for a convoy that never seems to start. He bitterly reflects: ‘It
was as simple as that, just two weeks ago. Get into a car and drive away’
(Malgonkar 1964: 346). But now this has become impossible. And as
the novel shows, the entire Teckchand family is wiped out (including
the servants). Only the daughter, Sundari, survives, and Malgonkar
leaves a faint ray of hope open that she will reach safety and start a new
life with the novel’s protagonist Gian, who turns up in Duriabad at a
most crucial moment.
In Ice-Candy-Man, similarly, we are given a vivid account of the sav-
agery that was perpetrated in hundreds of villages across the border.
One particular episode in this novel stands out, and this is the depiction
of an incident of Partition violence against Muslims that Sidhwa sepa-
rately heads as ‘Ranna’s Story’ (Sidhwa 1989: 195-208), and which was
later included by Salman Rushdie in The Vintage Book of Indian Writing
in English.26 Yet, it should be noted here that the narration of these inci-
dents sums up something far more significant than a mere retelling of
similar stories. Actually, the impression created by all these episodes
from the different novels is one of what Maulana Azad called the ‘total
insanity of the two-nation theory’.27
Khushwant Singh further shows that even in villages where there
were no animosities between the different communities even after hear-
ing rumours, a division was forced upon them by the administration,
from the fear that things might get out of hand otherwise. The lambar-
dar, for instance, echoes the Magistrate Hukum Chand’s earlier omi-
nous warning: ‘if something happens…’, and warns his fellow villagers
that the refugees who had arrived till then were a peaceful lot only be-
cause they had not lost any of their women folk, but that if this hap-
pened, it would be difficult to contain them. The villagers are thus
placed in a peculiar predicament. They cannot refuse to shelter the in-
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
41

coming refugees, but they also cannot allow them to be violent towards
their own fellow villagers who happen to be Muslims. To foment trou-
ble, Hukum Chand concocts false charges against innocent people and
tries to arouse false fears to provoke the Sikhs against the Muslims. He
even draws up an elaborate plan to loosen the strong ties existent for
generations between the two communities, so that the Sikhs would no
longer try to stop their fellow Muslim villagers from leaving Mano Majra.
Police enquiries are initiated about Jugga, Sultana and Iqbal, even
though as the reactions of Meet Singh and the lambardar indicate, the
villagers know very well that there is not a word of truth in the allegations
made by the police, and that the facts are that Jugga would never murder
anyone in his own village, that Sultana and his gang had left for Pakistan
long ago, and that Iqbal was actually a shaven Sikh who had come to
Mano Majra only after the murder of Ramdayal, the Hindu moneylender
of the village. Yet, such is the power of rumour and such is the insidious
role it plays that it changes everything overnight and provokes dishar-
mony in the hitherto peaceful village.
As Khushwant Singh indicates, the refugees themselves play a kind
of catalytic role in this respect, for it is through their presence in the vil-
lage that the Sikhs become aware, for the first time, of the atrocities
perpetrated against their community outside the confines of their own
village. Therefore, though the Sikh villagers are initially hesitant about
throwing out their Muslim brethren, they are later persuaded to do just
that. The refugees succeed in inciting the weak-minded villagers against
the Muslims28; and they themselves eagerly join the notorious dacoit
Malli in his looting and later the khaki-clad youth in his escapade to
stop the train from going to Pakistan. It is also interesting to note that
the refugees themselves remain an anonymous cluster of men who are
neither named nor given individual stories. This is largely because in
Khushwant Singh’s scheme of things, the refugees serve a more func-
tional purpose than to represent human interest material.
If the third major event depicted in Train to Pakistan, the evacuation
of the Muslims precipitated by the presence of the refugees, is poign-
ant, then the first and the last gruesome event, the trainloads of dead
arriving at the beginning and end of the novel, lend an aura of eerie
suspense to the narrative. These arrivals also serve another important
function in that they mirror the sea change that takes place in the atmo-
sphere of the village as in the attitude of its inhabitants. It is significant,
too, that the narrator’s tone is sympathetic in the description or evoca-
tion of the coming of the first batch of the trainload of corpses. The no-
velist clearly shows the shock and bewilderment of the villagers; shows
how the rhythm of their lives is disrupted, disjointed and broken. They
are totally taken aback by the happening and even forget their daily
chores. It is as if life itself had come to a halt.
42
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

While depicting the destruction of a neighbouring village whose
corpses fill up the Sutlej, Singh shows the same incredulity of the Mano
Majrans as when they had burnt the first trainload of dead or evacuated
their Muslim brothers. It is the fourth tragedy to strike them in a mat-
ter of weeks, and in all that time, they seem to be dealing only with the
dead and the dying. But while depicting the response of the Mano Maj-
rans to the second trainload of corpses – which they eventually bury,
and which is the fifth and last in a series of horrific events that they
face within a very short time – the narrator’s tone changes. Previously,
while registering the shock of the villagers to the arrival of a whole
trainful of dead Sikhs from Pakistan at their station, the narrator had
said: ‘That evening, for the first time in the memory of Mano Majra,
Imam Baksh’s sonorous cry did not rise to the heavens to proclaim the
glory of God’ (pp. 100-101). In sharp contrast to this, while dealing with
the second trainload of dead at the end of the novel, there is no expres-
sion of sympathetic engagement on the part of the narrator. Rather,
there is only a scathing remark:
When they came back to the village, [i.e. the people who had
gone to inspect the river, to see what was floating on it] nobody
was about to hear what they had to say. They were all on the
roof-tops looking at the station. After two days a train had drawn
up at Mano Majra in the daytime. Since the engine faced east-
ward, it must have come from Pakistan. This time too the place
was full of soldiers and policemen and the station had been cor-
doned off. The news of the corpses on the river was shouted
from the housetops. People told each other about the mutilation
of women and children. Nobody wanted to know who the dead
people were, nor wanted to go to the river to find out. There was
a new interest at the station, with promise of worse horrors than
the last one. (p. 166)
From the feeling of ‘This cannot happen to our village’ to the thrill of
more violence (‘There was (…) promise of worse horrors than the last
one’) – this shocking change in the attitude of simple village folk within
the span of only a few weeks speaks volumes about the hellish nature
of those times when the moral order had collapsed, and no one could
make any sense of the cataclysmic changes that were happening all
around them.
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
43

Flaws/Jugga, and Singh’s redeeming vision
The narrative of Train to Pakistan thus neatly divides itself up into the
five events that have been discussed so far – viz. the evacuation of the
Mano Majra Muslims; the burning and later burial of two trainloads of
Muslim and Sikh corpses, respectively; the arrival of refugees from
across the border; and the destruction of a neighbouring village. This
excessive preoccupation with events is basically Singh’s way of high-
lighting the terrible holocaust of the Partition. To maintain this focus,
he uses a simple, straightforward narrative and even eschews such im-
portant aspects of fictional representation as the individualization of
characters.
This becomes clear if we examine the figurative language used in the
novel. It first appears to be in keeping with the backdrop of Mano Majra
– homely images, and abundant metaphors and similes that smell of
the soil. To cite a few examples:
‘The head constable’s visit had divided Mano Majra into two
halves as neatly as a knife cuts through a pat of butter.’ (Narrator
– p. 41)
‘… a snake can cast its slough but not its poison.’ (Bhai to Iqbal –
p. 55)
‘Babuji, who kills a hen which lays eggs?’ (Jugga to the police –
p. 125)
‘A wise man swims with the current and still gets across.’ (Hu-
kum Chand to the sub-inspector – p. 116)
However, a close examination will reveal that in all the above passages,
the Bhai, the Magistrate and the budmash all speak in the same idiom.
By the strictest standards of novelistic discourse, this would be deemed
a flaw, but Singh’s intention here is not the individualization of charac-
ters but the foregrounding of events. This foregrounding is indeed so
important a part of the narrative technique that other aspects like the
individualization of characters through speech is largely ignored. Thus,
all the characters in the novel – good, bad, illiterate and educated –
speak in the same idiom. It is almost as if Singh is determined that
nothing should come in the way to detract the attention of the reader
from the main storyline.
Some critics have taken serious exception to this attitude and techni-
que of the author and criticized him for it. Suvir Kaul, in his ‘Introduc-
44
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

tion’ to the anthology, The Partitions of Memory: The Afterlife of the Divi-
sion of India, says:
That a largely mediocre novel, thin in character and event, writ-
ten in an idiom that must have seemed forced even in the 1950s
(and which has certainly dated rapidly since), has achieved such
prominence is surprising. This success is either a tribute to the
novel’s simplicity of conception and narrative…. or, more likely,
follows from the fact that there was so little else written in Eng-
lish about the partition of 1947 that interested readers did not
have much to choose from (…). Notwithstanding all its problems,
the novel has found a large readership, which begs the question
of what it is about the power of not very compelling writing (or
indeed cinema) to keep us riveted, so long as the stories told are
those of Partition? 29(Kaul 2001: 18)
This is a pertinent observation, but the answer to Kaul’s question lies in
the fact that Singh has been able to offer his readers a redeeming
vision; and that it is this that has held their attention for more than half
a century after it was written. For Singh’s vision, as it comes through in
the major part of the story, is almost apocalyptic; and yet, it is not en-
tirely dark. For most ironically in this novel, just when things seem irre-
mediably dark, a vision of redeeming humanity comes from a totally
unexpected quarter, in the form of Jugga, the budmash whom no one
could trust and whom no one thought capable of any positive emotion,
action or deed. We, of course, have been told very early in the novel that
Jugga indulges in antisocial activities only when there is no work in the
fields and his hands itch for something to do. We also know that he has
been wrongly accused of murder, because when Ramdayal, the village
moneylender was killed, he was away in the fields making love to Noor-
an, the Imam’s daughter. He is a rough and demanding lover, but also
very protective of his beloved and so he frames a convincing excuse for
her to give at home when she is afraid of getting caught and threatens
never to meet him again. He gets angry at Bhola (the tonga-driver) for
making sly remarks about his affair, and he almost kills Malli in prison
for his innuendoes. He is garrulous, obscene and irritates Iqbal in
prison with his endless talk about sex – but he never once mentions
Nooran or discusses his relationship with her. She is almost sacred to
him, and he knows her inside out. He has a gut feeling that she must
have come to his mother before leaving Mano Majra – which in fact
she has. And so blind is his love that even before knowing what has ac-
tually happened in his absence, he decides to teach his mother a lesson
in the event of her not having treated Nooran properly.
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
45

Hukum Chand, the District magistrate, exploits this emotion of Jugga
to the full. No sooner does he get wind of Jugga’s affair with Nooran
and his passion for her than he hatches a conspiracy to save the Mus-
lims going to Pakistan. Jugga is merely a tool in this scheme. Hukum
Chand is confident that if Jugga came to know that the villagers were
planning to prevent the train (full of Muslim refugees from the Chan-
dannagar camp) from going to Pakistan, he would do everything in his
power to stop that, because his beloved Nooran would also be one of
the passengers travelling in that train. So Jugga is suddenly released, to
his great surprise, and the news of the Mano Majra Muslims being
evacuated is repeatedly hammered into his head. Instantly, he becomes
a changed man – sullen and quiet. He comes to know of the secret plan
of the villagers, but he does not react verbally to it. The reader is told
nothing about what he intends to do, but only provided with a hint that
he is aware that he is about to do something solemn. Hence, he turns
up at the gurudwara at an ungodly hour and requests the Bhai, ‘I want
the Guru’s word. Will you read me a verse?’ When Meet Singh asks
what he wants to do, he impatiently says, ‘It does not matter about
that… just read me a few lines quickly’ (198). Meet Singh reads out a
piece from the morning prayer. After this, Jugga wishes him ‘Sat Sri
Akal’ and takes his leave. The reader is still left ignorant of Jugga’s mo-
tive, and it is only in the last three pages of the novel that he is let in
on the secret of what Jugga has set out to do: defeat the clandestine
mission of his fellow villagers. The suspense is kept up successfully till
the end, and nothing quite prepares us for Jugga’s sacrifice. Though we
know from the very beginning that he loves Nooran, we never think
him capable of such selflessness. In fact, just prior to the time the Ma-
gistrate hatches his conspiracy, the sub-inspector says that Jugga seems
to be the type who is never swayed by emotion, and that probably he
would not even grieve over Nooran’s loss and soon find someone else.
Jugga, however, proves everyone wrong.
Jugga’s Nooran gets saved. So does Haseena, the prostitute Hukum
Chand had unaccountably come to love. He realizes his feelings for her
only after he comes to know that all the Mano Majra Muslims have
been evacuated and have proceeded to the Chundannagar camp from
where they would go to Pakistan in a matter of days. For some time, he
toys with the idea of keeping her back, but then realizes that this is not
possible. However, when he comes to know that the train that will carry
her to Pakistan will be attacked, he goes mad. He just cannot allow that
to happen, and he decides that if he cannot keep Haseena back, he will
at least not let her die. He is in a desperate state, and it is in such a
frame of mind that he conceives his conspiracy in which Jugga be-
comes the sacrificial pawn. Hukum Chand’s plan succeeds, and both
46
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Haseena and Nooran it is hoped are saved, since they are in the train
carrying Muslim refugees to Pakistan.
Critics have interpreted the ending of the novel differently. M.K.
Naik, for example, finds ‘the conventionally romantic motif of the love
of Jugga, the Sikh village gangster, for (of course) a Muslim girl, in sav-
ing whom he duly sacrifices his life’ to be a ‘flaw’ in the novel; and im-
patient with the depiction of such inter-religious romances, asks: ‘Why
must Hindu heroes of Partition novels fall, with monotonous regularity,
in love with Muslim girls alone?’30
Suvir Kaul, on the other hand, is of the opinion that Jugga’s sacrifice
at the end is just not ‘an act of individual heroism’, because in addition
to saving Muslim lives, it ‘brings back order and humanity to a village
swept away by the flood of fratricidal violence sweeping over the Pun-
jab’. According to him, Singh seems to say that ‘if the trains can be al-
lowed to run as scheduled, much more than the lives of its passengers
will have been saved.’31
Manohar Malgonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges
The violence that erupted during the Partition has been frequently high-
lighted in Indian-English fiction, but perhaps nowhere with a more
naked power than in Train to Pakistan. This perhaps explains why this
novel is not just one of the most popular novels written on the Parti-
tion, but is also one of the best-known texts in the whole canon of In-
dian-English fiction. It is undeniable that compared to Khushwant
Singh’s popular novel, the attention that has been give to Manohar Mal-
gonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges32 is more or less confined to critical
books dealing with Indian writing in English in general and the Parti-
tion in particular.
Certainly it is true that Malgonkar has not received the full measure
of critical attention that he rightfully deserves as a significant Indian
novelist in English. In fact, as A. Padmanabhan laments in the ‘Intro-
duction’ to her book on Malgonkar,
Branded as an entertainer and storyteller, the deeper qualities of
his fiction have been neglected or unperceived by many. There
are only two full-length studies on his fiction by academic critics,
namely, G.S. Amur and James Y. Dayananda. N.S. Pradhan takes
up only one of the novels – A Bend in the Ganges – for a detailed
analysis. H.M. Williams too does not make a sustained study of
Malgonkar’s fiction (…). The general tendency in the sixties and
seventies was to dismiss him in a hasty pell-mell fashion. It is
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
47

only in the eighties and nineties that he slowly, though partially,
emerged from neglect and underrating.33 (2002: 2)
Among Malgonkar’s own novels, however, A Bend in the Ganges hap-
pens to be the ‘most-discussed’ work34, and an interesting thing about
this novel is that it has all the ingredients to make a book popular. It is
racy, packed with events, has frequent surprises and twists in the plot
and a liberal dose of love and romance, not to mention its representa-
tion of an action-packed history. Yet the novel is no cheap-thrill best-sell-
er, but actually a work of deep political introspection, and arguably one
of the best novels that Malgonkar ever wrote.
Malgonkar’s fascination with history
As far as the content of this novel is concerned, there is extensive politi-
cal documentation in A Bend in the Ganges right from Gandhi’s Non-
Cooperation movement till the time of the Partition. But Malgonkar’s
aim in doing so is not to give an ‘erratic national calendar’ as Meenak-
shi Mukherjee35 has somewhat erroneously observed, nor to provide the
ingredients of a historical novel. Here he is rather concerned with the
‘whys’ of Partition. It may be pertinent to point out here that A Bend in
the Ganges is not Malgonkar’s only novel that deals with the Partition of
the Indian subcontinent. In fact, the Partition and the riots before and
after it figure prominently in two of his previous novels, Distant Drum
and The Princes, as well. But the uniqueness of A Bend in the Ganges (as
a Partition novel) lies in the fact that here he portrays the growth of
communalism during the closing decades of British rule in India.
Partition apart, Malgonkar also wrote about the first Indian war of in-
dependence of 1857 in The Devil’s Wind. Thus, he displays his great fas-
cination for Indian history right from the Great Revolt to the post-inde-
pendence era. This interest in politics has perhaps something to do
with Malgonkar’s professional life as a soldier. Malgonkar served in the
British Indian Army from 1942 to 1952, when he travelled widely in Ne-
pal, Indo-China, Malaya and Western Europe, including England. That
this rich experience of his as a soldier in a whole decade of active ser-
vice (which also happened to be a momentous time of world history)
was a clear source of inspiration for his novels is evident from a state-
ment that he made in an interview given to James Y. Dayananda: ‘(…)
some aspects of politics and all that I have gone through – like our trou-
bles with the English, for instance – I have experienced them myself.
So, to that extent, it has given me some sort of capital to draw on.’36
He undoubtedly drew on these experiences in writing A Bend in the
Ganges, especially for his depiction of the Second World War, which is
48
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

one of the most prominent features of the novel. Malgonkar’s aim in
the novel is, however, not simply to faithfully depict a war that changed
the world, but rather to investigate the various strands of the nationalist
movement in India and try and fathom why it all went wrong at the
end. Central to the novel are two fundamental questions that the author
explores at great length: first, whether Hindus and Muslims could ever
be really united; and second, whether non-violence could be a plausible
and practical way of life. These questions are worked out, and the docu-
mentation of the times is embodied through the narrative strategy of
the employment of double-heroes who represent two opposing political
ideologies – revolutionary terrorism and non-violence, respectively.
These protagonists are Debi Dayal, the committed revolutionary terror-
ist, and Gian Talwar, the professed follower of Gandhi (but who sways
with every wind and unscrupulously uses other people for his own pur-
poses) and they are both directly involved in political action. And it is
through the contrasting responses of these two figures to the political
upheaval of the times that the author seems to build up a debate as to
which ideology was more suited for tackling the immense complexities
of the freedom struggle, as also the anomalies that underlay the Hindu-
Muslim question.
Double-hero/pluralistic method
Both features of A Bend in the Ganges mentioned above – i.e. the em-
ployment of double heroes; and through them, pitting two opposing po-
litical ideologies against each other – are new in this genre of fiction.
Commenting on the first, A. Padmanabhan says: Instead of the usual
single protagonist of Malgonkar’s earlier novels – Kiran Garud in Dis-
tant Drum, Henry Winton in Combat of Shadows and Abhay Raj in The
Princes – in A Bend in the Ganges, there is the device of the double-hero,
chosen from different social backgrounds.37 (2002: 38) Indeed, apart
from Malgonkar, no other English novelist of the Partition has used this
device yet.
But the aspect which really distinguishes A Bend in the Ganges is that
contrary to the monolithic approach of most novels dealing with India’s
freedom struggle, Malgonkar’s novel shows ‘a pluralistic method’38 in
the depiction of politics. Indeed, Malgonkar is perhaps the only novelist
to give importance to the terrorist movement of the 1930s; and while
he concedes that Gandhi won freedom for India, there is a thorough
questioning in A Bend in the Ganges of the validity of ‘ahimsa’ or non-
violence. This deviation in his depiction of the diverse strands in the na-
tionalist struggle is Malgonkar’s unique contribution to the genre of
Partition fiction.
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
49

The Hindu-Muslim question
An interesting point about the thematic concerns of Malgonkar’s novel
is that they negate a cherished assumption of post-colonial theory, the
notion that the post-colonial literature mostly has resistance to the ex-
colonizer as their theme.39 Malgonkar’s novel, it will be seen, is mani-
festly more inward-looking than outwardly protest-oriented. Instead of
hitting out against the British oppressors, it explores the socio-political
dynamics of Indian society with special focus on the two contending
communities, the Hindus and the Muslims. A Bend in the Ganges ques-
tions why the Partition happened in the first place and asks whether it
is simply because of the divide and rule policy of the British, or whether
there were also inherent (though invisible) fissures and fault lines in
the very structure of Indian society that made the Partition possible.
In asking these issues, Malgonkar may indeed be seen as anticipating
the stance of recent historians like Ayesha Jalal and Sugata Bose who
suggest in their work, Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political
Economy, that:
There is now overwhelming evidence to suggest that regardless
of whether Muslims were in fact a ‘nation’, let alone one created
by British policies of divide and rule, it was the contradictions
and structural peculiarities of Indian society and politics in late
colonial India which eventually led to the creation of Paki-
stan.40(2004: 135)
In keeping with the trend of this opinion, the omniscient narrator of
the novel reflects:
‘Religious differences among the races of India were the root cause
of the country’s slavery, and the British had learnt to take the fullest ad-
vantage of these differences, playing the Hindus against the Muslims
and the Sikhs against both.’41
The result was fundamentalism which was ironically growing in
strength even as the nationalist movement gained momentum. Two epi-
sodes in the novel – one near the beginning and the other towards the
end – effectively sum up the trajectory of the communal question in In-
dia in the three final decades before Independence.
The first of these episodes takes place in Chapter 8 of the novel,
where we meet the terrorist group ‘Freedom Fighters’ (of which Debi is
an active member) for the first time; and find Debi’s leader, Shafi Us-
man, categorically declaring, ‘The only saving grace of the Nationalist
movement is gone, it is no longer united, no longer secular’ (p. 78). As
the novel shows, it was as early as in 1929 that Debi had begun to have
misgivings. When all his boys eagerly volunteer for a new assignment,
50
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

the burning of a plane stranded in the military aerodrome in Duriabad,
he feels a ‘(…) surge of pride (…) and for the first time that evening he
wondered how long it could be maintained. (…) How long would it be
before the flames of communal hatred caught up with them?’ (p. 86).
Malgonkar indicates as well that Shafi Usman did have his reasons
for feeling this way. Towards the end of the 1920s, a new rift had been
created between the Hindus and the Muslims in India following the
Congress and the League’s final parting of ways after the publication of
the Nehru report in 1928.42 In the novel, Shafi’s leader, Hafiz, is shown
writing to him from Bombay complaining about the callousness of the
Hindus towards the Muslims, suggesting that they should reorientate
their activities.
But Shafi does not see eye to eye with Hafiz, and he makes this clear
to Hafiz when the latter comes down to Duriabad to talk to him after a
few days. In Chapter 10 (‘Two leaders’) of the novel, Shafi and Hafiz ar-
gue their case with pointed logic and much evidence to support their re-
spective views. We are not told who wins, for the argument is shown to
remain inconclusive when Hafiz leaves late that night, but not before
he bequeaths to Shafi a few journals and newspapers to be perused
carefully and makes an appeal that he should outgrow his Jallianwala
days. (Shafi lost his parents at the Jallianwalabagh Massacre in Amritsar
in 1919, and in youthful rebelliousness joined the terrorist movement
soon after, believing it to be the best way to free the country).
The morning after Hafiz leaves, Shafi warns a few of his boys about
a possible raid of the Hanuman Club (as the police inspector who in-
formed him had told him not to warn all his boys, because then he
might be suspected) and escapes himself. But as the novelist clarifies, it
was only while he was travelling in the train that he realizes that he had
warned only the Muslim boys, ‘It was the sort of coincidence that wor-
ried Shafi for a long time, but even to himself, he refused to admit that
it had anything to do with the visit of Hafiz, or with the clippings he
had left behind him’ (p. 100).
In Chapter 30, (‘Founder Members’), we find Debi meeting Bose, his
former terrorist friend, in Calcutta in 1945, after he leaves Assam. They
had last met in 1939 without the slightest inkling that six very eventful
and momentous years would elapse before they would set eyes on each
other again. The world was no longer the same again after the Second
World War; and India, in particular, was on the brink of another cata-
clysmic event. But these intervening six years did not have the same im-
pact on the two men. Debi had been in exile for the entire span of the
Second World War and hence had been in a way unaware of things at
home. Bose now briefs him on the real political situation in India in
the last six years: the widening (and now, almost unbridgeable) gulf be-
tween the Hindus and Muslims of the subcontinent; the Partition Plan;
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
51

the growing stature of fundamentalist parties like the Hindu Mahasabha
(of which he was now a proud member); and the rumours rife every-
where that the two communities were just waiting to pounce on each
other once the British left India.
Debi is all ears but unconvinced of Bose’s arguments. His fierce be-
lief in terrorism as the only possible path to real freedom had already
begun to be replaced by a new respect for Gandhi and the philosophy
he stood for, and hence a new confusion as to what should be the right
course of action begins to brew in his mind. It would not be wrong to
guess that Debi’s mind had not been vitiated by communal thoughts
because he has been away. Had he been in the midst of all this mutual
hatred, suspicion and mistrust, he too would have been swayed to
Bose’s side. Bose trying to show him the real picture in this chapter is
just like Hafiz trying to show Shafi the truth earlier in Chapter 10. Debi
had not known the Second World War experience in India at first hand;
Shafi (according to Hafiz) had not outgrown his Jallianwalabagh days.
Malgonkar’s representation of these two episodes indicates his ideas
about the progressive deterioration of the communal situation in India
in the phase between 1919 and 1945, from the Hindu-Muslim commu-
nities merely harbouring suspicion about each other to being avowed
enemies, waiting to exterminate each other.43 Such feelings, he implies,
were the root cause underlying the event of the Partition, and as he
shows it in his novel, the worst part was that nobody could remain un-
affected by it. As the narrator says:
Every citizen was caught up in the Holocaust. No one could re-
main aloof; no one could be trusted to be impartial (…) The ad-
ministration, the police, even the armed forces44, were caught up
in the blaze of hatred. Willy-nilly everyone had come to be a par-
ticipant in what was, in effect, a civil war (…) a war fought in
every village and town and city where the two communities came
upon each other. (p. 341)
At the end of the novel, in Chapter 34 (‘The Anatomy of Partition’), we
find Debi Dayal’s father, Teckchand, the richest and most renowned
man in Duriabad, bitter and raging at the turn of events:
That it should have come to this! (…) After a lifetime spent in
this part of India, in this town, and giving oneself to it and tak-
ing from it; letting one’s root sink deeper and deeper (…) This is
my city, as much as that of its most respected Muslim families
(…) I, my family, have done as much as any of them to make it
prosperous and beautiful (…). And suddenly someone has
decided that this land which is mine should be foreign territory
52
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

– just like that! And merely because some hooligans take it into
their heads to drive all the Hindus away from their land, I have
to leave everything and go, pulled out by the roots, abandoning
everything that has become a part of me. (pp. 347-348)
Revolutionary terrorism vs. non-violence
Malgonkar’s delineation of the so-called ‘Hindu-Muslim question’ in A
Bend in the Ganges is both sensitive and thought-provoking. But the
most arresting feature of the novel lies elsewhere. As already stated,
one of the most ironic aspects of the Indian anticolonial struggle
against the British was that fundamentalism grew even as the national-
ist movement gained momentum in the years before Independence. It
is this parallel development that Malgonkar traces with much dexterity
in the novel. And he does this by his in-depth analysis (through his
double-heroes) of the relative strengths and weaknesses of the opposing
ideologies of revolutionary terrorism and non-violence.
As virtually all historians of the Indian freedom struggle agree, the
organized struggle for independence, properly speaking, began with the
Gandhian era in Indian history.45 Malgonkar’s narrative, interestingly,
also starts roughly at the end of the 1920s, beginning with the Civil
Disobedience Movement of the early 1930s and ending with the post-
Partition riots in the Punjab. Between these two poles all the excitement
of two decades are packed in the novel: the boycott of foreign goods;
the secret activities of terrorist groups; the outbreak of the Second
World War; the Japanese occupation of the Andamans; the British re-
treat from Rangoon; the long march of evacuees from Burma46; the
Bombay dock explosion47; the dismemberment of India. These political
events in fact shape the plot of the novel. Malgonkar shows his protago-
nists as directly involved in each of the events enumerated above, in
some way or the other. Their lives are driven by these stupendous hap-
penings which just carry them along.48
Quite early in the novel, we find both Debi and Gian being convicted
(though for different reasons) and deported to the Andamans by the
British. Yet their lives follow a very different trajectory after they reach
the island. While Gian is a favourite with the officials in the Cellular
Jail, Debi becomes the hero of the convicts because of his pride and un-
compromising attitude even in the face of torture. When the Japanese
occupy the Andamans (Chapter 23, ‘Brothers from Japan’), he becomes
the spokesperson of the convicts and deals with the Japanese colonel Ya-
maki on their behalf. Yamaki inducts him into the Japanese Indian
army (most of which was comprised of prisoners of war), and he lands
in Rangoon soon after. However, following the British evacuation there,
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
53

he lands in Assam and gets a job as an assistant stockman of the Silent
Hill tea garden. At the end of the war and after a period of intense rest-
lessness, he leaves Assam and comes down to Calcutta to meet his for-
mer terrorist friend Bose. Gian, on the other hand, had never been con-
cerned about the fate of his country. He just wanted to settle down to a
quiet family life in the Andamans. That does not happen; and at the
time of the Japanese occupation, he escapes from the island and
reaches Madras, and with the help of a calculated strategy lands a job in
Bombay.
Thus, as Malgonkar shows it, both the protagonists live through the
same historical events differently. As Malgonkar has drawn them, Debi
Dayal is a committed revolutionary while Gian (somewhat uneasily) ac-
cepts Gandhi’s philosophy. Through them, Malgonkar focuses on cer-
tain key issues that lay at the heart of the ideological clash between
Gandhi’s satyagrahis and the revolutionary terrorists of the day. The
doctrine of non-violence and all that it stands for is very eloquently
summed up in the words Nehru is made to speak in the very first chap-
ter of the novel (‘A Ceremony of Purification’) where Gian attends a
meeting where Gandhi and Nehru had come:
We are all soldiers. Soldiers in the army of liberation. (…) But we
are a new kind of soldier. Our weapons are truth and non-vio-
lence. Our war shall be fought only by peaceful means. Gandhiji
has shown us the path. But make no mistake; our violence is the
non-violence of the brave, arising not from cowardice but from
courage, demanding greater sacrifices than ordinary fighting
men are called upon to make. (p.12)
In the course of this speech, Nehru at least acknowledges that the ter-
rorists are also patriots – albeit of a different kind – even though he
makes it clear that they have no place in the ‘army of liberation’ headed
by the Congress. But the terrorists, as represented in the novel by Shafi
Usman, Debi’s leader and mentor, are deeply contemptuous of Gandhi
and his followers and condemn them outright. At the end of Chapter 2,
(‘The Green Flash at Sunset’), Shafi, frustrated that he could not induct
the shy village boy and Debi’s college mate, Gian (who professes to be a
Gandhian) into their terrorist organization, says: ‘College boys fall more
easily for Gandhi’s type of movement, it is much more face-saving.
They shelter their cowardice behind the tenets of non-violence, and re-
fuse to rouse themselves to any form of positive action’ (p.24).
If we are to gauge the strength of the two movements through the
characters who represent them in the novel, then revolutionary terror-
ism wins; at least, initially. Debi Dayal comes across as a true hero,
since he is totally dedicated to his cause, has faith in his convictions,
54
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

and is uncompromising. Gian, on the other hand, is shown to falter.
And that he is himself aware of this is shown in Chapter 14 (‘Beyond
the Black Water’), where he ruminates:
Was it his youth that made him so shallow, he wondered, or was
it a part of the Indian character itself? Did he in some way repre-
sent the average Indian, mixed-up, shallow and weak? (…) Why
could he not be like Debi-Dayal, who held on to his beliefs with
unswerving rigidity? (p. 134)
Interestingly, Gian’s assessment of himself is the same as Debi’s opi-
nion of him as expressed in Chapter 16 (‘The View from Debi’s Cell’)
of the novel – ‘He [Gian] was typical of the youth of India, vacillating,
always seeking new anchors, new directions, devoid of any basic convic-
tions’ (p. 161).
Yet it would be unfair to condemn Gian in such unequivocal terms.
True, he was convicted of murder after he declared himself to be a fol-
lower of Gandhi, but we know that he was not very sure about his ac-
tual response to non-violence, and given what happened in his family,
he perhaps could not help doing what he did. In Gian’s family, a long-
standing family feud centering on a 100-acre plot of land named
Piploda was brought to an abrupt end by Gian when he killed his uncle
Vishnu-Dutt to revenge his brother Hari’s death at the hands of the lat-
ter which he had been unable to prevent. The feud had started in Gian’s
grandfather Dada’s lifetime and continued for three generations, claim-
ing several lives in the process. It was Dada’s part of the family that
was worst hit – having suffered both injustice and fraud at the hands of
his brother’s family. The incident of the murder happened just days
after Gian’s uneasy embrace of ahimsa when he had come home for a
holiday.
Gian’s case is, however, not an isolated one. As Sudhir Kakkar, the
biographer of Gandhi’s disciple, Mira Behn, has pointed out, even those
who adopted the creed of the Mahatma took some time to absorb the te-
nets of their leader. Even the most faithful of Gandhi’s followers went
through a few trials before becoming practising satyagrahis.49 In the
novel, Gian’s act of violence is understandable in this context, as the
time-gap between Gian’s embracing non-violence and his homecoming
was not a long one. In this novel, Malgonkar very effectively shows
man’s natural propensity to violence and what it is capable of once it is
unleashed. In this context, it may be remembered that Shafi’s strange
prophesy at the beginning of the novel that ‘a million shall die, a mil-
lion’ turns out to be true, but Gian’s promise that he shall never in-
dulge in violence is not kept.
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
55

However, as far as the novel is concerned, more than Gian not being
able to keep his word, what is important to notice is that even Debi va-
cillates as the war progresses, and continues vacillating more often and
doubting more deeply as the years pass by. The entire Second World
War experience leaves him profoundly shaken and disillusioned. He
watched the war from very close quarters, and in a way even partici-
pated in it. But then he came back to his own country only to see things
totally changed, their cause of an armed struggle against the British de-
feated, and their beloved motherland not just on the verge of Indepen-
dence but also on the brink of dismemberment and a civil war. As Mal-
gonkar paints him, Debi is totally disillusioned, and only after this
comes a new understanding and respect for Gandhi and his philosophy.
For the first time in his life, he finds that he cannot dismiss the Indian
National Congress and non-violence straightaway.
At the same time, it is interesting to note that the novel’s plot shows
Debi’s views changing with the changing fate of the British in the War.
At the very outset, when Mulligan (the superintendent of the Cellular
Jail in the Andamans) was eager that no news of German victories
should reach the convicts, Debi had told Mulligan to his face that he
would never write an anti-British slogan out of sympathy for the Ger-
mans because the Germans were as bad as the English. But when the
Japanese occupy the Andamans, they prove to be far worse than the
British – because, besides their atrocities, seeing them dispense ‘the
justice of victors’, the British seem kind by contrast. Yet again, in Debi’s
eyes, the British fare worst of all, in the way they withdraw from
Rangoon. As the author comments in Chapter 27 (‘Chalo Delhi!’) of the
novel:
No power that had occupied another country had ever disgraced
itself so thoroughly as did the British in their withdrawal from
Burma, Debi-dayal kept telling himself (…). The British Govern-
ment there, its mask of respectability and self-righteousness torn
away by a shattering military defeat, had been exposed as an ugly
spectre, making the starkest distinction between brown and
white (…) what had happened to the book of rules? To the
haughty awareness of the white man’s burden? – Debi Dayal
asked himself. The veneer of centuries of civilization seemed to
have been flung to one side. Women or children, old or infirm,
it had made no difference. The essential qualification for being
evacuated was white skin.50 (p. 273)
It is at this point in the story that Debi realizes that there is no choice
between two conquerors, for they can clearly outdo each other in ini-
quity. Back in India, he is shown to have become restless again, a re-
56
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

lapse into restlessness that had never quite left him ever since his An-
daman days. Repeatedly, he feels, he could do something now. Now that
the British had suffered major reverses in the Second World War, the
time seemed right to strike back. This, in Debi’s perception of things,
was something that the Congress did not seem to understand. We can-
not help feeling here that Debi, as portrayed in the novel, suffers from
an exaggerated sense of self-importance. He apparently thinks that his
presence or absence can make a real difference to the Indian political
situation, when the brutal reality was that even his organization, the
‘Freedom Fighters’, did not exist any more, having broken up a long
time ago, with its Hindu and Muslim members divided and even the
Hindu members scattered. There was therefore no question of Debi
being able to do anything in his erstwhile capacity of a revolutionary.
Debi frets and fumes, but he never thinks of it this way. Though we
may be impatient with him because of this, the author is being true to
type. Revolutionaries in India fighting for the liberation of the country
were proud of their devotion to the motherland and were convinced that
they could make a difference by following the path of violence.
Their patriotism and passionate devotion to their cause find eloquent
expression in the famous poem ‘Sarfaroshi ki Tamanna’ by the Urdu
poet Bismil Azimabadi51:
Sarfaroshi ki tamanna ab hamaare dil mein hai.
Dekhna hai zor kitna baazuay qaatil mein hai.
Hai liye hathiyaar dushman taak mein baitha udhar,
Aur hum taiyyaar hain seena liye apna idhar.
Khoon se khelenge holi agar vatan muskhil mein hai,
Sarfaroshi ki tamanna ab hamaare dil mein hai.
Haath jin mein ho junoon katt te nahi talvaar se,
Sar jo uth jaate hain voh jhukte nahi lalkaar se.
Aur bhadkega jo shola-sa humaare dil mein hai,
Sarfaroshi ki tamanna ab hamaare dil mein hai.
Hum to ghar se nikle hi the baandhkar sar pe qafan,
Chaahatein liin bhar liye lo bhar chale hain ye qadam.
Zindagi to apni mehmaan maut ki mehfil mein hai,
Sarfaroshi ki tamanna ab hamaare dil mein hai.
Dil mein tuufaanon ki toli aur nason mein inquilaab,
Hosh dushman ke udaa denge humein roko na aaj.
Duur reh paaye jo humse dam kahaan manzil mein hai,
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
57

Sarfaroshi ki tamanna ab hamaare dil mein hai.
Dekhna hai zor kitna baazuay qaatil mein hai.
An English transition of the poem would be:
To lay down our lives is now our deepest desire.
We dare to challenge the enemy.
Weapons in hand, the enemy awaits on the other side,
And we are ready to face them on this side,
We shall play Holi with our blood if our country is in danger,
To lay down our lives is now our deepest desire.
The hand that is passionate cannot be cut by a sword,
Heads that are raised do not bow down on hearing the battle cry,
And the fire that shall burn is in our hearts,
To lay down our lives is now our deepest desire.
Heads wrapped in a shroud, we have left our homes,
Wearing our hearts on our sleeves, we move ahead,
Life is just a guest at death’s door,
To lay down our lives is now our deepest desire.
A storm in our hearts and revolution running through our veins,
We will blow the enemy away, do not stop us today,
Our goal cannot avoid us today,
To lay down our lives is our deepest desire.
We dare to challenge the enemy.
These words could easily have been Debi Dayal’s in A Bend in the
Ganges. Indeed, he is truly a representative of the bunch of young revo-
lutionary terrorists who made a mark on India’s political scene in the
early decades of the twentieth century. Like many of them, he comes
from a privileged background, has to suffer dislocation as well as physi-
cal torture at the hands of the British, and dies young. The only differ-
ence is that while they were usually hanged in British jails, he ends up
being a victim of Partition violence – killed by the very compatriots for
whose freedom he had fought.
But before that, he suffers the greatest agony of all: doubting the very
revolutionary ideology he was baptized in. As Malgonkar shows, Debi is
not only restless when he returns to India after six years, but is also
clearly confused. He does not know what is right or wrong, and feels
the need to talk it out with someone. Thus (as has been mentioned ear-
lier in this chapter), Debi goes and meets his old comrade Bose in Cal-
58
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

cutta; and Bose, to some extent, clears the cobwebs from his mind and
also gives him a fresh perspective on things. He informs Debi that after
his wife’s face got scarred by an acid bulb thrown by a Muslim hooligan
in a riot, he felt the need to join the Hindu Mahasabha and had come
to believe that:
We have to become aligned in sheer self-defence. Hindus against
Muslims. (…) [because] What had been aimed against the British,
has turned against itself. And the ugliest thing it has bred is dis-
trust. No Hindu can trust a Muslim any more, and no Muslim
trusts a Hindu. (p. 298)
Debi is nostalgic for the days when the members of the Hanuman Club
used to sit together and partake of beef and pork, meat taboo for Hin-
dus and Muslims, respectively, to symbolize unity. He shrinks at the
thought of a civil war and quite surprisingly (for a man of his inclina-
tions) remarks: ‘It almost makes one think that non-violence is perhaps
the only answer’ (p. 299). But Bose springs to the offensive. He holds
forth eloquently on the pitfalls of the non-violent philosophy and its in-
herent limitations, in particular:
What is the future for a country nurtured on non-violence in a
world of mounting violence? Tell me that. How are we to sur-
vive? – defend our borders? Can a non-violent nation have a vio-
lent army? – a navy? We will be sitting ducks for anyone who
chooses to pick a quarrel with us; Burma, Ceylon, this new coun-
try, Pakistan. If non-violence is the bedrock of our national policy,
how is the fighting spirit to manifest itself only in our services?
(p. 300)
The inefficacy of non-violence as an all-embracing philosophy of life
(which is the basis of Bose’s argument) had become quite apparent by
1946. Very few Indians seemed to set store by it any more.52
In the next chapter, Chapter 31 (‘To fold a leaf’), we find Shafi Usman
thinking just the obverse of what Bose had said in the previous chapter.
For Shafi, the Ram-Rahim club, the partaking of a beef-and-pork dish,
belonged to an uneasy past. He had now become convinced that there
was no possibility of the
Hindus and Muslims living together (...). That was what the trial
spell of provincial government had demonstrated. For the Mus-
lims, independence was worth nothing unless it also ensured
freedom from the domination of the Hindus. They would never
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
59

live in an India where they were only a tolerated minority. (p.
303)
Incidentally, this idea of Shafi’s – the innate fear of the Muslims that
the British Raj would inevitably be succeeded by a Hindu Raj which
would only spell doom for them – is echoed in many other books. To-
wards the end of Shauna Singh Baldwin’s What the Body Remembers,
for example, this comes out very well in a conversation between two old
friends, Sardarji and Rai Alam Khan (both very eminent and well-placed
in their own ways). When Sardarji tries to allay what he thinks are his
friend’s fears about the imminent dismemberment of India, by saying,
‘There are other ideas and options than partition… Federations, tiered
governments, shared power,’ his friend testily replies, ‘Huh! Shared
power! Partition will come; it is the only solution. Do you think we
Muslims want to live under the Hindus or the Sikhs again?’ (2000: 371).
Somewhat similarly in Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man, just prior to
the Partition, Ayah’s circle have a heated argument at the wrestler’s res-
taurant in Lahore about the creation of Pakistan (to which Lenny, the
eight-year-old Parsee protagonist of the novel, is a witness). When the
Government House gardener (a Hindu) tries to rationalize: ‘It is the
English’s mischief (…). They are past masters at intrigue. It suits them
to have us all fight,’ the butcher (who is a Muslim) interjects:
Just the English? (...). Haven’t the Hindus connived with the An-
grez to ignore the Muslim League, and support a party that
didn’t win a single seat in the Punjab? It’s just the kind of thing
we fear. They manipulate one or two Muslims against the inter-
ests of the larger community. And now they have manipulated
Master Tara Singh and his bleating herd of Sikhs. (1989: 92)
The Hindus, in other words, are not to be trusted.
In A Bend in the Ganges, however, Malgonkar shows the insecurity of
both the Hindus and the Muslims. As A. Padmanabhan has rightly
pointed out,
Thus, the Hanuman club becomes a microcosm of the macro-
cosm that was Indian society, with the Hindus and Muslims uni-
ted at first to fight against the British, and, at last when they
were about to leave, fighting against each other, with Bose repre-
senting the Hindus, Shafi the Muslims, and Debi an embar-
rassed observer in between.53 (2002: 110)
Bose and Shafi, once revolutionary terrorists, are thus transformed right
on the verge of freedom into Hindu and Muslim fundamentalists, re-
60
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

spectively. The author gives each of them the scope to present their
case, as it were. But since they are both directly involved in political ac-
tion, they are incapable of giving a detached, objective view. Rather, it is
from Teckchand that we get the truly objective stance. When he rumi-
nates at the end of the novel (while waiting for a convoy to start), we
get the view of someone who perceives the whole issue rationally. Being
unashamedly pro-British and safely distanced from the whole move-
ment, he can truly see the thing for what it is:
The freedom they had longed for was only a day away; a freedom
that would bring only misery to millions of them. The entire
land was being spattered by the blood of its citizens, blistered
and disfigured by the fires of religious hatred; its roads were
glutted with enough dead bodies to satisfy the ghouls of a major
war (…). Teckchand had never imagined that such happenings
could be possible in India, after more than a hundred years of
the sanity and orderliness of British rule, after thirty years or so
of the Mahatma’s non-violence (…). Now he could see that as far
as the people of India were concerned, Gandhi’s message was
only a political expedient, that for the bulk of them, it had no
deeper significance. At best, they had accepted it as an effective
weapon against British power. It seemed the moment the grip of
British power was loosened, the population of the subcontinent
had discarded non-violence overnight and were now spending
themselves on orgies of violence which seemed to fulfil some ba-
sic urge. (p. 342)
The failure of both ideologies
A Bend in the Ganges records the transformation of Revolutionary Ter-
rorism into Fundamentalism and shows how a historic non-violent
struggle against an imperial power ironically gave way to unprecedented
communal violence and savagery. Debi at one point asks Bose a very
pertinent question: ‘Do you think the Congress movement has been
just as much of a failure as ours?’ to which Bose replies, ‘It is an even
greater failure’ (p. 300).
Perhaps it was so. Revolutionary terrorism as a whole had a very
short life and was easily terminated by the British. One of the reasons
that it could not survive, according to the historian Bipan Chandra, was
because, ‘above all theirs was not the politics of a mass movement (…)
they could not establish contact with the masses’ (1999: 259)54. But the
most profoundly ironic and tragic turning came with Gandhi’s non-vio-
PARTITION: THE HOLOCAUST
61

lent movement, which, after having enjoyed decades of success as a
mass movement, suddenly seemed to turn on its head.
Just three days prior to Independence (and his own death at the
hands of Muslims) – on 12 August 1947 – Debi ruminated,
Would terrorism have won freedom at a cheaper price and some-
how still kept the Hindus and Muslims together? Perhaps not.
But at least it would have been an honest sacrifice, honest and
manly – not something that had sneaked upon them in the garb
of non-violence. (p. 366)
This is a very poignant statement, and one gets the feeling that like
Debi, the author felt the same.
What indeed comes across most forcefully in a careful reading of A
Bend in the Ganges is the author’s preoccupation with the ‘whys’ of the
Partition. As an amateur historian, Malgonkar was less interested in the
specific happening that was the Partition than in examining the idea-
tional fault lines that lay concealed under the event. The novel thus de-
lineates with insight, penetration and utter analytic precision the uneasy
transformation of a colonized country into a sovereign state, the diffi-
cult passage from the familiar shackles of bondage to the disturbing
challenges of freedom.
As has been already stated, A Bend in the Ganges is not the first his-
torical novel that Malgonkar wrote. His ability to handle his historical
subjects with consummate skill had been proved first with The Princes
and then again with The Devil’s Wind. In these novels, he not only suc-
cessfully blended the perception of the historian with the imagination
of the novelist, but also achieved a documentary authenticity that is vir-
tually unparalleled in the whole genre of Indian-English fiction. His
achievement in A Bend in the Ganges, however, lies in another direction.
In this novel, as Shankar Bhattacharya rightly points out, Malgonkar
‘successfully combined narrative and analysis in a manner in which
analysis does not interrupt or violate the texture of the narrative, nor
does the narrative overwhelm analysis’55 (1994: 153). It is perhaps this
technical skill of Malgonkar as a novelist that his contemporaries, the
novelists Khushwant Singh and R.K. Narayan, had in mind when they
praised him later.56
62
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

2
Women during the Partition: Victim and agent
Four of the six novels studied here were written in the 1980s. But there
is a marked difference between them in that the novels written by wo-
men (Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day and Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-
Man) stand apart from the others. They are as equally distinct from the
two novels written in the 1960s by Khushwant Singh (Train to Pakistan)
and Manohar Malgonkar (A Bend in the Ganges) as they are from the
two other novels written in the 1980s by Salman Rushdie (Midnight’s
Children) and Amitav Ghosh (The Shadow Lines). Even a cursory reading
reveals that the novels by Desai and Sidhwa present an alternative ver-
sion to the male visualization of the event of the Partition. To put it sim-
ply, in their respective novels, Malgonkar gives us a thesis and Singh
tells us a story. But both works betray signs of being totally preoccupied
with the immediate political and social ramifications of the ‘event’ of
the Partition. The ideological differences that gave rise to the political
upheaval are discussed at length by Malgonkar; the plight of innocent
people caught in the vortex of an unprecedented whirlpool of violence
is shown by Singh. Yet, both novelists emphasize what the Partition
meant in immediate and everyday terms. How much more intensely
personal and intimate a technique of rendition there can be, we realise
when we come to examine Anita Desai’s and Bapsi Sidhwa’s novels.
As the analyses of Singh’s and Malgonkar’s novels in the previous
chapter tried to make clear, in the envisioning of these two novelists at
least, the Indian people were living out the ‘two-nation theory’ whether
they accepted the theory or not. Both novels show lives being ruptured,
changed beyond recognition and shattered beyond all hope as a result of
this theory working its way through the mindset of communally in-
clined people; dividing whole village communities as well as city folk
into neat groups of ‘them’ and ‘us’, and most viciously spreading intoler-
ance and violence in its wake. The Pakistani author Bapsi Sidhwa’s third
novel Ice-Candy-Man1 (1989) shares this aspect of its narrative (that of
innocent people living out a theory they knew nothing about) along with
Malgonkar and Singh’s novels; but otherwise, it defines a very different
Partition experience altogether. Written from the Pakistani point of view
and through the eyes of a Parsee child, Lenny, the novel deals with the
eight-year-old Lenny’s predicament in Lahore at the time of the Parti-

tion of the Indian subcontinent. She and her Hindu Ayah or nurse
(who is later abducted) are the focus of the narrative, which basically
shows how the Partition and its continuing trauma affected women.
The Pakistani version of the partition
All the specific issues referred to in the previous paragraph – viz. the
Pakistani point of view, the Parsee angle, the child narrator and the fo-
cus on women’s experience – contribute to the uniqueness of Sidhwa’s
novel. But each issue requires detailed consideration. Apart from being
a novel which Salman Rushdie praised for embodying ‘one of the finest
responses to the horror of the division of the subcontinent’2, Ice-Candy-
Man presents an alternative perspective on the Partition. As Laurel
Graeber in his New York Times review of the book wrote, ‘Bapsi Sidhwa
has attempted to give a Pakistani perspective to the Partition of India’3.
This was an opinion that had already been previously stated by the
author herself in an interview with David Montenegro in 1989, in the
course of which she clearly stated:
The main motivation grew out of my reading of a good deal of
literature on the partition of India and Pakistan (…) what has
been written by the British and Indians. Naturally they reflect
their bias. And they have, I felt after I’d researched the book,
been unfair to the Pakistanis. As a writer, as a human being, one
just does not tolerate injustice. I felt whatever little I could do to
correct an injustice I would like to do. I have just let facts speak
for themselves, and through my research I found out what the
facts were.4
She felt that her status as a Parsee (that is, neither Hindu nor Muslim)
would help her to do justice to the history of the Partition. As she her-
self once said, ‘The struggle was between the Hindus and the Muslims,
and as a Parsee, I felt I could give a dispassionate account of this huge,
momentous struggle (…) as a Parsee, I can see things objectively’.5
Her stance is undoubtedly different from that of her Indian counter-
parts, and nowhere more radically so than in her portrayal of the ‘chief
players’ of the Partition – the triumverate of Jinnah, Gandhi and Nehru.
To counter what she claimed to be the British and Indian versions of
the Partition, Sidhwa in Ice-Candy-Man not only tries to resurrect the
image of Jinnah but also seeks to demystify the images of Gandhi and
Nehru. Jinnah in the novel is highlighted as an ambassador of Hindu-
Muslim unity. And to substantiate this image of Jinnah, Sidhwa quotes
the Indian poetess Sarojini Naidu:
64
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

(…) the calm hauteur of his accustomed reserve masks, for those
who know him, a naïve and eager humanity, an intuition quick
and tender as a woman’s, a humour gay and winning as a child’s
– pre-eminently rational and practical, discreet and dispassionate
in his estimate and acceptance of life, the obvious sanity and ser-
enity of his worldly wisdom effectually disguise a shy and splen-
did idealism which is of the very essence of the man.6 (Sidhwa
1989: 161)
As against this paean in Jinnah’s name, the sublime image of Gandhi
constructed by British and Indian historians is totally undercut when
he is seen through the eyes of the eight-year-old narrator, Lenny:
(…) Mother hauls me up some steps and into Gandhiji’s pre-
sence. He is knitting. Sitting cross-legged on the marble floor of
a palatial veranda, he is surrounded by women. He is small,
dark, shriveled, old. He looks just like Hari, our gardener, except
he has a disgruntled, disgusted and irritable look, and no one’d
dare pull off his dhoti. He wears only the loin-cloth and his black
and thin torso is naked. (p. 86)
Unlike most of the Indian historians who credit Gandhi for single-
handedly ousting the British from India, in Ice-Candy-Man, Sidhwa re-
duces him to the role of an eccentric diet-faddist, who advises every wo-
man to flush her system with enemas. According to the character called
Masseur in the novel, Gandhi is only ‘a politician’ (not ‘Bapu’ or ‘Ma-
hatma’) and ‘It’s his business to suit his tongue to the moment’ (p. 91).
Similarly, Nehru is described as just a shrewd politician who, in spite of
all the efforts of Jinnah, ‘will walk off with the lion’s share’ (p. 131). The
politically conscious Ice-candy man calls him ‘a sly one (…) He’s got
Mountbatten eating out of his one hand and the English’s wife out of
his other what-not (…). He’s the one to watch!’ (p. 131)
In the light of the above citations from the text, it would perhaps not
be wrong to say that Sidhwa succeeds in ‘providing an alternate version
of history’7 but not an objective one. Her not being a part of any of the
contending communities does not automatically make her dispassionate
and detached, as she would like us to believe. Indeed, the novel shows
that she has merely replaced one bias by another. And this bias is mani-
fest not only in the way she portrays the contemporary political leaders
of the subcontinent, but is also evident in her depiction of Partition vio-
lence, where her sympathies are totally on the Muslim side.
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
65

The Partition in Bapsi Sidhwa’s novels
Before discussing Sidhwa’s depiction of Partition violence, it is neces-
sary to point out the importance of the Partition in her fiction as a
whole. As Niaz Zaman has rightly pointed out, three of the novelist’s
four novels – The Crow Eaters, The Pakistani Bride and Ice-Candy-Man
‘(…) are firmly rooted in a historical-political consciousness and concern
directly or indirectly, the Partition of the Indian subcontinent and the
creation of the newly-independent states of India and Pakistan’ (2004:
98)8. Sidhwa’s first novel (and her personal favourite)9 The Crow Eaters
ends just before the Partition, with Faredoon Junglewalla, the protago-
nist, passing judgement, in his inimitable fashion, on the bickering pol-
iticians who are going to cut up the country. The Pakistani Bride (Sidh-
wa’s first written novel, though published after the success of The Crow
Eaters) begins some years before the Partition, and the earlier part of
the novel describes the communal tension during the Partition, a train
massacre, and the displacement consequent upon Partition. This novel
is about a young girl, a Muslim refugee from India, who is adopted by
a Pathan during the Partition upheavals. Ice-Candy-Man, tighter in fo-
cus than the other two novels, is concerned wholly with the turbulent
events of the Partition as they affect the lives of a Parsee family and the
people who come into their lives.
Nilufer Bharucha reads this development in Sidhwa’s novels as es-
sentially an exploration of the Parsee ethnic identity and its eventual as-
similation in the larger milieu. According to Bharucha, with each suc-
ceeding novel of Sidhwa, the assertion of the theme of Parsee identity
gradually wanes, and the Partition theme gets correspondingly stronger
as the characters become integrated into their environment and over-
come their anxieties as a social and political minority in the nation of
their domicile. Thus, while the Junglewallahs in The Crow Eaters are in-
different to the political fate of the country, the Sethis in Ice-Candy-Man
become actively involved in it, in however personal a capacity.10 Yet it
must be remembered that one of the chief reasons why the Partition
figures so prominently in Sidhwa’s fiction is because it was one of the
defining moments of her own childhood in Lahore. She herself has said
on the record:
I was a child then. Yet the ominous roar of distant mobs was a
constant of my awareness, alerting me, even at age seven, to a
palpable sense of the evil that was taking place in various parts
of Lahore. The glow of fires beneath the press of smoke, which
bloodied the horizon in a perpetual sunset, wrenched at my
heart. For many of us, the departure of the British and the
66
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

longed-for Independence of the subcontinent were overshadowed
by the ferocity of Partition.11
She successfully captures this ‘ferocity of Partition’ through the eyes of
Lenny in Ice-Candy-Man. But it is important to remember too that un-
like Train to Pakistan and A Bend in the Ganges, both of which feature
omniscient third-person narrators, Ice-Candy-Man has a first-person
point of view and hence, the narrator figure becomes all-important here.
The novel shows the Partition as affecting, tainting, traumatizing, alter-
ing and radically transforming the child narrator. At eight, Lenny is al-
ready on the threshold of experience, but it should be remembered that
in her case, her stepping into the world of experience is accelerated by
the fact that her most impressionable years coincide with the communal
upsurge that happened around the time and event of the Partition.
Ayah’s Circle, Ice-candy man and Ayah’s abduction
As Sidhwa shows it, Lenny’s initiation into Partition politics (albeit in-
directly) happens through her Hindu Ayah, Shanta, and a motley group
of men that she draws around her. She is established as an object of
male desire quite early in the novel:
The covetous glances Ayah draws educate me. Up and down,
they look at her. Stubhanded twisted beggars and dusty old beg-
gars in crutches drop their poses and stare at her with hard, alert
eyes. Holy men, masked in piety, shove aside their pretences to
ogle her with lust. Hawkers, cart-drivers, cooks, coolies and cy-
clists turn their heads as she passes, pushing my pram with the
unconcern of the Hindu goddess she worships. (p. 12)
She is, however, not totally indifferent to the group of men that she reg-
ularly meets in Lahore. They number thirteen in all – and they include
the Sethi family cook, the Government House gardener, the sepoy from
the barracks, the butcher, the wrestler, the zoo attendant Sher Singh,
the masseur, and the Ice-candy man. This motley group, whom Lenny
collectively terms ‘Ayah’s circle’, is a truly ‘secular’ group, with mem-
bers of almost all faiths and communities of the Indian subcontinent
represented in it. And it serves as a kind of barometer in that little Len-
ny notices the tenuous changes that are taking place in Lahore on the
eve of the Partition through the alterations that take place in the nature,
number, mood and tenor of this circle. Ayah is polite to everyone in the
group and enjoys their attention in general, but her most favoured sui-
tors are Masseur and Ice-candy man, both of whom happen to be Mus-
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
67

lims. In the novel itself, the group is shown usually gathering in
Queen’s Park and discussing, like Lenny’s Parsee parents and relatives,
the political issues of the day. But as the communal situation gets in-
creasingly tense in the city of Lahore in 1946 and early 1947 with de-
monstrations and meetings being held, the atmosphere of Queen’s Park
gradually changes, with people increasingly huddling together in sepa-
rate communal groups. Only Ayah’s group is shown to be (at least initi-
ally) unaffected by this creeping communal polarization, for as Lenny
says, ‘Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, Parsee are as always unified around her.’
But it does not remain so for long – the numbers dwindle, the jokes be-
come cruel and communal in colour, the arguments more heated, and
finally the venue itself shifts from the Park to the wrestler’s restaurant.
As Sidhwa depicts it, initially, there is great camaraderie within the
group, but when bloodshed and mayhem are shown as becoming ram-
pant in Lahore, there are only grudging pledges of solidarity amongst
these friends culminating in the terrible confession of the Ice-candy
man that after the Gurdaspur incident, he feels like butchering Hindus
to which the Government house gardener touchingly replies, ‘I have
sent my family to Delhi (…) as soon as the sarkar permits, I will join
them (…) when our friends confess they want to kill us, we have to go
(…)’ (p. 157). This dialogue takes place in Chapter 19, and Lenny is pre-
sent when this conversation takes place. She invariably (though unwit-
tingly) becomes a sharer in all the political talk that is a major ingredi-
ent of the novel; and it is chiefly through these conversations (which
very often turn into bitter and acrimonious arguments) that she comes
to know of the imminent Partition of the country and its chief players.
‘Gandhi, Jinnah, Nehru, Iqbal, Tara Singh, Mountbatten are names I
hear,’ she says early in the novel (p. 90). But though she hears a lot,
she understands very little of the raging controversies over the Partition
and, in fact, is quite confused as to what it means. ‘Can one break a
country?’ she wonders, and worries about what it can do to her own daily
life – ‘And what happens if they break it where our house is? Or crack it
further up on Warris Road? How will I ever get to Godmother’s then?’
(p. 101).
These childlike confusions notwithstanding, Lenny is a very sensitive
little girl, and politics apart, there are a lot of things she intuitively un-
derstands, the most remarkable of which is her growing perception of
the importance of religious differences and of hierarchy in social life.
In what is perhaps one of the finest passages in the book, Lenny says:
And I become aware of religious differences.
It is sudden. One day everybody is themselves – and the next day
they are Hindu, Muslim, Sikh, Christian. People shrink, dwind-
68
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

ling into symbols. Ayah is no longer my all encompassing Ayah
– she is also a token. A Hindu. Carried away by a renewed devo-
tional fervor she expends a small fortune in joss-sticks, flowers
and sweets on the Gods and Goddesses in the temple.
Imam Din and Yousaf, turning into religious zealots, warn
mother they will take Friday afternoons off for the Jumha
prayers… Cramped into a narrow religious slot they too are di-
minished: as are Jinnah and Iqbal, Ice-Candy Man and Masseur.
Hari and Moti the sweeper and his wife Muccho, and their un-
touchable daughter Papoo, become ever more untouchable as
they are entrenched deeper in their low Hindu caste. While the
Sharmas and the Daulatrams, Brahmins like Nehru, are dehu-
manized by their lofty caste and caste marks.
The Rodgers of Birdwood barracks, Queen Victoria and King
George are English Christians: they look down their noses upon
the Pens who are Anglo-Indians, who look down theirs on the
Phailbuses who are Indian-Christians, who look down upon all
non-Christians.
Godmother, Slave sister, Electric-aunt and my nuclear family are
reduced to irrelevant nomenclatures – we are Parsee.
What is God? (pp. 93-94)
Lenny loves Lahore, because that is the only place she has ever known
and because all her loved ones live there. But on the eve of the Partition
she now sees the city anew as a bone of contention between the Hindu
and Muslim communities living there. When the Partition Awards are
announced, it is indicated that nobody is happy with what is doled out.
As it turns out, Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, all want Lahore – the Hindus,
because Lahore functions with Hindu money; and the Muslims because
Lahore has a Muslim majority. Besides, the sheer indiscriminacy with
which the Awards are announced stuns one and all.
Playing British gods under the ceiling fans of the Falettis Hotel –
behind Queen Victoria’s gardened skirt – the Radcliffe Commis-
sion deals out Indian cities like a pack of cards. Lahore is dealt to
Pakistan, Amritsar to India. Sialkot to Pakistan. Pathankot to In-
dia.
I am Pakistani. In a snap. Just like that. (p. 140)
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
69

Lahore, however, is not the only ‘contentious’ zone in the Punjab re-
gion. Another such town is Gurdaspur. And all Lahoris, as it transpires,
want Gurdaspur on their side of the border. Everyone ‘knows’ that Gur-
daspur will go to Pakistan, but in the end, it goes to India. There is
‘trouble’ and then ‘the situation is reported to be under control’, which,
as the gardener says, only means that there is ‘uncontrollable butcher-
ing going on in Gurdaspur’ (p. 148).12 And this is attested to very soon
when a train comes from Gurdaspur to Lahore. As the Ice-candy man
reports to his friends soon after the arrival of this train, ‘Everyone in it
[i.e. the train] is dead. Butchered. They are all Muslim. There are no
young women among the dead! Only two gunny-bags full of women’s
breasts.’(p. 149)13 Ice-candy man knows about the incident because this
train full of corpses incidentally included his own relatives, for whom
he has been anxiously waiting for more than a day.
The Hindus and Sikhs in the group cannot face him after this incident;
and when he sees them next, Ice-candy-man’s rage is uncontrollable:
I lose my senses when I think of the mutilated bodies on that
train (…) that night I went mad, I tell you: I lobbed grenades
through the windows of Hindus and Sikhs I’d known all my life!
(...) I want to kill someone for each of the breasts they cut off the
Muslim women. (p. 156)
The critic Shirin L. Kudchedkar has pointed out that, ‘This is perhaps
the only occasion in the novel when we see events from the perspective
of the killer, not of the victim.’14 But the killer, as Sidhwa shows us, is
spawned by the violence itself. It is the Gurdaspur train incident that
changes Ice-candy man. Revenge now seems to become his only moti-
vation, and he is transformed from someone who had almost never gi-
ven a thought to religious affiliations to a man who is unapologetically
communal, a fanatic who probably gets his rival (Masseur) killed be-
cause he was in favour of Hindu-Muslim unity in the face of all odds,
and most strangely of all, a man who abducts Ayah, the very woman he
loves, because she is a Hindu. Ayah is subsequently gang-raped, and as
if this physical abuse by the Muslim mob was not enough, she is then
condemned to a life of prostitution in Hira Mandi. But the moment
Ice-candy man gets wind of the fact that efforts were being made by her
former employers to search her out and rehabilitate her, he promptly
marries her, believing that he saves her that way (hence doing her a fa-
vour) as his cronies had wanted to kill her.15
It needs to be remembered here that in the case of Ayah’s violation,
sexual jealousy plays a very important part. Ice-candy man desired Ayah,
but she loved Masseur. Until the time communal violence turns him
mad, he however does not seem to be overtly affected by this. But as
70
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

soon as he turns communal, he seems to take the first opportunity to
settle personal scores – taking revenge for the insult of being ‘shunned
in favour of another lover’ by killing his rival and degrading the desired
woman. As Kudchedkar pertinently says about this in her essay, ‘The
Second Coming: Novels of the Partition’:
It is difficult to explain his [Ice-candy-man’s] behaviour in terms
of psychological plausibility. There is no doubt that he ‘loves’
Ayah in his own way; he [later] follows her across the border into
India. That he should yet wish to injure her in revenge for her
preference for Masseur is plausible. But that he should prostitute
her and then take her to himself is scarcely credible in a society
where a woman once touched is tainted for ever. His own sense
of ‘honour’, if not his devotion to her, would prevent it.16(Kud-
chedkar: 69)
It is interesting to note here that in Ice-Candy-Man, Sidhwa gives a twist
to the interfaith romance that is a common feature in Partition novels.
For one thing, unlike some other Partition novels (like Train to Pakistan
discussed earlier in Chapter I of this book), there is a triangular love in-
volved here where both the rivals are Muslims – one strongly believing
in social harmony and the other only too susceptible to violence; but
more importantly, as Paul Brians has pointed out: ‘Whereas in Train to
Pakistan interfaith romance was a redemptive force in the face of vio-
lence, here it is an integral part of the violence’ (2003: 106)17.
Many critics have noted that Ayah’s abduction and humiliation must
be understood in symbolic terms – and a most appealing interpretation
of the novel is that Ayah is (especially keeping in mind the composition
of her circle) actually symbolic of the Indian earth18 that was ravaged by
the Partition of 1947. As Deepika Bahri has observed, Ayah is ‘installed
in a metaphoric capacity from the beginning of the novel’19. (Bahri
2008: 98) and the reader is never allowed to forget this. But Ayah’s vio-
lation is symbolic in another respect, too, particularly when we see it in
the broader context of the relation between violence and women’s sexu-
ality in partriarchal societies such as India. In such societies, women’s
bodies are construed as being nothing more than the receptacles of a
man’s honour – and the act of violation emphasizes precisely this role
of women as objects in male constructions of their own honour. To put
it in the words of Ritu Menon and Kamla Bhasin, ‘Women’s sexuality
symbolizes “manhood”; its desecration is a matter of such shame and
dishonour that it has to be avenged. Yet, with the cruel logic of all such
violence, it is women ultimately who are most violently dealt with as a
consequence.’20 Inevitably then, women become the worst victims of
atrocities during civil strife as victories against the enemy are inscribed,
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
71

marked and celebrated on their bodies. This was as true of the Partition
of India in 1947 as civil strife anywhere else in the world. What how-
ever distinguished the events of 1947 was the sheer scale of the atroci-
ties committed against women, especially in the Punjab. According to
Urvashi Butalia, ‘The figures [of women raped, abducted, tortured]
range between 33,000-50,000 Hindu and Sikh women and 21,000 or
so Muslim women’ (1995: 81).21 Lenny’s Ayah was just one among
those thousands of victims.
Gurdaspur and Lahore
The Gurdaspur train incident, which is ultimately responsible for
Ayah’s fate, is not the only deed of communal violence documented in
the novel. We are also given other vivid accounts of what happened im-
mediately after the Partition. We actually get a two-pronged account
here, for we are told what happened both in remote villages as well as
in major cities. ‘Ranna’s Story’22, for instance, gives us graphic descrip-
tions of how entire villages like Dera Tek Singh were wiped out, and we
are also told what was happening in Lahore, post-Independence. At the
same time, it needs to be stressed here that even though Sidhwa appar-
ently tries to depict the atrocities committed by Hindus, Muslims, and
Sikhs without partiality in this novel, being a Pakistani writer she
makes it obvious that her sympathies are more with the Muslim vic-
tims. For not only is a Sikh attack on a Muslim village in Punjab de-
scribed vividly, but it is also seen through the eyes of a Muslim child,
Ranna, a narrative device which automatically shifts the reader’s sympa-
thy towards the Muslims.23 This is Sidhwa’s way of accentuating the
violence inflicted upon the Muslims by the Sikhs, an opinion the nove-
list expressed in an interview with David Montenegro, in which she said
that ‘the Sikhs perpetrated the much greater brutality (…)’ during the
Partition violence of 1947.
It may be noted in this context that at least two historians have made
the same observations about the atrocities in the Punjab in 1947. The
British historian Nicholas Mansergh, for instance, writing about his
visit to India in the summer of 1947, noted in an essay entitled ‘The
Last Days of British Rule in India: Some Personal Impressions’ that at
the time of his visit,
there was a widespread feeling, which in the light of after-events
must honestly be recorded, that in the Punjab the Sikhs were
spoiling for a fight, and whatever happened elsewhere, there ser-
ious trouble was hardly to be avoided.24 (1999: 56)
72
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Dominique Lappierre and Larry Collins, in their hugely popular docu-
mentary novel Freedom at Midnight, have also made a similar observa-
tion. In the chapter entitled ‘The Greatest Migration in History’, while
chronicling the experiences of army officers in their population-
exchange operations across the new western border in September 1947,
Lappierre and Collins write:
Capt. R.E. Atkins and his Gurkhas spent weeks escorting refugee
columns, taking Sikhs into India, then bringing a horde of Mos-
lems back over the same route (…). Protecting those chaotic col-
umns, spread out over miles of road and field, was a staggering
problem. They were likely to be attacked almost anywhere along
their march. As always, it was the Sikhs whose attacks were the
most formidable and the most savage.25 (1976: 220)
The historian Robin Jeffrey, writing roughly at the same time as Lap-
pierre and Collins, has a completely different view on the subject. Ac-
cording to him, at least until August 1947, the Sikhs were ‘(…) more
sinned against than sinning (…) [as they had been] abandoned by the
British, tolerated by the Congress, taunted by the Muslim League, and,
above all, frustrated by the failures of their own political leadership.’26
Quoting Jeffrey in India after Gandhi, the Indian historian Ramachan-
dra Guha also observes that ‘The peculiar (not to say tragic) situation of
the Sikhs best explains why, when religious violence finally came to the
Punjab, it was so accelerated and concentrated’ (2007: 29)27. But an-
other perspective is offered by Ian Talbot, one of the foremost authori-
ties of the Partition on the Punjab side. Without going at all into the ar-
gument of who killed more during the Partition violence, Talbot in a
discussion of Sidhwa’s novel28 simply states that: ‘Its counterpart writ-
ten from the non-Muslim perspective is the equally harrowing account of
the attack on the Sikh minority of Sayyedpur contained in [Bhisam Sah-
ni’s Hindi novel] Tamas.’29 Talbot then goes on to mention real-life in-
cidents in 1947 that parallel the violent episodes in these two novels.30
It will be clear from the above account that historians can probably
never agree about the question of which community committed the
greater atrocities during the Partition violence of 1947. Perhaps there is
no such thing as a dispassionate, objective view when it comes to the
recording of history – especially, when it comes to the recording of the
atrocities of one group or community, or even one nation, against an-
other. Sidhwa’s Parsee child-narrator is supposed to give only a de-
tached view of events, but as we can patently see, she cannot. What she
does manage to convey truthfully, however, is her heartbreak and utter
sense of desolation when she sees her familiar world fall apart in 1947.
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
73

The city of Lahore that she loves so much is reduced, we are told, to a
wreck by the hellish fires of the Partition that never seem to end.
How long does Lahore burn? Weeks? Months? (...). Mozang
Chawk burns for months… and months… And the hellish fires
of Lahore spawn monstrous mobs. These no more resemble the
little processions of chanting urchins that Warris Road spawned
– and that Adi and I shouted ourselves hoarse in – than the fires
that fuse steel girders to mortar resemble the fires that Imam
din fans alive in our kitchen grates every morning. (pp. 139-40)
But it is noted too in the novel that while Lahore was burning, most of
its resident Hindu and Sikh families were leaving it. As their neighbour
Mr Singh says to Lenny’s father: ‘The Mehtas have gone! The Malothras
have gone! The Guptas have gone! (…). I don’t think there are any Hin-
du families left on Warris Road… Just two Sikh families. The Pritam
Singhs and us’ (p. 145). The novel also records the fact that as most peo-
ple were leaving on very short notice, they were leaving behind most of
their belongings, which were rampantly looted. Many of their houses
too were indiscriminately ransacked and burnt. Almost overnight, hun-
dreds of homes degenerated into empty and desolate shells. Some of
the few that escaped this fate came to be used for other purposes, like
the women’s camp next to Lenny’s house, which, after Ayah’s abduc-
tion, becomes the focus of the narrative.
‘Recovery and rehabilitation’ – Hamida and Ayah
The most prioritized incident of violence highlighted in the novel is of
course Ayah’s abduction, which is shown to have a profound effect on
Lenny. Almost the whole of Lenny’s experience of the Partition is repre-
sented as having happened through Ayah and her circle. Also, and
more importantly, since Ayah had always been a surrogate mother to
Lenny, the residual guilt of unwittingly betraying her never quite leaves
Lenny. The absence of Ayah is a void within, which nothing can fill up:
‘Ayahless and sore-tongued I drift through the forlorn rooms of my
house (…)’ (p. 185). This is largely because Ayah had endeared herself to
almost everyone in Lenny’s family – in fact, she had come to be an inte-
gral part of the Sethi household. Always more than a servant, she was
indulged and pampered by her mistress and the other servants alike.
Hence, they all take an interest in and become associated with the activ-
ities of the adjacent camp for the recovery and rehabilitation of ab-
ducted women. They all sympathize with the hapless women of the
camp particularly because Ayah had suffered a similar fate.
74
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

The focus on the rehabilitation camp in the novel is clearly neither
incidental nor fortuitous, but a piece of vivid realism, for as social his-
torians like Ritu Menon and Kamla Bhasin have recorded, together with
mass abductions and the rape of women by the opposite community at
the time of the Partition went earnest efforts to rescue and rehabilitate
these women.31 These efforts were made not only by their own families
and the authorities of the new nation states but also by ordinary people
who were moved simply by the plight of the victims of Partition vio-
lence. Women played a central role in this respect. And Bapsi Sidhwa
stresses just this fact in her novel in showing the efforts made by Len-
ny’s mother and Electric aunt who try their bit to bring back some sem-
blance of sanity in frenzied Lahore by ‘smuggling the rationed petrol to
help [their] Hindu and Sikh friends to run away and (…) to send kid-
napped women (…) to their families across the border’ (p. 242).
It may be noted here that though Lenny’s mother and aunt do not
play as pivotal a role as Lenny’s godmother Rodabai, their contribution
is no less significant for all that. In fact, the very profile of Lenny’s fa-
mily life changes because of her mother’s secret missions. There is ten-
sion in the house, and Lenny in Chapter 22 is almost convinced that
her mother and aunt are the secret arsonists who were putting Lahore
to flames with the dickey of their car full of petrol cans. Mrs Sethi is
also shown to risk disharmony at home for the greater cause of helping
Hindu women who had been victims of violence. It may be said too that
her and Electric aunt’s efforts are especially laudable, as they are shown
to be motivated purely by altruistic intentions. Since they are not part of
the two contending communities, it would perhaps have been more
convenient for them personally if they had remained detached or aloof.
In fact, Sidhwa makes it a point to state that the declared policy of the
Parsees of Lahore (as resolved in a public meeting at the city’s Fire tem-
ple to celebrate the Allied victory at the end of the Second World War)
was to ‘run with the hare and hunt with the hounds’. As Colonel Bharu-
cha (the president of the Parsee community in Lahore) reminds them
more than once, being a tiny community that has to survive on the
goodwill of the powers that be, they simply could not afford to take
sides in any political crisis on the subcontinent, however great that
might be.32 In the novel itself, the efforts of Lenny’s mother and aunt at
building bridges is manifested in the help and assistance they accord to
Ayah. Without these women, Ayah would have been irrecoverably lost.
At the same time, it must be noted that unlike many other women in
her situation, Ayah does not accept her fate.
Social historians and chronologists of women’s experiences during
the Partition like Ritu Menon and Kamla Bhasin have noted that it was
customary for women caught up in Partition violence to blame it all on
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
75

fate. Menon and Bhasin thus record the words of a woman named
Gyan Deyi as saying:
(…) This was all fate… To leave one’s country is fate. Now this
[India] is my country, this has become my place. I am settled
here (...). If a country is destined to be divided, it will be. What-
ever is written will happen. Have I ever wanted to go back to Pa-
kistan? No, one needs great strength for that and I am not strong
enough. It’s a dream I cannot afford to have.
Another widow of the Partition, Durga Rani, expressed similar senti-
ments when she said:
I have just blurted out everything to you today, everything that
was boiling inside has just come out. Well, we got what was in
our ‘kismat’. We must not have done good deeds in the past. But
I thank God everyday. I say, ‘Many many thanks to you for giving
me food to eat, clothes to wear.’ Most of my life is over; the re-
maining few days will also pass.33
We find an echo of this collective sentiment of resigned acceptance in
the face of a relentless fate in the character of Hamida in Ice-Candy-
Man. After Ayah’s abduction, Hamida is recruited from the adjacent re-
habilitation camp for recovered women by Mrs Sethi as a replacement
for Ayah. It is significant though that she herself describes the camp as
a ‘camp for fallen women’ – her self-definition as ‘fallen’ is eloquent
not only of the way she is perceived by her society in general and the
home she has left behind in particular, but also her own construction of
her self and the parameters by which she reconstitutes her life and her-
self in a new environment.
Nothing much is told about Hamida in the novel, and we never come
to know the exact circumstances of her violation. All we learn later is
that she has four children and she knows that her husband would never
accept her back and would, in fact, not even approve of her children
meeting her. The overriding philosophy of Hamida’s life is her belief
that we mortals are ‘khut-putlis, puppets, in the hands of fate. It’s my
kismet that’s no good’, she tells Lenny once. Ironically, it is this belief
of hers in the inevitability (and essential cruelty) of fate that helps sus-
tain her and sees her through this crisis in her life. Unlike Ayah, we
are not told what happens to Hamida at the end of the book – whether
she lived on in the same house or went elsewhere. This is because the
prime focus of the novel is on Ayah and not on Hamida. The latter is,
in fact, a relatively minor character in the novel. But her story is signifi-
cant because it is a truly representative one – representative not only of
76
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

the tragedy of women violated during the Partition but also of the fail-
ure of the new nation states to address as well as redress their post-Par-
tition problems.34 As Sidhwa herself said to Alok Bhalla, ‘Hamida is a
sort of composite figure (…) [for which] I drew upon all the stories of
horror that were floating around me at that time’ (2006: 233)35. Sidhwa
certainly conceptualized Ayah very differently. Seen against Hamida’s
story, Ayah’s is an exceptional one in that she is portrayed as one of
those rare women victimized by Partition violence who defies her fate
(though helped and aided by other women).36
When in Chapter 30, Lenny (against stiff opposition) accompanies
her godmother to meet Ayah at Hira Mandi, Lahore’s prostitute quar-
ters, the latter is a ghost of herself. As a shocked Lenny observes:
‘Where have the radiance and the animation gone? Can the soul be ex-
tracted from its living body? Her vacant eyes are bigger than ever (…).
Colder than the ice that lurks behind the hazel in Ice-Candy Man’s be-
guiling eyes’ (p. 272). Ayah is now clearly a broken-hearted woman, and
the life has gone out of her; but even in that state, she is inflexible in
her refusal to spend her life with Ice-candy man, however repentant he
might be. She tells Rodabai in a voice that is ‘(…) harsh, gruff: as if
someone has mutilated her vocal words (…). I will not live with him
(…). I cannot forget what happened (…). I have thought it over… I want
to go to my folk… whether they want me or not’ (pp. 261-63). She does
leave him; stays in the women’s camp near Lenny’s house for a short
while and then, eventually, we are told, joins her family at Amritsar. No
amount of importuning, poetry-spouting or even pestering by Ice-candy
man could make her change her mind. But of course, Sidhwa also
makes it obvious that nothing of this would have been possible if Roda-
bai – Lenny’s beloved godmother, whom she trusts completely and ad-
mires without reserve – had not made her timely intervention. God-
mother, we come to know from the novel, is an immensely resourceful
person:
Over the years Godmother has established a network of espio-
nage with a reach of which even she is unaware. It is in her nat-
ure to know things; to be aware of what’s going on around her.
The day-to-day commonplaces of our lives unravel to her under-
currents that are lost to less perceptive humans. No baby – not
even a kitten – is delivered within the sphere of her influence
without her becoming instantly aware of its existence.
And this is the source of her immense power: this reservoir of
random knowledge, and her knowledge of ancient lore and wis-
dom and herbal remedy. You cannot be near her without feeling
her uncanny strength. People bring to her their joys and woes.
Show her their sores and swollen joints. Distilling the right
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
77

herbs, adroitly instilling the right word in the right ear, she se-
cures wishes, solaces grief and prevents mistakes. She has access
to many ears. No one knows how many. (pp. 210-211)
All of this formidable arsenal Godmother brings to bear in Ayah’s case,
to help her escape from Hira Mandi, the point being that just Ayah’s re-
solve by itself was not enough to get her out of that place.
This action of Godmother depicted in Ice-Candy-Man is also paradig-
matic of what a number of real women did at the time of the Partition.
In fact, what Godmother does in a private capacity in the novel had
been enacted too by thousands of women spontaneously responding to
the exigencies of the moment, many of them women who had never
led a public life before then.37
Lenny’s awakening consciousness
All of this is there in the novel, but refracted through the prism of the
child’s mind, her developing consciousness and evolving awareness of
the world outside. For Sidhwa’s novel is, after all, a story of a child
growing up, and the narrative of an irretrievable loss that changed
many lives forever.
For Lenny, Ayah’s abduction is undoubtedly an irretrievable loss. And
it is while coping with it, or perhaps because of having to cope with it,
that Lenny grows up fast. As Sidhwa shows, Lenny had always been a
sensitive child, especially when it came to her Ayah. For instance, she is
extremely alert to the difference in chemistry between Ayah and her
band of close admirers – Sharbat Khan, Masseur, Ice-candy man:
Ayah is nervous in his [Sharbat Khan’s] presence… they don’t
touch… They don’t need to touch. His presence radiates a warmth
that is different from the dark heat generated by Masseur’s fingers
– the lightning-strikes of Ice-candy man’s toes. (p. 75)
But she comes to understand the darker side of love and passion and
the vulnerability of being a woman only after Ayah’s abduction:
If those grown men pay to do what my comparatively small cou-
sin tried to do, [tried to show her, in his own inimitable fashion,
what ‘rape’ meant] then Ayah is in trouble. I think of Ayah twist-
ing Ice-candy man’s intrusive toes and keeping the butcher and
wrestler at arm’s length. And of those strangers hands hoisting
her chocolate body into the cart. That night I take all I have
heard and learnt and been shown to bed and by morning I reel
78
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

dizzily on a fleetingly glimpsed and terrible grown-up world. (p.
241)
Lenny’s journey of transition from innocence to experience, however,
becomes complete only when she witnesses Godmother’s confrontation
with Ice-candy man:
The innocence that my parent’s vigilance, the servant’s care and
godmother’s love sheltered in me, that neither cousin’s carnal
cravings, nor the stories of the violence of the mobs, could quite
destroy, was laid waste that evening by the emotional storm that
raged round me. The confrontation between Ice-candy man and
godmother opened my eyes to the wisdom of righteous indigna-
tion over compassion. To the demands of gratification – and the
unscrupulous nature of desire. To the pitiless face of love.38 (p.
252)
It is around the same time in the novel that Lenny comes to know
about ‘rape’, ‘fallen women’ and ‘unlucky 13’. She gets her ‘first kiss’
and voices her incredible romantic fantasies; becomes acutely conscious
of the changes in her body. All of this is assisted by her near and dear
ones, in small or big measure, especially by her cousin and Godmother.
But she also gains insights on her own. And so, when Hamida, her
new ayah, hearing a wailing woman in the neighbouring camp blames
all their suffering on fate, Lenny is moved to protest: ‘My heart is
wrung with pity and horror. I want to leap out of my bed and console
the wailing woman and slay her tormentors. I have seen ayah carried
away – and it has less to do with fate than with the will of men.’ (p.
214)
Agency to women
It is precisely this conviction that the ‘will of men’ had precipitated the
Partition that sets this novel apart from the other Partition novels. Ice-
Candy-Man is unique in depicting not only the violence that was un-
leashed on the women of the subcontinent but also in its valorization of
the conviction and courage that women are capable of in times of crisis.
Sidhwa’s depiction of Lenny’s own insights, of Ayah’s outright refusal
to accept her fate, of Godmother’s resourcefulness, and of Lenny’s
mother and aunt’s efforts at rehabilitation – all combine to provide
agency to women in this novel. Sidhwa’s Partition-centered narrative
thus vindicates the power of women to make choices and to take the
reins of their lives in their own hands, which actually amounts to an act
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
79

of stupendous defiance, especially if we keep in mind the particular cir-
cumstances of Ayah’s predicament. Thus, though being a novel which
apparently prioritizes a man at least in its title, Ice-Candy-Man subtly
but effectively subverts the discourse of patriarchy and privileges female
will, choice and strength along with the feminine qualities of compas-
sion and motherhood.
Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day
The Partition novels discussed so far – Khushwant Singh’s Train to Pa-
kistan, Manohar Malgonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges and Bapsi Sidhwa’s
Ice-Candy-Man – happen to be some of the most popular English novels
written on this theme. But there are quite a few other novels that deal
(very differently, though significantly) with the Partition which have
never shared this limelight. Pre-eminent among them, to my mind, is
Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day (1980).39
Desai stereotyped
There seems to be a critical consensus that Clear Light of Day (1980) has
little to do with the theme of Partition. Part of the reason is (probably)
because Anita Desai is predominantly identified with a particular type
of fiction and a particular kind of character, an image that has stuck to
her to this day. For example, in a very recent book on the history of
Indian Literature in English, Shyamala A. Narayan and Jon Mee40 have
this to say about Anita Desai:
Born of a German mother and Bengali father, her fiction seems
most confident when it deals with the educated upper-middle
classes, but while Sahgal and Markandaya concern themselves
primarily with the external political and social circumstances of
their characters, Desai concentrates on their psychology. Indeed,
she has often made her priorities in this respect clear:
Writing is to me a process of discovering the truth – the truth
that is nine-tenths of the iceberg that lies submerged beneath the
one-tenth visible portion we call Reality. Writing is my way of
plunging to the depths and exploring this underlying truth… my
novels are no reflection of Indian society, politics, or character.
This view of Desai (that her novels have nothing to do with politics), at-
tested (as in the above quote) by the author herself, seems to be so
firmly entrenched in the minds of critics that even when she writes a
80
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

different kind of fiction and creates a different kind of character, they
fail to notice it. And they have failed to notice it most consistently in
Clear Light of Day.
Critics on the novel
It is important to remember here that Clear Light of Day happens to be
one of the most commented upon novels by Desai. Yet ironically en-
ough, though there are innumerable articles and essays devoted to the
finer points of this novel, the issue of the Partition does not figure in
most of them. And even when it does, the statements are very often
qualified by comparison with other (and more celebrated) Partition nov-
els. Thus, Basavaraj Naikar writes in an article entitled ‘The Paradox of
Time in Clear Light of Day’:
Anita Desai brings out the horror and the tragedy of the Partition
(…) evocatively and memorably in Part II of the novel (…)
although the Partition as such does not provide the leit motif or
the theme for the novel as in Khushwant Singh’s Train to Paki-
stan or Manohar Malgonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges (…)41
and Neeru Chakravertty asserts that:
The personal drama of the growing children is inextricably
linked with the historical developments of the time, namely, the
Partition trauma. The historical context is [however] not incorpo-
rated as in Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy man, where primal passions
of love and hate impinge in a gut-wrenching way on the con-
sciousness, but as a subdued historical event impinging on the
adolescents’ awareness, caught up in their own emergent
selves.42
Even when Clear Light of Day is singled out for praise in the more gen-
eral context of Desai’s oeuvre, it is usually lauded for some aspect other
than its connection with the theme of Partition. Thus, William Walsh
categorically states, ‘Clear Light of Day shows Anita Desai’s art at its
most sensitively effective. It seems to me the height of her considerable
achievement.’43 Equally, Salman Rushdie, while celebrating Desai’s In
Custody in one of the essays in Imaginary Homelands, prefaces it with
an introduction to Anita Desai and her novels thus:
The subject of Anita Desai’s fiction has, thus far, been solitude.
Her most memorable creations – the old woman, Nanda Kaul, in
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
81

Fire in the Mountain, or Bim in Clear Light of Day – have been
isolated, singular figures. And the books themselves have been
private universes, illuminated by the author’s perceptiveness, de-
licacy of language and sharp wit, but remaining, in a sense, as
solitary, as separate, as their characters.44
This comment by Rushdie is especially significant because Clear Light
of Day actually marks a transitional point45 in Anita Desai’s career,
something that Rushdie totally misses out on (although he otherwise
aptly sums up Desai’s earlier fiction). For in this her fourth novel, she
moves away from the private universe of solitary, alienated characters to
portray an individual, who, though highly introverted herself, has per-
force to negotiate with the outside world and public events. And this
she is obliged to do because of the intrusion of the events of the Parti-
tion in her life. The Partition is indeed integrally related to the plot of
the novel, and no matter how unnoticed this particular aspect of the no-
vel has been, it is indubitably true that it is possible to read Anita De-
sai’s fourth novel as one related to the Partition.
Anita Desai herself has not only spoken about her own experience of
the Partition as a child, but has also given her own take on the novel,
which leaves no doubt about its Partition connection. In an interview
with Sunil Sethi for India Today soon after the publication of the novel,
she said: ‘My novel is set in Old Delhi and records the tremendous
changes that a Hindu family goes through since 1947.’ In the same in-
terview, reminiscing about her own experience of the Partition, she
said: ‘I was ten at the time of Partition and profoundly affected by it; so
much in our life suddenly changed character’46.
Talking of families, it is important to note that all novels dealing with
the Partition invariably show how the Partition affected the family unit
on both sides of the border. To that extent, all Partition novels are family
novels in one way or another. But Clear Light of Day is unique in that it
is a novel that primarily focuses on the social unit of the family and
shows how the Partition affected familial ties and interpersonal relation-
ships.
Clear Light of Day as a Partition novel
At one level, Clear Light of Day is a story of four brothers and sisters –
Bim, Raja, Tara and Baba – and their interpersonal relationships, of
how they come to terms with changing realities, and how they come to
understand themselves and each other. Yet national history is inextric-
ably bound up with the personal history of the siblings, for while they
are not actively involved in politics, they are forced to make emotional
82
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

and intellectual adjustments in their lives due to the political upheaval
all around them at the time of the Partition. In fact, the crisis in the na-
tion coincides with the crisis in their own family life, a crisis which
Bim aptly describes as the ‘first terrible flood of life’. And it is at this
very crucial phase that misunderstandings crop up between them. The
novel actually turns around these misunderstandings (which they nur-
ture for years) and their final resolution with the passage of time.47
The siblings in the story are all shown to share an essentially de-
prived childhood, a fact which emotionally unites them in the formative
years of their lives but ironically proves to be the cause of a split be-
tween them in their adult lives. They react to this childhood deprivation
very differently, each trying to come out of it by taking a different route:
Raja, the elder brother, who is ‘naturally inclined towards society, com-
pany, applause; towards colour, song, charm’ is more at home with the
Hyder Alis because ‘their almost shocking contrast’48 with his own fa-
mily fascinates him. He finds his own house ‘dismal’ and is convinced
that ‘no other family could have as much illness contained in it as his,
so much oddity, so many things that could not be mentioned and had
to be camouflaged or ignored’(p. 47). Tara, the younger sister, on the
other hand, feels isolated both at home and in school in her growing
years. To her dismay, she finds that she cannot share her elder sister
Bim and her brother Raja’s intellectual interests, and neither can she
get the emotional security that she craves from Mira Masi, the destitute
widowed aunt who had come to live with them and look after them.
She thus edges closer to the neighbouring family of the Mishras, ‘to the
warmth (…) emanating from them, from their large, full, bustling
household’ and the Mishra girls become ‘the closest certainty to friend-
ship in Tara’s forlorn experience’ (p. 58).
Only Bim has no alternative, and seeks none. As Desai portrays her,
she pursues no avenue of escape from the harsh environment she is
hurled into and is abruptly made to take charge of. Instead of trying to
be oblivious of the present reality by immersing herself in poetry (as
Raja does) or simply escaping from it into a more relaxed and comforta-
ble life through marriage (like Tara), she confronts it. As the novelist
paints her personality, she considers it to be a test of her natural self to
accept challenges and to lock horns with life. She thus shoulders the
immense four-fold responsibility of taking care of her retarded youngest
brother Baba, looking after the senile Mira Masi, nursing the malaria-
stricken Raja back to normalcy, and being the guardian of Tara. After
Tara leaves, Raja and she are thrown together for company and comfort
even more than at any time of their lives. But when Raja too leaves her,
because he could not ‘go on living just to keep my brother and sister
company (…) down in this hole’ (p. 100), she takes complete charge of
things at home – her home, which now comprises a derelict aunt and
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
83

an autistic brother. She rejects a marriage proposal, completes her edu-
cation, and becomes a teacher.
None of the members of this family are thus shown in Clear Light of
Day to be directly involved with politics, and yet the Partition invades
their lives in devious ways. This mostly happens through the figure of
Raja and his close association with their neighbour and landlord, Hyder
Ali. At his most impressionable age, Raja is drawn to the figure of Hy-
der Ali, attracted by the man’s refined and cultured personality, his li-
brary, his evening garden parties centering round politics and poetry,
even his zenana (though fleetingly) through the person of his wife and
daughter Benazir (whom he later marries). As Anita Desai depicts it, in
almost no time Raja becomes the son Hyder Ali never had. In fact, Raja
is shown in the novel to be accepted as an integral part of the Hyder Ali
family, and he in his turn is clearly honoured and grateful to the house-
hold for giving him all that he craved for. Hyder Ali soon becomes for
Raja not only the ideal of his life but almost the very reason for living.
We learn from the story too that the influence of the Muslim gentleman
is so strong on him that he wants to take up Islamic studies at Jamia
Millia only because Hyder Ali wants him to. Raja is stung when his
father vehemently opposes this and snubs him into submission by
powerful arguments of a kind that the son had never imagined his per-
petually absent and neglectful father to be capable of. He warns his
son, ‘If you, a Hindu boy, are caught in Jamia Millia, the centre of Isla-
mic studies – as you call it – you will be torn to bits, you will be burnt
alive.’ And when Raja retorts, ‘Who will do that to me?’, he answers
with pointed logic, ‘Muslims, for trying to join them when they don’t
want you and don’t trust you, and Hindus, for deserting them and
going over to the enemy. Hindus and Muslims alike will be out for your
blood’ (p. 52).
This passage in the novel alerts us to the fact of how the spectre of
the Partition was affecting one and all on the subcontinent in 1947. It is
an established fact that massive migrations had started months before
the Partition, displacing thousands of people on the eastern and wes-
tern borders of the country. But even the sections of the population
which were not directly threatened by the impending Partition (i.e. peo-
ple who belonged to the majority community in a particular place) did
not remain unscathed. Raja’s father’s words quoted above show how
something as decisive as admission to a college (on which a middle-
class youth’s future depended) was affected by the Partition. And the
all-encompassing political controversy surrounding the Partition and
the hatred and suspicion that it generated led to a point where the two
contending communities did not want to have anything to do with each
other. Even when it came to educational institutions, there seemed to
84
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

be a neat division – Jamia Millia for the Muslims in Delhi, and Hindu
College for the Hindus in the same city.
In Desai’s novel, Raja reluctantly takes up English Literature at Hin-
du College at his father’s insistence, only to discover that the institution
has become a hotbed for politics, a place that spawns fanatics. His
friends expect to find a revolutionary in him – ‘his idealistic enthu-
siasm, his graceful carriage, his incipient heroism’ (p. 57) leave them
with no other option – and never forgive him for not being one. To top
it all, not only does he not join them, he actually openly sympathizes
with the Pakistani cause. His charmed friends therefore soon turn into
dangerous enemies, threatening to report him to the police as a Pakista-
ni spy. And true to their word, a policeman in plainclothes is posted
outside the gate of their home for twelve hours for a couple of days.
Mira Masi had always been apprehensive about the Hyder Ali connec-
tion; now, they are all positively frightened. Though nothing overtly vio-
lent happens, it creates a great deal of tension and fear in the family.
Raja’s college friends, though, cannot be blamed for their suspicion,
for it must have been extremely rare for a Hindu youth to espouse the
cause of Pakistan in 1947. But the novelist makes it clear enough that
Raja thinks the way he does not out of any ideological convictions but
for emotional reasons, because of his bonding with his Muslim mentor.
His response has thus nothing to do with politics whatsoever. Essen-
tially of a romantic disposition, we are told in Chapter II that his idol
was Byron and not Jinnah or Nehru, and he was himself naturally in-
clined more towards poetry than revolutionary politics. Nevertheless, it
cannot be denied that in Anita Desai’s visualization at least, Raja repre-
sents an alternative viewpoint. His college admission, the fiasco attend-
ing it, his experience on the campus thereafter, and his unique position
on the Pakistan issue (the way he responds to the Pakistani cause), all
of these are, of course, directly related to the theme of Partition. But
what needs to be noted here is that this very important aspect of the no-
vel has hardly been highlighted in the existing body of criticism on Ani-
ta Desai’s book.
One commentator however who does reflect on this Partition orienta-
tion of Clear Light of Day is Rani Uniyal, who succinctly sums up the
connection of the Partition with the siblings of this story as follows:
The summer of 1947 was marked with Raja’s illness at home
and the country’s partition outside. It marks the beginning of
Bim’s responsibility towards others and Aunt Mira’s strange bent
towards alcoholism. It is also the year that marks Tara’s escape
from the drudgery of the old Delhi house and the death of her
father. It marks Bim’s development as a new woman. Indeed,
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
85

the socio-political changes within the country have a strong bear-
ing on the personal history of these characters.49
In real history, however, the impact of the Partition continued for many
months after the actual event and culminated with the assassination of
Mahatma Gandhi, an event which, significantly enough, changes the
lives of the siblings in the novel forever. To begin with, two very signifi-
cant personal associations in the story are inextricably tied up with this
national loss. As we are told in Chapter II, Bim had been out on a date
with Dr Das that day (she had conceded to it out of gratitude for his pa-
tience with and compassion for the increasingly senile Mira Masi), but
it had ended in disaster. That was the last time she met Dr Das – or at
least that is how she chose to remember it. And when she came to
know of the news of the assassination on the main street of Darya Ganj,
she hurried back to give Raja the news, leaving Dr Das stranded on the
road. At home, turning on the radio, Raja is said to be immensely re-
lieved to know, for the sake of the Hyder Alis and their safety, that
Gandhi’s assassin was a Hindu and not a Muslim. Bim too is described
as being relieved, but as much for his sake as for theirs. Only this relief
does not last long, for amidst all the chaos and confusion that follows
the Mahatma’s death, Raja receives a letter from Hyder Ali telling him
they are alive and safe in Hyderabad. Raja cannot wait any more and
rushes to join his mentor without sparing so much as a thought for
Bim or Baba.
Though she never says it, what hurts Bim beyond words is Raja’s atti-
tude. He is so blindly loyal to the Hyder Alis that all the while he is ill
and even later, he broods and frets and fumes about nothing else but
how they would cope with the difficulties in the aftermath of the Parti-
tion. It is ironic that he ignores what happens before his own eyes at
home and empathizes with a family who after all settle down safely in
Hyderabad. As we see at the end of Chapter II, Bim, rejected and cast
out unceremoniously by the brother who meant everything to her, says
not a word when Raja leaves. But the depth of her desolation comes out
very poignantly in the passage in the same chapter where she is left
alone with Baba at the end of the summer of 1947:
‘Everyone’s gone except you and I. They won’t come back. We’ll
be alone now. But we don’t have to worry about anyone now –
Tara or Raja or Mira Masi… now that they have all gone.’ (p. 101)
This callous rejection of his own family by Raja when in fact they were
passing through their worst crisis ever and Bim required maximum
support, is the beginning of the rift between brother and sister, and
with time, this only increases.
86
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Anita Desai’s emplotment of the story in Clear Light of Day thus indi-
cates that this happens because of Raja’s association with the Hyder
Alis and Partition. Very simply put, the plot of the novel shows that be-
cause of the Partition, the Hyder Alis had to leave; because they left,
Raja followed suit; and because of this thoughtless action of Raja, his
ties with his sister are severed. The Partition is thus shown to lead to
the disintegration of the family, and this becomes a powerful image of
the disintegration of the subcontinent of India into separate nation
states.
Bim enabled
Yet, the novel also shows how the event of the Partition is an enabling
experience, especially for Bim, as she starts to discover a new sense of
personal identity for herself when she starts working and resumes her
studies. She may have rejected Dr Das, but acting on his advice that she
could train herself for nursing, she starts helping out in a clinic for wo-
men at the Kingsway Cross refugee camp in Delhi. In fact, Desai’s nar-
rative shows that she resumes her studies (in History) and starts this
work at the same time. She therefore truly comes into her own only in
the summer of 1947, after having being abandoned by her beloved
brother. In other words, she becomes a type of the new, independent wo-
man whom Simone de Beauvoir delineated as follows: ‘Once she ceases
to be a parasite, the system based on her dependence crumbles; between
her and the universe, there is no longer any need for a masculine media-
tor.’50 Bim is of course a fictional character, but it is interesting to note
that her case can be cited to describe: ‘(…) how the expansion of social
space in the years following 1947 led to a number of cultural reorienta-
tions in society. Women moved out of their domestic insularity and un-
derwent attitudinal changes as well’ (Chanana 2004: 101)51.
Desai’s revisioning of the traditional Partition narrative
As we have seen, there is a manifest revisioning of the traditional Parti-
tion narrative in Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day. As the above analysis
of the novel reveals, all the normal artifacts of the Partition are missing
in it, all that is usually associated with the colossal upheaval that was
the Partition. The brutal violence of the whole event – murder, rape,
mutilation, as well as the mass migration and dislocation of millions of
refugees who travelled and lived under inhuman conditions do not fea-
ture in Clear Light of Day. Even loss in the novel is more on a psycholo-
gical plane. There is nothing in Clear Light of Day that is spectacularly
WOMEN DURING THE PARTITION: VICTIM AND AGENT
87

dramatic, the kind of thing one has learnt to expect from a Partition
novel. The extreme experiences of the Partition do not figure here. For
example, we do not see Bim inside a refugee camp, but on its fringes,
in a clinic. We are spared the excruciating suffering that millions went
through inside a camp. But then, we have accounts of it in other novels
(notably, camp life in Azadi). All novels need not be the same. Granted,
there are these unavoidable signifiers of the Partition. Though the most
obvious ones are missing in this novel, quite a few are still there, but
distanced – like the fire on the horizon, the refuge camp clinic, the ab-
sconding Muslim neighbours, and the news of Gandhi’s assassination
on the radio (which, many agree, signalled the end of Partition violence,
at least in Delhi).52
One of the alleged shortcomings of Desai as a novelist is that ‘Her
novels (…) deal with the class she knows best, but they do so at the ex-
pense of shutting out the much more complex Indian reality. She her-
self admits (…) that vast areas of the Indian experience cannot be within
her easy reach’53. I would, however, argue that, at least as far as Clear
Light of Day is concerned, far from it being a shortcoming, Desai’s fo-
cus on the elite and upper middle class of her society actually imparts a
uniqueness to this Partition novel, because it offers us an alternative
way of looking at this event. After all, the Partition did not affect just
the people who were victims of communal violence or were uprooted
from their land and rendered poor and homeless. It touched the lives
of all Indians, especially on the eastern and western borders. And the
case of Delhi was, of course, special. Being the capital city, the drama of
the Partition was enacted there with an intensity probably lacking in
other cities at the time. (Many of them had seen the worst massacres
before August 1947.) There was a certain urgency to the situation in
Delhi, and it went on for months – both before and especially after the
Partition. And even people who had apparently nothing to do with the
Partition were deeply affected by it. It changed their lives too. That is
Desai’s fundamental point in this novel – and though she says it in her
own quiet way, it is a vitally important point. Her shortcomings as a no-
velist actually help her to give us a refreshingly new perspective on a
much written about event.54
88
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

3
The making of a nation: Religion or language?
Midnight’s Children: A watershed
It is generally agreed that though English has been creatively used in
India since the nineteenth century and literary production in it has
strengthened since at least the 1930s, when it flowered in the hands of
writers like Mulk Raj Anand, Raja Rao and R.K. Narayan, Indian Writ-
ing in English, especially the Indian novel in English, properly came
into its own only in the 1980s. This was not because of any previous
dearth of talent, as every decade since Independence invariably pro-
duced a fresh crop of successful writers with their own special con-
cerns. It was rather because of (among several other factors) the new
energy that was infused into Indian Writing in English in the 1980s by
its reception in the West in a way that it had never experienced before.
And this turning point came with Rushdie’s 1981 Booker Prize-winning
novel, Midnight’s Children.1
Malcolm Bradbury, the chairman of the judges of the prize, hailed
the novel as ‘a genuine contribution to fiction, a brilliant experimental
novel that is also a very funny book’.2 Indeed, initially Midnight’s Chil-
dren was seen as merely a comic, irreverent and high-spirited novel
about a fantastic protagonist whose birth coincided with the Indepen-
dence of India. But gradually, as the eminent Indian critic Meenakshi
Mukherjee has pointed out, Midnight’s Children was ‘appropriated into a
theoretical discourse about nation, history and their narrativity’3. As to
Rushdie’s own motive in writing the novel, he once said in an interview
that if the novel had any purpose, it was to ‘(…) say that the 32 years be-
tween independence and the end of the book did not add up to very
much, that a kind of betrayal had taken place, and that the book was
dealing with the nature of that betrayal’4.
In the novel itself, this betrayal is written about in Rushdie’s inimita-
ble style. When it was first published, Midnight’s Children was hailed in
the West as ‘a continent finding its voice’. While that contention has
been sharply (and quite rightly) refuted by Indian critics5, it cannot be
denied that Midnight’s Children is a singular achievement, not only be-
cause it is, as William Walsh says, ‘(…) a novel unprecedented in scope
and manner in the history of the Indian novel in English’6 but also be-

cause it deals with the theme of Partition in a very unique manner. For,
of virtually all the Indian English novels that deal with the Partition,
Midnight’s Children is the only novel that takes within its ambit both the
Partition of 1947 which divided the subcontinent into a secular India
and a Muslim Pakistan, as well as the later division of the two wings of
Islamic Pakistan into two separate nations, Pakistan and Bangladesh, in
1971.
Rushdie’s sweeping narrative begins long before the birth of the nov-
el’s protagonist, Saleem Sinai, with Saleem’s grandfather Aadam Aziz’s
life history after his return to Kashmir from Germany at the beginning
of the twentieth century (where he had gone to study medicine); before
going on to trace the tragic trajectory of Saleem’s businessman father,
Ahmed Sinai, in the independent and so-called ‘secular’ India (and later
in Pakistan); and ends with the birth of his son, Aadam, who represents
the promise of a more pragmatic generation than Saleem’s own. Politi-
cally, these three generations span the entire history of the Indian sub-
continent from the Jallianwalabagh Massacre of 1919 to the Emergency
of 1977.
Ever since it was first published in 1980, the novel has occasioned a
considerable amount of critical discussion. In the 29 years since its first
publication, apart from lengthy analyses in several seminal studies of
Rushdie’s oeuvre by (among others) Timothy Brennan7, James Harri-
son8 and Catherine Cundy9, Midnight’s Children has produced a verita-
ble deluge of articles and essays representing widely divergent critical
responses. These range from responses that elicit comparisons with
iconic European novels like Tristam Shandy and The Tin Drum to delib-
erations on Rushdie’s use of history, to examinations of the magic rea-
list mode in the novel and Rushdie’s innovative use of the English lan-
guage. Rushdie’s own comments on the critical exegeses spawned by
his novel deserve mention. In 2003, he wrote in an essay, ‘Adapting
Midnight’s Children’:
Interestingly, on the novel’s first publication, Western critics
tended to focus on its more fantastic elements, while Indian re-
viewers treated it like a history book. [Yet] however highly fabu-
lated parts of the novel were, the whole was deeply rooted in the
real life of the characters and the nation (…). And all around
Saleem is the stuff of real Indian history.10 (2003: 79)
Indeed, as Timothy Brennan has remarked:
Midnight’s Children is distinctive (…) in the way that it systemati-
cally sets out in discursive fashion, all the key historical road
markers of the Indian postwar period inserting them into the
90
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

narrative like newspaper reports or like textbook lessons in mod-
ern Indian history: the massacre at Jallianwallah Bagh in Amrit-
sar in 1919; the Partition of 1947; Nehru’s First Five-Year Plan in
1956; Ayub Khan’s coup in Pakistan in 1958; the India-China
war of 1962; the India-Pakistan war of 1965; the creation of Ban-
gladesh in 1971; and the Indian ‘Emergency’ of 1975.11 (1989: 83)
Two aspects of the novel’s representation of history usually
missed
It is important to note that there are two aspects of the novel’s represen-
tation of history that are all too easily missed by readers and critics
alike. The first of these has to do with the nationalist movement itself,
and the other with the Partition. About the former, Brennan percep-
tively notes that:
By far the most significant historical jump in Midnight’s Chil-
dren’s time-frame is not so much temporal as thematic. No one
has seemed to notice that the very staple of a major branch of
Indo-English historical fiction, Gandhi’s National Movement, is
impertinently excised from the narrative outright, which rushes
from Amritsar in 1919 to Agra in 1942 without so much as a
passing comment! Thus, the story of Indian nationalism is
erased from the book that documents its sad outcome, and the
most dramatic illustration of Rushdie’s argument is an ab-
sence.12 (1989: 84)
There is however another very important facet of Rushdie’s historical re-
presentation which has been overlooked even by Brennan – and that is the
way it deals with the Partition. It is interesting to note here that even apart
from the critics, Rushdie himself does not seem to consider Midnight’s
Children as a Partition novel per se. In an interview he gave to Salil Tri-
pathi in 1983, he had said: ‘Khushwant Singh’s Train to Pakistan is
about the only good book on that theme. Midnight’s Children uses the
partition somewhat at a distance because the action is in Bombay.’13
But as this chapter will argue, Midnight’s Children (notwithstanding
the general opinions of its critics and even its author) is certainly a Par-
tition novel, and a very unique one at that. Indeed, there are three key
aspects about the treatment of the Partition in this novel which sharply
differentiate it from the other novels discussed so far. The first aspect is
that Midnight’s Children deals with both the partitions of the subconti-
nent, that is, the one of 1947 as well as the later one of 1971; second,
that its characters inhabit all three partitioned states of India, Pakistan
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
91

and Bangladesh; and third, that it uniquely represents the precise mo-
ment of the birth of the nation.
Freedom at midnight: The moment of birth
To take the last of the above-mentioned points first (i.e. the depiction of
the precise moment of the nation’s birth), it is a fact that while Mid-
night’s Children, like a few other Partition novels before it, also depicts
the event of the Partition, it does so from a completely fresh narrative
perspective. There are two chapters in Book I of Midnight’s Children that
deal with the event of the Partition, the chapter entitled ‘Methwold’s Es-
tate’ which is the prelude to the end of Book I, and ‘Tick, Tock’, the very
last chapter of the first book which enacts the steady, metronomic beat
of a countdown to ‘an approaching, inevitable midnight’14.
Methwold in the novel is a reluctantly departing colonial who sells
his estate in Bombay to a select group of the city’s Indian elite (one of
whom is Saleem’s father Ahmed) before finally leaving India’s shores.
Both Methwold and the selling of his property are significant, for
Methwold sells his estate (consisting of four identical houses built in
European style and named after the royal palaces of Europe) on two
conditions. These conditions, which display his reluctance to let go his
erstwhile holdings, were that, first the houses should be purchased with
every last thing still in them and that their ‘entire contents’ were to be
retained by the ‘new owners’; and second, that ‘the actual transfer
should not take place until midnight on August 15’ (p. 95). The transfer
of assets at Methwold’s estate is thus both a metaphor for and a parody
of the political transfer of power that was happening in India at the
time.
Additionally, Methwold himself is also important because (as it turns
out) he is the biological father of Saleem. And this is a fact that has a
significance beyond its immediate ramifications, particularly as Saleem,
who is taken to be ‘the chosen child of midnight’, ironically turns out to
be an Anglo-Indian, the illegitimate son of a devious colonizer and a
poor Hindu woman, Vanita. Throughout the novel, the narrator tries to
establish that the history of Saleem’s life is the history of the country
and that Saleem is India, and India is Saleem. His family genealogy is
also presented in this light in the novel. Hence, it can be said that if Aa-
dam Aziz (Saleem’s grandfather) embodies the established narrative of
Indian History, then this alternative genealogy expresses a dissatisfac-
tion with national history and a rejection of the Indian nation state itself
as the bastard product of England’s violation of the subcontinent.15 In
other words, Rushdie seems to be arguing that the new state that came
92
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

into being on 15 August 1947 was Indian in its colour, composition and
make-up, but its pedigree was unmistakably British.
The birth of the nation and the novel’s protagonist both happens ‘at
the stroke of the midnight hour’. But we have already been given an
inkling of this by the announcement of a prize in the previous chapter
of the novel, which is a truly new device that Rushdie introduces in the
plot. We are told that the daily newspaper, Times of India, searching for
a human-interest story for the Independence celebrations, announced a
prize to any Bombay mother who would ‘give birth to a child at the pre-
cise instant of the birth of the new nation’ (p. 99). Seeing this in the pa-
pers, the protagonist’s would-be mother, Amina, was absolutely sure
that she would win the prize. But she had stiff competition from two
other women within Methwold’s Estate itself – Nussie (wife of the Par-
see lawyer, Ismail Ibrahim) and Vanita (wife of the street accordionist
and entertainer, Wee Willie Winkie). A certain comic element is intro-
duced in the countdown to 15 August in the narrative, because of this
aspect of rivalry surrounding the birth of the protagonist.
But there are ominous strains too in the prelude that leads to the fi-
nal countdown to the moment of India’s independence. And these are
introduced through the character of Joseph D’Costa, the communist
lover of Mary Pareira, the virgin midwife at Dr Narlikar’s Nursing
home. Joseph hated the rich and was, like Aadam Aziz, sensitive to the
winds of change. He had sniffed the air blowing from the north and
concluded: ‘this independence is for the rich only; the poor are being
made to kill each other like flies. In Punjab, in Bengal’ (p. 104). En-
raged by the Partition riots, Joseph turns his attention from plump, vir-
ginal Mary to the more ‘patriotic cause of awakening the people’ (p.
103) to the concealed fakery of Independence. This turns Mary dis-
traught, and she commits the terrible deed of swapping the babies born
to Amina and Vanita, legitimate and illegitimate babies, respectively.
Joseph’s predictions about and assessment of India’s Independence
draws our attention away from Methwold’s Estate and the euphoria all
around to the ‘other’ gruesome things that were happening all over In-
dia but were not given priority in official reports. It is important to
point out here that Rushdie’s fictional prioritization of the events at
Methwold’s estate is very much like Nehru’s skirting of the trauma of
the Partition and his romanticization of the event of emancipation from
the British in his famous ‘freedom at midnight’ speech, which ran (in
part):
The achievement we celebrate today is but a step, an opening of
opportunity, to the greater triumphs and achievements that await
us. Are we brave enough and wise enough to grasp this opportu-
nity and accept the challenge of the future? Freedom and power
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
93

bring responsibility. That responsibility rests upon this assembly,
a sovereign body representing the sovereign people of India. Be-
fore the birth of freedom we have endured all the pains of labour and
our hearts are heavy with the memory of this sorrow. Some of those
pains continue even now. Nevertheless, the past is over and it is
the future that beckons to us now.16
It may be noted here that towards the end of the second paragraph of
the given quote (i.e. the lines in italics), Nehru is actually talking about
the Partition without mentioning the word. It is a glaring, deliberate
gloss-over, suitably capped by a flourishing last sentence.
It will be seen that just as Nehru foregrounds the prize of Indepen-
dence and the promise that it holds, the inhabitants of Methwold’s es-
tate are more caught up with the promised Times of India prize. What
needs to be noted particularly is that neither in Nehru’s speech nor in
the reflections of all the would-be fathers at Dr Narlikar’s clinic is there
even a single mention of the word ‘Partition’ or of all the tragedy and
irony of the violence that came after decades of non-violent struggle for
independence. And that this parallel with Nehru’s speech is meaningful
is further evidenced by the fact that all the major events that happen in
this chapter of Midnight’s Children literally happen within the same
three- to four-minute time span that Nehru’s speech must have taken to
have been delivered.
In his novel, Rushdie focuses on what is happening with a single fa-
mily at the time of the Partition, and it is amazing to note how much
happens in these three to four minutes. To summarize: two children
are born to parents of widely different backgrounds: one (Saleem) is
born on the stroke of midnight, at the precise moment of the country’s
birth; and the other (Shiva) arrives within a minute of Independence.
Next, Ahmed Sinai breaks his toe when he absent-mindedly drops a
chair that he was carrying on hearing from Dr Narlikar that he has had
a son. Then, in a most dramatic twist in the narrative, the two babies
are swapped by the distraught midwife Mary who does it foolishly
thinking it to be ‘her own private, revolutionary act’ for which Joseph
would love her. One of the women, Vanita, dies in childbirth, leaving
her husband utterly desolate. But for the other couple, Ahmed and Ami-
na (who would be the parents of the child they had not conceived), it is
a moment of happy togetherness, as husband and wife regard the new-
born child, and the mother in particular feels enormously relieved and
happy: happy to have won the Times of India prize after all (she asks her
husband to contact the paper); and relieved that contrary to the strange
predictions of the soothsayer Ramram Seth, her son thankfully had only
one head.
94
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

In all of this, it is the baby-swapping that is the most important.
Rushdie himself elucidated why he used this device in an interview
with Chandrabhanu Pattanayak:
[The swapping] was partly because I thought of a sort of dualism
between the children – they represent wealth and poverty, reason
and unreason, peace and war and so forth. But also I wanted
them to be not the children of their parents; I wanted them to be
the children of the times. And the exchange, by divorcing them
from their actual bloodlines, was a way of achieving that.17
But there’s also another aspect to this issue. As a recent critic, Nandini
Bhattacharya, has pointed out:
In the figure of Saleem (whom Nehru calls the mirror of the na-
tion), Rushdie also attacks the concept of the nation as a pure, es-
sential and unchanging space, comprising of a group of homoge-
nous people moving towards a common destiny. As a ‘monster’
born of triple mothers – the Hindu Vanita, the Muslim Amina
and the Christian Mary – and three fathers – the departing colo-
nialist Methwold, the street musician Wee Willie Winkie, and
businessman Ahmed Sinai – Saleem represents the new-born na-
tion in all its heterogeneity, and bewildering plurality.18
The narrator, highly self-conscious as he always is, seems to be well
aware of this excessive focus on a particular event in a particular family
on the momentous night of August 15 – and cannily admits, as if to
forestall criticism:
I shall not describe the mass blood-letting in progress on the
frontiers of the Punjab (where the partitioned nations are wash-
ing themselves in one another’s blood…); I shall avert my eyes
from the violence in Bengal and the long pacifying walks of Ma-
hatma Gandhi.
But then, he justifies himself by saying: ‘Selfish? Narrow-minded? Well,
perhaps; but excusably so, in my opinion. After all, one is not born
every day’ (p. 130).
The interesting thing to note here is that, despite all such protesta-
tions, he eventually does mention the unavoidable facts of the Partition,
though in a very unusual and macabre fashion.
Suddenly everything is saffron and green (…). Saffron minutes
and green seconds tick away on the clocks on the walls. Outside
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
95

Dr Narlikar’s Nursing Home, there are fireworks and crowds,
also conforming to the colours of the night – saffron rockets,
green sparkling rain; the men in shirts of zafaran hue, the wo-
men in saris of lime.
(…) Saffron-shirted, green-skirted, the crowd throng in the illumi-
nated streets, beneath the infinite balconies of the city on which
little dia-lamps of earthenware have been filled with mysterious
oils; wicks float in the lamps which line every balcony and roof-
top, and these wicks, too, conform to our two-tone colour
scheme; half the lamps burn saffron, the others flame with
green.
(…) And in all the cities all the towns all the villages the little dia-
lamps burn on window-sills porches verandahs, while trains
burn in the Punjab, with the green flames of blistering paint and
the glaring saffron of fired fuel, like the biggest dias in the
world. (pp. 132-134)
This description constitutes a kind of montage representing multiple vi-
sions on Rushdie’s part which serves to replace the unilinear version of
official history by an alternative view that takes into consideration a
number of contrasting realities and displays the varying impact of the
event of the Partition on different sections of the people.
In noting the uniqueness of Rushdie’s depiction of the Partition, one
is also led to take into consideration his independent stance on Indian
Independence:
This year – fourteen hours to go, thirteen, twelve – there was an
extra festival on the calendar, a new myth to celebrate, because a
nation which had never previously existed was about to win its
freedom, catapulting us into a world which, although it had five
thousand years of history, although it had invented the game of
chess and traded with Middle Kingdom Egypt, was nevertheless
quite imaginary; into a mythical land, a country which would
never exist except by the efforts of a phenomenal collective will –
except in a dream we all agreed to dream; it was a mass fantasy
shared in varying degrees by Bengali and Punjabi, Madrasi and
Jat, and would periodically need the sanctification and renewal
which can only be provided by rituals of blood. (pp. 129-130)
Every key phrase in this articulation of the significance of Indian Inde-
pendence is loaded with meaning. The countdown itself (‘fourteen
hours to go, thirteen, twelve’) is significant, not only because it gives
the chapter its name (‘tick-tock’), but also because it reminds us that a
countdown is usually a prelude to the launch of a rocket or the explo-
96
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

sion of a bomb and that Indian Independence is one such cataclysmic
event. The countdown ends at ‘twelve’, of course (‘when clock-hands
joined palms in respectful greeting’), which is a moment of transition,
a time marking a change from (to borrow Nehru’s words) ‘the old to
the new’19, from sleep to awakening, from darkness to light. The word
‘festival’ draws our attention to the fact that it is a celebration, but the
usage of the word is deeply ironic, because it also marks a tragedy, since
India won its freedom and got partitioned simultaneously. While libera-
tion from the British is a cause for celebration, the ‘dream’ of freedom,
Rushdie points out, is not shared uniformly, but only in ‘varying de-
grees’ by the different communities living in the land. So, the lack of
uniformity in the newly created nation is declared here itself. The
phrase ‘never previously existed’ further draws our attention to the re-
drawing of the political map of the Indian subcontinent.
But noticeably, Rushdie also anticipates the Andersonian theory of
the ‘nation’ as an imagined community, when he has the narrator say
that India exists only ‘by the efforts of a phenomenal collective will’. For
Benedict Anderson published his seminal work, Imagined Communities:
Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism20, only in 1983 – that
is, three years after Midnight’s Children. It should also be noted that the
nation, along with other ‘narratives’, has been rigorously investigated in
post-colonial discourse, especially in the last two decades of the twenti-
eth century. Rushdie’s narrative is a part of this discourse.21 It is also
important to point out here that the question of narrative apart, one of
the chief preoccupations of Rushdie as a writer has been with the ‘idea’
of India and he has come back to it again and again in both his fiction
and non-fiction. In an essay entitled ‘The Riddle of Midnight: India, Au-
gust 1987’, written to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of Indian
independence, Rushdie asked, ‘Does India exist?’ and then went on to
answer this question himself:
It’s when you start thinking about the political entity, the nation
of India, the thing whose fortieth anniversary it is, that the ques-
tion starts making sense. After all, in all the thousands of years
of Indian history, there never was such a creature as a united In-
dia. Nobody ever managed to rule the whole place, not the Mugh-
als, not the British. And then, that midnight, the thing that had
never existed was suddenly ‘free’. But what on earth was it? On
what common ground (if any) did it, does it, stand?22 (1991: 27)
Again, a whole decade later, on the golden jubilee of Indian indepen-
dence in 1997, he wrote an article (originally commissioned and pub-
lished by Time magazine) where, after listing all the things that had
gone wrong with India in the fifty years of its free existence, and in-
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
97

forming his readers that many of her citizens (whom he claimed to
have personally spoken to during a recent visit) did not feel the urge to
celebrate the jubilee and had good enough reasons for feeling so, he
nevertheless went on to add:
And yet I do feel like celebrating (…). Above all… I want to extol
the virtues of the most important thing that came into being on
that midnight 50 years ago, the thing that has survived all that
history could throw at it; that is, the so-called ‘idea of India’. I
have spent much of my adult life thinking and writing about this
idea.23 (2003: 178)
Bombay-Karachi-Dhaka
The ‘idea’ of India, as it transpires in Midnight’s Children, has no uni-
formity about it. For though India came into being, according to the
novel’s narrator, by the effort of a ‘phenomenal collective will’, the col-
lective life of its citizens definitely did not move in the same direction.
Trumpeted as a ‘secular’ democracy at the time of its birth, the new na-
tion state of India meted out (as shown in the novel) a very different
treatment to its Muslim populace, at least in the initial years of its inde-
pendent existence. Rushdie has very deftly traced the fate of India’s
Muslims through the fortunes of the Sinai family in the novel, by show-
ing how they and their relations shift from one city to another on the
subcontinent in search of wealth and security. Originally from Kashmir,
the family (from Saleem’s maternal side) moves to Agra, in British In-
dia, in 1919. From then on, the travails of Saleem’s family are shown in
the novel to symbolically correspond with key events in India’s postwar
history. Saleem’s maternal grandfather, Aadam Aziz, had always felt a
little alien in his own land, as he could not share the faith of his Mus-
lim brethren, being ‘unable to worship a God in whose existence he
could not wholly disbelieve’ (p. 12). He is the quintessential secular fig-
ure in Midnight’s Children, a man who had no compunctions even in
throwing out a maulvi from his house because he was teaching his chil-
dren to hate people of other faiths. Indeed, as Rushdie draws him, he is
almost Nehruvian in his deep faith in the secular essence of the land
he lived in. Thus, though initially he felt out of place when he first left
his native princely state of Kashmir to practice medicine in Agra in Brit-
ish India, Aziz stopped being a ‘Kashmiri’ and finally started feeling an
‘Indian’ at the time of the ‘Quit India’ movement. From this moment
of time, he is shown as totally identifying himself with the creed of the
nationalist movement, and hence, when he has to choose between India
and Pakistan at the time of the Partition, he simply refuses to leave
98
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Agra for Pakistan, which, according to him, is a godforsaken country.
However, this does not stop his children from being scattered over far-
flung parts of the subcontinent. Two of his daughters go to Pakistan:
the youngest daughter Emerald, with her husband Zulfikar, who lays
the foundations of an immense fortune by buying up refugee property
at absurdly low prices; and the unmarried Alia, who starts teaching in a
Karachi school. Their elder son, Hanif, rejects Pakistan and arrives in
Bombay to become the youngest director in Hindi cinema and marries
the beautiful actress Pia; while the other son, Mustapha, joins the In-
dian Civil Service. The novel shows too that the elder daughter of Aziz,
Amina, and her husband Ahmed Sinai begin their conjugal life in the
heart of Old Delhi. But it is in this brief period of their stay (when Saleem
is conceived) that they face ‘the gathering pre-Independence storm’ which
forces them to leave the communally charged capital of Delhi for the ‘(…)
secular, cosmopolitan (…) tolerant, broad-minded city’ of Bombay.24
It may be pertinent to remember here that Rushdie’s own family had
suffered a similar fate in 1947. Writing about this almost two decades
after the publication of Midnight’s Children, he observed:
My own family, like so many of Muslim origin, was cut in half
by partition. My parents opted to stay in Bombay, and so did my
two uncles and their families, but my aunts and their families
went to West Pakistan, as it was called until 1971 (...). We were
lucky, escaping the worst of the bloodletting, but our lives were
defined and shaped by the frontier separating us.25 (2003: 176)
The life of Saleem and his family are likewise similarly defined by the
Partition. And in the novel itself, one of the things that it leads to is that
the protagonist and his family end up inhabiting all the three post-parti-
tioned states of the subcontinent, India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. In
the year of Independence itself, the Sinais, as an affluent Muslim fa-
mily, fall victim to the discriminating attitude and politics of the so-
called ‘secular’ state of India. When the Government of India freezes
the assets of many affluent Muslims to force them to flee to Pakistan,
Saleem’s family is severely affected. Saleem’s father, Ahmed, who has a
propensity for making wrong financial moves, is totally devastated by
this. However, it is Amina, Saleem’s mother, who rises to the occasion
and fights Ahmed’s battle against the state on his behalf aided by the
crooked lawyer, Ismail Ibrahim, and by the money she wins (with sur-
prising regularity) at the racecourse. But Ahmed continues to act irre-
sponsibly even after this. At the prodding of his gynaecologist friend,
Dr Narlikar, he revives his dream project of land reclamation and in-
vests huge sums without keeping any record of his involvement in the
scheme. But Narlikar’s sudden death in mob-violence leads to Ahmed’s
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
99

financial ruin and eventually to his mental decline. Destitute, his family
is forced to migrate to Karachi in Pakistan where they seek asylum in
the house of Saleem’s aunt, Emerald.
Saleem, leaving the ‘highly-spiced non-conformity of Bombay’ (p.
308) now finds himself in a country where ‘truth is what it is instructed
to be’ (p. 326). The Karachi years, as depicted in the novel, trace the tu-
multuous adolescence of Saleem, who has to face the multiple agonies
of a disintegrating family, a loveless existence and the shameful discov-
ery of his incestuous love for his own sister, the ‘Brass Monkey’, who is
magically transformed in the course of a few years into ‘Jamila the Sing-
er’. There is a brief happy interlude in Saleem’s life following his
father’s sudden heart attack when the family returns to Bombay for a
while, only to begin a whole new life in Karachi again, once Ahmed re-
covers. Ahmed starts a towel business there named after Amina, which
is a huge success, becomes his old jovial self, falls in love with his wife,
and discovers a new affection for his son. But this bliss does not last
long. As we are informed in Chapter 23 (‘How Saleem Achieved Purity’)
of Midnight’s Children, the Indo-Pak war of 1965 all but obliterates the
family when their house in Karachi is bombed. Saleem is hit by a spit-
toon on his head, survives the injury, but loses his memory and later
joins the Pakistani army’s covert operations in Dhaka. Thus, after a
childhood spent in India and his adolescence experienced in Pakistan,
Saleem comes to spend a crucial year of his adult life in the soon-to-be
born nation of Bangladesh and, as an agent of the Pakistan army in
Dhaka, becomes a part of an epochal event in the history of the subcon-
tinent.
The novel thus charts the disintegration and peculiar predicament of
the Muslim community on the subcontinent for whom neither Inde-
pendence nor the Partition managed to deliver the promised goods. In-
deed, the course of events as set out in Midnight’s Children clearly
shows that between the hypocritical ‘secularism’ of independent India
and the stifling of all civic freedoms in Islamic Pakistan, the Muslims
of the subcontinent had very little to choose from. It is crucial to re-
member here that an overwhelming number of Partition novels prior to
Rushdie’s were predominantly preoccupied (in varying degrees) either
with the sudden deterioration in Hindu-Muslim relationships at the
time of the Partition (when friends and neighbours turned enemies al-
most overnight), or else with the celebration of Hindu-Muslim ties in
the midst of the communal holocaust. In other words, it was the social
relationship between the two contending communities in India that
was given pride of place in the earlier Partition narratives, and those re-
lations were invariably construed in terms of simplistic love/hate para-
digms. Certainly, the predicament of the Muslim minority in India
(over the question of whose status and future security the country was
100
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

partitioned in the first place) did not receive any serious consideration
in Indian-English fiction. It was Rushdie who for the first time focused
on this issue, perhaps helped in no small measure by the fact that to a
great extent Saleem’s story was his own story, too. And it will perhaps
not be wrong to say that it is this autobiographical element that imparts
a certain authenticity and poignancy to the narrative of Midnight’s Chil-
dren, for the novel has as its source all the validity of the author’s own
lived experience.
1971 Bangladesh Liberation War
The single-most outstanding feature of Rushdie’s representation of the
Partition in Midnight’s Children is, neither the delineation of the magic
moment of ‘the midnight hour’ of 15 August 1947, nor the many and
varying experiences of the Sinai family in Bombay and Karachi in the
first two decades of the newly created nations’ existence. It is rather the
depiction of the genocide that preceded the Bangladesh War of Inde-
pendence. In fact, it is the depiction of this second Partition of the sub-
continent in Midnight’s Children that needs special focus as it throws up
a number of vital questions regarding some of the fundamental issues
that were at stake in 1947, and which were (as the history of the new
nation states were to prove) in no way resolved by dividing the subconti-
nent on the basis of religion. Critics have largely ignored this vital as-
pect of Rushdie’s narrative. But since this paradigmatic post-colonial
text is as much about nationhood and its narrativity as about anything
else, it is therefore perhaps important to look afresh at the novel’s treat-
ment of the 1971 war in this context.
It is the third part of Midnight’s Children that deals with this second
division of the subcontinent. Book II of the novel ends with the Indo-
Pak War of 1965, and Book III begins with the prelude to the 1971 war.
The first (according to Saleem) was aimed at annihilating his family,
and the second to reunite him with his friends and his old life. Only
three chapters are devoted to the representation of the Bangladesh War:
‘The Buddha’, ‘In the Sunderbans’ and ‘Sam and the Tiger’, respec-
tively. However, it is basically the first and third chapters that deal with
the war or, more specifically, with the political development in Pakistan
in a single year, between December 1970 when Mujib-ur-Rahman’s
Awami League swept the country’s polls, and December 1971 when
Bangladesh came into being. What happens in the five intervening
years between 1965 and 1970 – both in Pakistan and in Saleem’s life –
is summarized in a few paragraphs at the beginning of this section.
The narrative in Book III commemorates the political crisis in Paki-
stan following the Indo-Pak war of 1965 over Kashmir, when discontent
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
101

with the military regime grew steadily, as did agitation for greater de-
mocracy. In 1969 General Ayub Khan resigned as President and
handed power over to General Yahya Khan, the head of the Pakistani
army. The latter declared martial law but also scheduled elections for
1970. In this election, Mujib-ur-Rahman’s Awami League in East Paki-
stan won a crushing victory over the People’s Party of Zulfikar Ali Bhut-
to. However, Mujib was denied the right to form a new government by
the West Pakistani leaders. This political stalemate plunged the country
into a civil war as Mujib led the East wing into secession and declared
it independent as ‘Bangladesh’.26 The fratricidal war that followed,
which witnessed ‘the biggest migration’27 and one of the worst geno-
cides in human history, ended in the disintegration of the two wings of
Pakistan which had been held together, despite their linguistic and cul-
tural differences, by (what Rushdie calls) the ‘glue’ of religion.28
These political events leading to the dismemberment of Pakistan are
presented in Chapters 24 and 26 of the novel as a kind of journalistic
reportage, but the atrocities of the war and what it meant in human
terms are vivified through the experience of three boy-soldiers – Ayooba
Baloch, Farooq Rashid, Shaheed Dar – who are part of a special ‘canine
unit for tracking and intelligence activities’ (CUTIA, in short),29 with
Saleem as their tracker.
In Rushdie’s depiction, the war itself is ironic and ambiguous since
it is a war that is defined by utter confusion as all the parties involved –
Pakistan’s west wing, east wing and India – are all shown to be highly
confused as to their aims and objectives. In a fundamental way, the
Bangladesh chapters in Midnight’s Children question the very idea of a
pan-Indian/pan-Islamic identity. Ayooba Baloch, the leader of the cutia-
unit 22 (of which Saleem is the tracker), for instance, is all excited
about tracking down ‘vegetarian Hindus’, but soon realizes that his unit
was covertly brought to Dacca only to root out ‘fellow meat-eaters’ or, in
other words, to kill their own brethren. Disillusioned, he loses his zeal
in the operations. Rushdie’s portrayal of the activities of the Mukti Bahi-
ni, who helped the Indian troops against the occupying Pakistani west
wing forces in the winter of 1971, can be seen as a variation of the same
theme. This is because the revolutionaries are shown to be ironically
and blissfully unaware that India was not there just to play the role of a
benevolent elder brother. Rushdie’s text makes it clear that the Indian
intervention was in fact propelled by mostly deeply selfish reasons, by
the Indian government’s keeping in mind its own immediate and long-
term interests. One of the most immediate and pressing of these was
the influx of vast numbers of refugees driven into India by the atrocities
of the Pakistani army. As the narrator elaborates in the chapter, ‘Sam
and the Tiger’:
102
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

The Indian intervention in the Bangladesh dispute was also the
result of the interaction of great forces. If 10 million had not
crossed the border obliging the Delhi government to spend
$ 200,000,000 a month on refugee camps (…) Indian soldiers,
led by General Sam, would never have crossed the frontiers in
the opposite direction. (p. 447)
Here, one is reminded of a memorable passage in Amitav Ghosh’s The
Circle of Reason, where the narrator talks about the effect of the 1971
War on a small border village in West Bengal:
Long before the world had sniffed genocide in Bangladesh, Lal-
pukur began to swell. It grew and grew. First, it was brothers
with burnt backs and balls cut off at the roots. Then it was cou-
sins and cousins of cousins. Then it did not matter; borders dis-
solved under the weight of millions of people in panic-stricken
flight from an army of animals.30 (1986: 59, 60)
But the influx of refugees apart, there were other vital/strategic/long-
term reasons for the Indian Government to rally behind the cause of
the Awami League and Bangladesh. As Willem van Schendel elaborates
in his chapter on the 1971 Liberation War in A History of Bangladesh:
One of the concerns that had propelled India into invading the
delta and installing a new government was a fear of radicalisation
among the freedom fighters. The Indian regions surrounding
Bangladesh were politically unstable: in West Bengal Maoist revo-
lutionaries, known as Naxalites, were active and so were various
groups fighting for autonomy in North-east India. During the
war many freedom fighters had begun to imagine a liberated
Bangladesh not just as an independent state but also as a social-
ist society. This prospect worried India’s policy-makers for two
reasons. First, it might provide the Naxalites and other leftist re-
bels with strategic cross-border links; and second, nationalisation
of land in Bangladesh could lead to an exodus of dispossessed
landholders to India. Ensuring a non-radical government policy
in Bangladesh was high on India’s wish list, and this is why it
threw its support squarely behind the Awami League leaders
who had formed the Bangladesh government-in-exile in India
during the war.31 (2009: 175)
The Bangladesh War of Independence was replete with surprises; and
in Midnight’s Children, Rushdie does manage to convey the dramatic
way in which it unfolded right from start to finish. We are told how, in
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
103

March 1971, west wing forces, with the help of crack troops (of which
Saleem’s ‘cutia’ unit is a part), wreak havoc on unsuspecting civilians in
Dacca. However, by December 1971 (i.e. within nine months), the
course of the war changes dramatically, and this time, it is the Mukti
Bahini volunteers who terrorize west wing officials and soldiers alike in
the east wing. Within a short while, in fact, things are shown to speed
up even more in the novel, so that it would all be over in three short
weeks. What would remain is a devastated Pakistan – having sustained
losses of half of her navy, a third of her army, a fourth of her airforce,
and, after her general (Tiger Niazi) surrendered32, half of her popula-
tion as well.
Rushdie thus points out the irony, ambiguity and savagery of the
Bangladesh War in his novel, but the significance of the Bangladesh
chapters can be properly understood only in conjunction with a much
earlier chapter in the novel, Chapter 2 of Book I, entitled ‘Mercuro-
chrome’. Both sections deal with violence, ‘Mercurochrome’ with one of
the worst massacres in Indian history at Jallianwalabagh in April 1919
when General Dyer opened fire on an unarmed crowd, and Chapters
24-26, with a defining civil war on the Indian subcontinent in 1971. But
the registers of depiction are very different in the two cases. There is a
kind of distancing in the first instance against the graphic description
of violence in the latter, which is not only horrific but also nauseating.
‘Mercurochrome’ depicted a colonial power’s brutal assertion of its
authority when threatened with concerted opposition.33 The Bangladesh
chapters, however, show the subcontinental people’s decimation of their
own brethren, which is all the more piteous. And Rushdie loses no op-
portunity to ram home the point.
The savagery of the Bangladesh war is depicted here so realistically
because it is not a war against an external foe but a war with one’s own
people. It is basically an acknowledgement of the enormity of the error
of the Partition and the manifest irony of its professed objective. As has
been pointed out earlier, Midnight’s Children is the only major Indian-
English novel that deals both with the Partition of 1947 and the later di-
vision of the Islamic state of Pakistan into Pakistan and Bangladesh in
1971. As such, Rushdie’s chapters dealing with this second division of
the subcontinent are invested with a special significance. But the inci-
dents in themselves are not as important as what they indicate. And
they indicate, in no uncertain terms, that the very ideological basis of
the Partition was wrong – that the ‘glue of religion’ is not always en-
ough (as the founding fathers had thought) to keep a people together.34
In this context, it is important to remember that there was a prefigur-
ing of the Bangladesh liberation war long before it actually happened.
For while the ‘two-nation theory’ (on the basis of which the country was
partitioned in 1947) proved to be sacrosanct in the Punjab, it was chal-
104
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

lenged in East Pakistan by the historic ‘Language Movement’ that began
soon after Independence in 1948 and culminated in the events of Feb-
ruary 1952.35 Thus, at least as far as Bengal was concerned, language
proved to be a far greater defining/dividing factor than religion – some-
thing that ultimately led to the creation of Bangladesh in 1971. The Ra-
bindrasangeet (‘O amar Sonar Bangla’) cited in Rushdie’s text empha-
sizes just this point. The song in a way epitomizes the irony of the
whole war fought ostensibly to root out subversion and keep the two
wings of Pakistan united – for the occupying West Pakistani soldiers in
Dacca (who were there to enforce unity) could not understand a word
of the song when they heard it ‘though their feet did tap inadvertently
to the tune’. Here is a perfect attestation of the fact that cultural differ-
ences (in which language figures predominantly) divide much more
than religion.
The idea of religion (and Partition) is evoked and interrogated further
in two key passages in the novel that speak eloquently of the moral out-
rage of the war, and both involve the presence of a mosque. In one, the
mosque (which obviously symbolizes Islam) is indifferent, and in the
other it is ineffectual in stemming the rising tide of violence in the
land. In one,
Shaheed was staring at a maidan in which lady doctors were
being bayoneted before they were raped, and raped again before
they were shot. Above them and behind them, the cool white
minaret of a mosque stared blindly down upon the scene. (p.
449)
In the other, we are told that when Saleem accidentally activates a loud-
speaker in a mosque, where his friend Shaheed lay with amputated
legs, his screams are carried far, ‘… and afterwards, people would never
forget how a mosque had screamed out the terrible agony of war.’ (p.
451)
Religion and the ethic of violence come together in these chapters of
Book III of Midnight’s Children. In them, we see the coalescence of the
essence of fundamentalist discourse and the processes of military dicta-
torship in undivided Pakistan. The briefing of the new recruits before
their covert operations in East Pakistan and the rhetoric of their training
leaves no doubt about this fact. Indeed, Sergeant Major Najmuddin’s
briefing of new recruits to the cutia unit is a brilliant parody of the pro-
cesses of military dictatorship. The briefing happens, we are told, in
‘Question-and-answer format; [where] Najmuddin provides both queries
and replies [and] no interruptions are (…) tolerated’ (p. 416). The young
soldiers, who are so young that they ‘had not had time to acquire the
type of memories which give men a firm hold on reality’ (p. 417), are
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
105

subjected, we are told, to rigorous training and religious programming.
As the narrator says, a ‘high Islamic sense of self-discipline and respon-
sibility’ is instilled in them. They are taught ‘to obey unquestioningly; to
seek unflaggingly; to arrest remorselessly’ (p. 414) and the purpose of
their training, they learn, is to root out subversive elements and traitors
who challenge the country’s unity.
The historical reasons behind all this are clear enough. In 1969,
when General Yahya became President, Pakistan’s identity was that of a
young Islamic nation, born as a democracy, but which, in the twenty-
two years of its existence, had already experienced more than a decade
of military dictatorship. Indeed, democratic institution-building had not
happened in Pakistan at all the way it had in India – which is why the
polls of 1970 were so unsettling for its leaders. Pakistan and its army
never had much respect for democratic procedures, which is well borne
out by its political history between 1947 and 1965. What worsened the
whole scenario is the subsequent collusion of two inimical forces (i.e.
inimical to democracy) – fundamentalist religion and military dictator-
ship. Together, they created the inevitable crack of the Partition in a
country that was too diverse and divided from its very inception. In this
context it is pertinent to quote what the historians Bipan Chandra, Mri-
dula Mukherjee and Aditya Mukherjee have said in their book India
After Independence. While trying to diagnose the reasons behind the very
different political trajectories of India and Pakistan since 1947, they
come up with the thesis that the source of this difference actually lay in
the freedom struggle movement itself. More specifically, they argue that
it lay in the different ways in which the Congress and the League con-
ducted the anticolonial movement against the British in India. Accord-
ing to them, the national movement as led by the Congress had, in the
many decades of its functioning,
(…) succeeded in making democracy and civil liberty basic ele-
ments of the Indian political ethos. If free India could start and
persist with a democratic polity, it was because the national
movement had already firmly established the civil libertarian and
democratic tradition among the Indian people (…). It is this tradi-
tion which explains why multi-party democracy and civil liberties
have met different fates in India and Pakistan, though both
equally constituted colonial India. The political party (and its poli-
tics) that brought about Pakistan was not known for its defense
of civil liberties, or its functioning on democratic lines, or its tol-
erance towards its political opponents. Democracy was no signifi-
cant part of its political culture. Besides, the national movement
and its political culture were weak precisely in the areas which
came to constitute Pakistan.36 (2000: 23)
106
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

In the same vein, in his essay, ‘The roots of religious violence in India,
Pakistan, and Bangladesh’, Sumit Ganguly, tracing the sources of con-
flict in these post-colonial nations, argues that ‘in polyethnic societies,
ethno-religious conflict and violence is more likely when states lack a
commitment to ethno-religious pluralism, to the protection of minority
rights, and to democratic procedures.’ This was exactly the case with Pa-
kistan, as it showed very scant regard for these matters and ended up
losing its east wing.37 (2007: 71)
Indeed, in 1970, as always, Pakistan’s generals were not amenable to
democratic opinion at all, no matter what the poll results were. They
did not expect their eastern compatriots to choose their leader, but only
to acquiesce in military command. Hence, it ruthlessly set about forcing
the east wing into submission after December 1970. And in true mili-
tary style, it perpetrated horrific crimes, even as being the final arbiter
of ‘truth and untruth’, it reserved for itself the right to deny its own
atrocities. At one point in the narrative, Saleem says,
In the midst of the rubble of war, I discovered fair-and-unfair.
Unfairness smelled like onions; the sharpness of its perfume
brought tears to my eyes. Seized by the bitter aroma of injustice
(…) I remembered (…) all the vast mountain of unreasonable oc-
currences plaguing my life. (pp. 442-443)
‘Unfairness’ and ‘injustice’ are inextricably linked with war, any war,
but the civil war that led to the division of Pakistan witnessed an ex-
treme version of that. And nowhere is it more transparent than in the
official denial of the west wing’s covert operations in Dacca in the
spring of 1971. On being quizzed about his army’s special canine units,
the Pakistani General (Tiger) tells his old friend and Indian counterpart
(Sam)38 that he had ‘never heard of it’ and actually found the whole idea
‘damn ridiculous’ (p. 453)39. In this context, it may be remembered that
for seven months, cutia unit 22 (comprising Ayooba, Farooq, Shaheed
and Saleem) had ‘vanished off the face of the war’ (p. 440), living in a
realm outside space and time. The Sunderbans was a phantasmagoric
experience for the boy soldiers which they could not pin down to reality.
But the funny thing is that even their actual war experiences in Dacca
are made to be unreal by their General’s denial of the very existence of
their canine units.
Talking about the Sunderbans, it may be noted that it figures in just
one chapter of this voluminous novel of thirty. And yet, it is a very sig-
nificant one – not only because it is one of the most magical/fantastic
parts of a book known/celebrated for its use of magic realism, but also
because Saleem and his comrades’ experience in the forest is an inte-
gral part of the narrative of the 1971 War in Midnight’s Children.
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
107

‘In the Sunderbans’ happens to be the longest of the three chapters
in Book III to deal with the Liberation War, and primarily has the func-
tion of making the boy soldiers own up to their guilt, take responsibility
for their crimes and be punished for committing them; and also to in-
itiate them into adulthood. It is a surreal experience that apparently had
to happen, because, according to the author, the war-weary boy soldiers
had entered ‘(…) that condition of the spirit in which the consequences
of acceptance could not be denied, in which an overdose of reality gave
birth to a miasmic longing for flight into the safety of dreams’ (p. 431).
This flight is nothing but their adolescent attempt to escape from a
gnawing sense of ‘wrong-doing’ by deserting ‘into the historyless anon-
ymity of rainforests’ (p. 360). As Abdulrazak Gurnah has observed,
‘The Sunderbans episode is a trope of the epic form, because it is
through this descent that Saleem (…) and the Pakistani soldiers with
him see through the national myth that had obscured their sense of re-
sponsibility as human beings’ (Gurnah 2007: 102)40.
An almost identical situation can be found in Sorayya Khan’s Noor41,
where a Pakistani war veteran, confronted with unusual paintings that
reminded him of the civil war of 1971, is forced to admit to himself that
he had ‘(…) not only witnessed but partook in the willful devastation of
a people, the Bengalis, for reasons of national consolidation that he no
longer – if ever – believed in’.42
Noor, written more than two decades after Midnight’s Children, tells
the story of the 1971 civil war, of the deafening silences that surround
it, of Pakistani attempts to forget it, and of the possibilities of redemp-
tion. It is a remarkable debut work and breaks a long literary silence by
being the first Pakistani English novel to focus on East Pakistan during
the war of 197143 and come to terms with its brutality. Set in modern-
day Islamabad, Pakistan, the book tells a powerful and poignant story of
an extraordinary child, Noor, who, through her paintings and drawings,
enables her mother, Sajida, and her grandfather, Ali, to confront the
pasts they have chosen to suppress. Her paintings (that change from ab-
stractions to realistic depictions as the novel progresses) bring their
haunted memories to the fore – memories of the 1970 cyclone (which
had orphaned her East Bengali mother) and the violent atrocities of the
1971 war (in which her West Pakistani foster grandfather had partici-
pated as a soldier). Her artwork thus becomes the central means
through which the novel excavates individual and collective memories.
Rushdie and Ghosh
Rushdie’s novel was the first Partition novel to be published in the dec-
ade of the 1980s, and, as in so many other ways, it also ushered in a
108
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

change in the depiction of the Partition in Indian-English fiction. When
we compare Midnight’s Children to some of the earlier Partition novels
(discussed in Chapter II), we discern a palpable shift from something
akin to direct reportage to a more distinct theoretical accent. This is be-
cause, by the time we come to Rushdie, it is no longer enough to just
speak of the immediate physical consequences of the Partition – the
mass migration and communal violence, which were the defining fea-
tures of the times; or even to dissect what went wrong with the nation-
alist movement. The positioning of the novelist in a vantage point in
history now afforded him perspectives that were not possible before.
For writers of the post-Partition generation like Rushdie, the midnight
hour of 15 August thus becomes a site to explore ideas about nation-
hood, to ask questions like: Who/What constitutes a nation? What is its
basis? What kind of a nation has India created? How did it come about?
Is it uniform? Through the figure of Saleem, Rushdie invokes these
questions in Midnight’s Children. But not only this, for the shift in em-
phases signalled by Rushdie came to be continued through the decade
of the 1980s, and these new concerns in Midnight’s Children were ex-
tended and explored more deeply by Amitav Ghosh in The Shadow
Lines, a novel that will be discussed in the next chapter.
THE MAKING OF A NATION: RELIGION OR LANGUAGE?
109


4
Imagined communities: Questioning the border
Proust and the anti-Sikh riots
The title of Amitav Ghosh’s novel The Shadow Lines1 is reminiscent of
the title of Joseph Conrad’s The Shadow-Line2, but it is clear enough
that Ghosh did not draw upon Conrad’s book while writing his defining
and most popular piece of fiction to date. His sources lay elsewhere,
and they could not have been more divergent. As acknowledged by the
author himself, there were two principal inspirations behind The Sha-
dow Lines, one political and the other literary, of which the first shaped
its content, and the other determined its form. These were the 1984
Delhi riots following the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi
by her Sikh bodyguard; and Michel Proust’s masterpiece In Remem-
brance of Things Past.3
Ghosh himself has written eloquently on the first in more than one
essay. He refers to it in passing in his essay ‘The Greatest Sorrow’,
where he says, ‘The violence [of the 1984 riots] had the effect of bring-
ing to the surface of my memory events from my own childhood, when
I had indeed been in a similar situation’ (2002: 314)4. But the essay
where he talks at length about his 1984 experiences in Delhi (when he
was teaching at Delhi University and completing his first novel, The
Circle of Reason) is one entitled ‘The Ghosts of Mrs Gandhi’. It was a
defining moment in his life, Ghosh tells us, when he was faced with a
difficult choice. He had to, he says, ‘resolve a dilemma, between being
a writer and being a citizen.’ He chose the first, and out of the crucible
of that realization The Shadow Lines was born. As he goes on to write:
‘(…) The Shadow Lines (…) became a book not about any one event but
about the meaning of such events and their effects on the individuals
who live through them’ (2002: 60, 61)5. About Proust’s book and its in-
fluence on his second novel, he has recently said in an interview with
the critic John C. Hawley:
(…) Proust’s influence on The Shadow Lines is clearly evident (…)
it was in deference to Proust that the narrator of The Shadow
Lines was left unnamed. But Proust’s influence is evident also in
the ways in which time and space are collapsed in the narrative

of The Shadow Lines. I remember that at the time my ambition
was to do with space what Proust had done with time: that is, to
make completely different instances of a continuum immanent
in each other.6 (2005: 8-9)
Midnight’s Children and The Shadow Lines
As a novelist, Ghosh was successful enough in his ambition to win the
Sahitya Academy Award7 in 1989 for The Shadow Lines. And though
coming a full seven years after Salman Rushdie’s Booker Prize-winning
novel, Midnight’s Children, The Shadow Lines shares quite a few con-
cerns with it. Foremost among them is the theme of the Partition itself
(though this is not apparent at first), and, as a kind of natural corollary
to it, the concept of ‘nation’ as an imagined community. But, of course,
Ghosh’s novel is set in a radically different universe from that of Rush-
die; and unlike Rushdie’s protagonist, Ghosh’s protagonist inhabits a
very different milieu and is a member not of a minority but rather the
majority community in India. Again, while Rushdie’s novel covers the
history of the subcontinent from 1915 to 1977, Ghosh’s novel traverses
time and space far more extensively, its locales being spread over three
continents and its events focused on three chunks of time – London
during the Second World War Blitz; Calcutta and Dhaka in the 1960s
and 1970s; and then again London of the 1980s. From the 1960s to the
1980s it covers the childhood, adolescence and young adulthood of the
protagonist, as well as the life of the protagonist’s beloved uncle from
the 1940s to the 1960s.
Four ways to read the novel
It is important to note that The Shadow Lines can be read in at least four
ways. It is first the story of a person coming to terms with an irrevoc-
able loss8 (the death of a beloved uncle in a communal riot), trying to
make sense of and understand what happened years ago when he was a
child. Seen in this way, it is a novel about growth and maturity, a type
of Bildungsroman. Secondly, it may be regarded as a story about the Par-
tition and its aftermath, since the novel reveals the great potency and
power of such destructive forces as religious fundamentalism and the
mindless violence that it can unleash – which is all an enduring legacy
of the Partition. At another level, however, The Shadow Lines is a novel
that questions whether states can be geo-politically defined; whether the
socio-political shadow line that we draw between people has any validity
by itself, or whether it is an absurd illusion. In other words, the novel
112
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

explores the relationship between the modern nation state and its deni-
zens, and it exposes the limits of that relationship. But this is not all as
Ghosh’s fiction may also be seen as a text that questions the established
narrative of the Indian nation and attempts to recover a piece of its lost
history – a riot in 1964 that was drowned in silence. Seen from this
point of view, the novel’s concern seems more with historiography than
history. Indeed, The Shadow Lines dramatizes what Milan Kundera says
in The Book of Laughter and Forgetting: ‘the struggle of man against
power is the struggle of memory against forgetting’.9 In this instance,
the novelist pits the memory of a riot against the documented history of
a war.
Of borders and lost histories
Most of the novels that have been discussed in this study deal with what
went before and/or immediately after the Partition. Ghosh, on the other
hand, focuses exclusively on the aftermath of the Partition in The Sha-
dow Lines – and therefore, quite inevitably, goes much beyond the depic-
tion of the ‘event’ that constituted the Partition. In fact, in The Shadow
Lines, the Partition becomes the locus for the exploration of larger politi-
cal concepts like ‘freedom’ and ‘nationalism’, and for an interrogation
of the concept of a ‘border’. On the question of borders, Ghosh is on re-
cord as having said:
What interested me first about borders was their arbitrariness,
their constructedness – the ways in which they are ‘naturalized’
by modern political mythmaking. I think this interest arose be-
cause of some kind of inborn distrust of anything that appears to
be ‘given’ or taken-for-granted (…). I think these lines are drawn
in order to manipulate our ways of thought: that is why they
must be disregarded. (2005: 8-9)10
However, it is important to remember here that The Shadow Lines is
not the only novel of Ghosh’s to deal with borders. The notion of a bor-
derless universe is clearly something that preoccupied Amitav Ghosh
from his very first novel, The Circle of Reason (1986). If studied in de-
tail, it will be seen that his repertoire represents a continual attempt to
explore the connections between different people and places in widely
divergent spatial and temporal settings. Ghosh’s is an essentially idealis-
tic vision of a world without borders – the emblems of which in The
Shadow Lines happen to be the atlas and the story of Tristan, which are
what Tridib bequeaths to his nephew.11 ‘Tridib had given me worlds to
travel in and eyes to see them with,’ avers the narrator very early on in
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
113

the novel. In its essence, Tridib’s legacy was a particular vision of the
world where the shadow lines that connected people were infinitely
more significant than the ones that divided them.
Integrally related to Ghosh’s passionate appeal for a borderless uni-
verse is another issue. If we take Amitav Ghosh’s oeuvre as a whole, we
will see that one of his fundamental preoccupations as a writer (of both
fiction and non-fiction) has been to recover lost histories. Be it the story
of Bomma in The Slave of MS. H.612, a piece that was originally a part
of his doctoral dissertation (which later became the book In an Antique
Land13 and was also included in Volume VII of Subaltern Studies)14; or
the lost art of the Cambodian dancers in Dancing in Cambodia (1998)15;
or the practically unknown history of the reign of the last Burmese
King, Thebaw in The Glass Palace (2000)16, his aim has always been to
make the forgotten histories of defeated people and subjugated cultures
visible to the world. It is noticeable too that the same impulse was at
work when Ghosh wrote about his own country, India. Countdown
(1999)17, for example, tells the story of the aftermath of the Pokhran
nuclear explosion in Khetoloi, an unknown village on the border of In-
dia and Pakistan, where the experiment was conducted. In The Hungry
Tide (2004)18, he not only uncovers the suppressed history of the despe-
rately poor and wretched refugees of Morichjhapi who were massacred
by the West Bengal Government in 1979, but also intersperses it with
the forgotten history of the Irrawady dolphins (Oracealla brevirostris) of
the Sunderbans.19 His latest novel, the 2008 Booker-nominated Sea of
Poppies (which is the first part of the ‘Ibis trilogy’), uncovers yet another
silenced history of the subcontinent, this time with regard to British
imperialism. The novel is set against the backdrop of the first Opium
War with China in the mid-nineteenth century and delves deep into the
fiercely exploitative nature of the British opium trade in Asia.20
The Shadow Lines and the aftermath of the Partition
Both the concerns of Ghosh enumerated above – i.e. his appeal for a
borderless universe and his penchant for recovering lost histories come
together in The Shadow Lines. On the face of it, The Shadow Lines has
little to do with the Partition. But this is to ignore the central incident
of the novel – Tridib’s death – which can be read as a far-reaching con-
sequence of this long-ago event of 1947. The death of Tridib indeed in-
dicates that the aftermath of the Partition did not die down even after
seventeen years, and that even if it is a remote and quite insignificant
(from a newsworthy point of view) an incident, it highlights the destruc-
tive energies of religious fundamentalism. And quite significantly, it is
the remoteness and apparent political insignificance of this central inci-
114
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

dent that ironically enables the novel to make its statement all the more
powerfully.
The incident of Tridib, Jethamoshai and Khalil’s death in a riot in
Dhaka in January 1964 was certainly not a happening of national
importance. Rather, as Ghosh indicates in his text, Tridib’s murder in
Dhaka was only a personal loss to the protagonist – a most sudden and
abrupt loss, which he never lives down. But what is interesting is the
way Ghosh shows how this tragic incident was actually a deeply ironic
off-shoot of something that happened on the subcontinent in the pre-
vious week. Towards the end of the novel we are provided with the his-
toric information that on 27 December 1963, the Mui-Mubarak, a
sacred relic, believed to be the hair of the Prophet Mohammad himself,
was stolen from the Hazratbal shrine in Srinagar. Summarizing a news-
paper report that he had examined in the Teen Murti House library in
New Delhi, the narrator tells us that the whole nation was shocked and
outraged at the theft, and there were numerous protest demonstrations
in Kashmir. Yet, the narrator notes that the remarkable thing about
these demonstrations was that there were no reported incidents of vio-
lence between Hindus and Muslims in the Kashmir valley. Indeed,
while Pakistan indulged in its customary inflammatory remarks, India
helped out in the search. Then, with the Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI) intervening, the relic was found. However, the narrator pointedly
observes that in a most curious twist of events, while Kashmir cele-
brated the recovery of the relic, riots flared up in Dhaka and Khulna in
the distant east wing of Pakistan, and then in Calcutta in India. Thus,
Ghosh shows us how an incident in Srinagar triggered off a series of
incidents of communal violence in different (and far-flung) parts of the
subcontinent.21
In terms of the story told in The Shadow Lines, in one of these riots
in Dhaka, on 9 January 1964, a young man fell victim to mob fury. This
young man, Tridib, had gone there to bring back a granduncle to Cal-
cutta and was accompanied by his loved ones. He was killed ironically
in the very lane where his mother was brought up and spent the whole
of her maiden life, but the exact circumstances of his death are not im-
mediately revealed in the text. Exactly how Tridib died and why are the
questions that are situated at the very heart of the narrative. In fact, it
can be said that these are the two questions that the novel primarily ex-
plores.
Tridib, the man who is at the centre of Ghosh’s story, is an endearing
figure who subsumed many roles in his personality with equal élan. He
is a loving brother and son, an affectionate nephew, a lover and a be-
loved uncle. Evidently, his death affected all these people to whom he
was related and became an incident that was indelibly imprinted on
their minds. But the person whose very life became defined by this inci-
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
115

dent was his nephew (the protagonist of the novel), who was not pre-
sent at the time of his death. Tridib is the narrator-protagonist’s idol,
the person with whom he completely identified himself and ‘with
whose life he is preoccupied to the point of obsession’22. Indeed, the
narrator’s intensely imaginative inner life is, for him, Tridib’s lasting le-
gacy. As he says in the novel, ‘Tridib had given me worlds to travel in
and eyes to see them with.’ But not just that, for as Rajeshwari Sunder
Rajan has rightly pointed out, ‘His entire adult life is later played out at
the level of loving imitation, even surrogacy: he sees through Tridib’s
eyes, studies history like Tridib does, thinks Tridib’s thoughts, and final-
ly loves Tridib’s lover’ (2002: 296)23.
Tridib’s loss thus leaves a void in his life, rendered more intense by
the mystery that surrounded his death. The protagonist’s search for the
truth of Tridib’s death, in fact, constitutes the crux of the novel, but the
truth is revealed to him only sporadically over a period of almost two
decades. As the novel sets out, Tridib dies on 4 January 1964. The pro-
tagonist, who is then an eight-year old child, comes to know of his
death only a few days later, and then he is told by his father that it was
an accident. The very next year, in 1965, during the Indo-China war,
when Thamma, his grandmother, is hysterical and donates her last bit
of jewellery to the war fund, his mother blurts out that she had been
like that ever since Tridib’s murder. That Tridib was murdered comes
as a revelation to the boy. Fifteen years later, in 1979, when the narrator
is a college student in Delhi, a chance remark by a friend (Malik) sparks
off a debate about the riots of 1963 in Khulna, Dhaka and Calcutta. It is
at this point that he is granted an epiphanic realization, as following his
scanning of newspaper reports to try and discover how Tridib died, he
realizes that while Tridib was being murdered in Dhaka, he too had un-
dergone a disturbing experience of a communal nature in Calcutta.
Communal disharmony had disfigured the faces of the two cities of
Dhaka and Calcutta simultaneously. As Ghosh makes his protagonist
put it, it was a time when ‘each city was the inverted image of the
other’. (p. 233). Another two years later, i.e. in 1981, precisely seventeen
years after Tridib’s death, when on a year’s fellowship as a research stu-
dent in London, the protagonist finally comes to know exactly what hap-
pened to Tridib from two eyewitness accounts – that of Robi and May.
For Robi, Tridib’s brother, it is a nightmare from which there is no deli-
verance; for May, the English girl Tridib had fallen in love with, it is an
acknowledgement of her own guilt that leads her on to intensive soul-
searching.
This is how the protagonist comes to know of Tridib’s death in bits
and pieces over a period of seventeen years. His search for the truth be-
hind Tridib’s death constitutes an agonizing experience for the narrator,
and Ghosh introduces a great deal of suspense in his presentation of
116
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

this search. Many indirect comments throughout the novel lead up to
the actual statement which is expressed in no more than three bland
lines at the end of the novel: ‘When I got there I saw three bodies. They
were all dead. They’d cut Khalil’s stomach open. The old man’s head
had been hacked off. And they’d cut Tridib’s throat from ear to ear’ (p.
251).
To unearth the circumstances of Tridib’s death entails for the narrator
a seventeen-year-long search. But this does not in itself explain why it
happened. There are actually two facets to the question as to why Tridib
died – the first is about why the incident took place; and the second,
about why Tridib voluntarily threw himself in the midst of a blood-
thirsty mob to save two other lives. To consider the second aspect first,
it is self-evident from the thrust of Ghosh’s narrative that Tridib threw
himself because May goaded him to do so. For years, May later tells the
protagonist, she held herself responsible for the whole happening. She
used to think that ‘she had killed Tridib by imposing her liberal values
on a cultural situation she didn’t understand’.24 But later she realized
that she had been wrong, for as she says, Tridib
(…) must have known that he was going to die… I was arrogant
enough to think I owed him his life. But I know now that I
didn’t kill him; I couldn’t have if I had wanted. He gave himself
up; it was a sacrifice. I know I can’t understand it, I know I
musn’t try, for any real sacrifice is a mystery. (pp. 251-252)
In his text, however, Ghosh makes it clear that Tridib’s death was no
‘mystery’. It is merely May’s belated excuse to exorcize herself of the
guilt that had plagued her for seventeen long years. As the narrative
shows it, she was definitely responsible for Tridib’s death, for it was she
who had goaded him into it. It was only when she stubbornly left the
safety of the car to face the Muslim mob that Tridib got out of the car,
too. She had taunted the Datta-Chaudhuris with a charge of hypocrisy
since she just could not accept the fact that they could so mercilessly
leave Jethamoshai, Tridib’s granduncle, at the mercy of a bloodthirsty
mob, the very same old man they had come all the way from Calcutta
to rescue. Indeed, if Tridib had stayed back, probably nothing would
have happened to him or anyone else in the car. The mob would have
been temporarily satisfied with the old man’s blood and been quite hap-
py to get Khalil as bonus. But Tridib would have lost May’s esteem had
he done so. Since this was of far greater value to him than his life, it
was a loss he could not have lived with. In fact, it is clear that he did
not go out to save May, for then he would have brought her back to the
car. Instead, he pushed her aside and went ahead and hurled himself
into the mob to prove that he was not a coward. Only, as May remarked
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
117

years later, she had no idea at that time of what she was doing then.
She came to understand only much later why Mayadebi had said, ‘You
will get us all killed’.
There can be little doubt that Westerners cannot fully comprehend
the complexities of Asian political realities, brought up as they are on
Western notions of liberal democracy. A comparable example would be
that of Priscilla Hart in Shashi Tharoor’s profoundly provocative novel
Riot.25 Priscilla is an American NGO worker who comes to India to do
fieldwork in a remote district of Uttar Pradesh and loses her life most
tragically at the hands of Hindu goons precisely because she refuses to
understand that her American notions of right and wrong cannot work
in a back-of-beyond hole in India. Her case is a very good illustration of
the fact that Western concepts are seldom tailor-made to solve the pro-
blems of the East, especially in a democracy like India. Within Ghosh’s
own oeuvre, Piya, the cetologist in The Hungry Tide (who has been
brought up in the United States) acts in a similar way in the Sunder-
bans when she objects to the killing of a tiger that had been causing ha-
voc in a village. Without understanding the desperation of the villagers,
she tries to single-handedly stop them and has to be dragged away from
the angry mob by Fokir and Horen. As Hawley rightly points out: ‘[She
is] reminiscent of May Price in the face of the Dhaka mob in The Sha-
dow Lines, and like May, she is oblivious to the danger in which she is
putting everyone by romantically standing before a “force of nature”’
(2005: 139)26.
Why Tribib got killed in Jindabahar Lane
While discussing Tridib’s death, however, what is more important is the
first facet of the question as to why he died – namely, why that violent
incident in Dhaka’s Jindabahar Lane took place at all. And the explora-
tion of this raises certain other issues in the novel, particularly the issue
of the unique political reality existing on the Indian subcontinent, post-
1947. The two new states of India and Pakistan came into being as a re-
sult of a division on the basis of religion and were demarcated by arbi-
trary borders, borders that were etched all too hastily by an Englishman
who knew very little of the land he was commissioned to divide.27 The
drawing of the borders, however, did not end the communal problem it
was meant to solve, but ironically only aggravated it. For, as a result of
the perpetual hostility between these states that were once part of a sin-
gle nation, frequent communal disturbances invariably followed on the
basis of a majority-minority religious polarity. The fact that the majority
in one state was the minority in the other undermined, too, the very
118
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

possibility of there existing anything like a coherent nationalism in any
part of the subcontinent.28
Of course, it must be admitted that such a broad, all-encompassing
political concept like nationalism has no uniform definition, and even
political theorists have interpreted it from varying perspectives.29 In the
novel itself, we find two versions, the first a brand of nationalism, cur-
rent during the first half of the twentieth century, which Thamma pas-
sionately believes in; and the other, a very different concept which the
narrator enunciates in the course of the novel. The narrator remembers
his grandmother as someone bigger than life, a bubbling cauldron of
nationalist fervour. As Suvir Kaul rightly says, Thamma in the novel is
‘the exemplar of militant nationalism (…) [a woman] who had lived the
nationalist dream and experienced the setbacks and successes that gave
it its character’.30 Subscribing to a view of freedom forged in the cruci-
ble of violent anticolonial struggle, Thamma, as is made very clear in
the text, ‘sees national identities not in terms of imagined communities,
but as a deeply rooted connectedness to a place borne out of the blood
sacrifices of generations’.31
All this is supported by what we are told about Thamma in the novel.
In her youth in Dhaka, we are told, she had wanted to be a part of a ter-
rorist group and serve the motherland in some way during the struggle
for independence. Later, when she is an old woman, she is severely cri-
tical of Ila, her niece, who chose to stay back in London alone ‘only be-
cause she wanted to be free’ (p. 89). According to Thamma, Ila has no
right to live there, for as Jon Mee observes, ‘she sees England no less
than India as a place that belongs only to those who have this kind of
visceral relationship to the land’.32 Besides, as the narrator remarks at
this point, his grandmother had ‘nothing but contempt for a freedom
that could be bought for the price of an air-ticket. For she too had once
wanted to be free; she had dreamt of killing for her freedom’ (p. 89).
Again, during the Indo-China war of 1965, when her grandson asks her
why she gave away her last bit of jewellery, she screams out her motive:
I gave it away… I gave it to the fund for the war. I had to, don’t
you see? For your sake; for your freedom. We have to kill them
before they kill us; we have to wipe them out (…). This is the
only chance, she cried, her voice rising to a screech. The only
one. We are fighting them properly at last, with tanks and guns
and bombs.33 [And then, when her hands were bleeding] (…). I
must get to the hospital, she said to herself, perfectly calm now. I
musn’t waste all this blood. I can donate it to the war fund. (p.
237)
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
119

This hysterical response shows how deeply steeped Thamma is in the
nationalist rhetoric, and this proves Anjali Gera’s point that ‘till the
end, she remains imprisoned in the myth of the nation’34. Yet it is im-
portant to note that The Shadow Lines questions this idea of a nation-
hood consolidated through the baptism of wars. Certainly, as Meenakshi
Mukherjee perceptively notes, ‘Thamma does not fall outside the no-
vel’s inclusive ambit of sympathy; the author allows her historical posi-
tion to confer a certain inevitability to her ideology’.35 But Ghosh never-
theless prioritizes a very different notion of nationalism, since what he
very persuasively puts forward, albeit through his protagonist, is that
nationalism needs to be redefined in the present global context; for na-
tionalism, in the sense Thamma understood it, is often a source of vio-
lence. Through the narrative of his novel, Ghosh indeed questions
whether nations can be geo-politically defined at all. As he shows in The
Shadow Lines, the borders that are supposed to divide nations are often
shadowy, arbitrary and illusive. The whole incident of Tridib’s death as
set out in the novel attests to this fact.
In order to understand this, it is necessary here to look back upon
the chain of events set out in the novel after the mention of Tridib’s
death. The riot in Dhaka, we are told, had sparked off a riot in Calcutta
the very next day, just as it had itself been sparked off by a riot in Khul-
na. The protagonist had had the fearful experience of having his school
bus attacked and pursued by a mob of frenzied Muslims. Though noth-
ing overtly violent had occurred, this incident had shaken and even ter-
rified him. Earlier in the day, he had already had a disturbing experi-
ence, when he was forced to disown his Muslim friend and when all
his bus mates had drained their water bottles, acting on the rumour
that the Tala Tank (the city’s principal water supply) had been poisoned
by the city’s Muslims in retaliation for ‘(…) that familiar old rumour,
the harbinger of every serious riot – that the trains from Pakistan were
arriving packed with corpses’ (p. 228).
This story of communal violence, of retaliation setting off counter-re-
taliation, of rumours sparking off riots, is of course familiar from the
other novels examined so far. But the point that Ghosh obviously under-
lines is the mystery of why an incident that took place in Srinagar in In-
dia sparked off riots in distant Khulna and Dhaka in East Pakistan, and
then was mirrored in communal violence in Calcutta, a metropolis in a
different nation. The protagonist tries to figure out this mystery, and it
is while toying with Tridib’s old copy of Bartholomew’s Atlas that he is
granted an epiphanic insight. Taking 1200 miles (i.e. the distance be-
tween Khulna and Srinagar) as radius, he draws a circle first in a map
of Asia and then of Europe. He finds the first circle a ‘remarkable’ one,
as ‘more than half of mankind seemed to have fallen within it’ (p. 232).
But more pertinently, this circle in Asia reveals to him the paradox of
120
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

physical proximity and a completely contrary sense of differences in na-
tional identity. As the narrator says,
Tridib’s atlas showed me, for example, that within the tidy order-
ing of Euclidean space, Chiang Mai in Thailand was much
nearer Calcutta than Delhi is, that Chengdu in China is nearer
than Srinagar is. Yet (…) did the people of Khulna care at all
about the fate of the mosques in Vietnam and South China (a
mere stone’s throw away)? I doubted it. But in this other direc-
tion, it took no more than a week [for a riot to flare up].
The reality of the other circle inscribed in a map of Europe (this time
with Milan as centre and again with 1200 miles as radius) was very dif-
ferent, however. As the narrator observes about this second circle:
I tried to imagine an event, any event that might occur in a city
near the periphery of that circle… Stockholm, Dublin, Casablan-
ca, Alexandria, Istanbul, Kiev… which would bring the people of
Milan pouring out into the streets. I tried hard, but I could think
of none.
None, that is, other than war.
It seemed to me then that within this circle [unlike the other
one] there were only states and citizens; there were no people at
all.
Then, he turns back to the first circle and concludes:
I was struck with wonder that there had really been a time, not
so long ago, when people, sensible people, of good intentions,
had thought that all maps were the same, that there was a special
enchantment in lines.
They had drawn their borders, … hoping perhaps that once they
had etched their border upon the map, the two bits of land
would sail away from each other like the shifting tectonic plates
of the ancient Gondwanaland. What had they felt, I wonder,
when they discovered that they had created not a separation, but
a yet-undiscovered irony – the irony that killed Tridib: the simple
fact that there had never been a moment in the four-thousand-
year-old history of that map when the places we know as Dhaka
and Calcutta were more closely bound to each other than after
they had drawn their lines. (p. 233)
This passage, towards the end of the novel, clearly enunciates Ghosh’s
political position, which is ideologically a very a-political one. What he
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
121

highlights here is the fact that borders are illusive, and that they defeat
and negate the very reason behind their existence.
Meaninglessness of borders – colonial and post-colonial
perspectives of the nation
There are three passages in the novel that speak eloquently on the
meaninglessness of borders, and these figure in diverse sections,
spread out over 150 pages of the text. The first is located in a context in
which we are told that before flying to Bangladesh, Thamma is very dis-
turbed to realize that her place of birth (Dhaka, in Bangladesh) is mes-
sily at odds with her nationality (Indian). Further on, in her conversa-
tion with her son, she is told that the ‘border’ is not on the frontier, but
right inside the airport. This is too much for her to comprehend. She
cannot believe that there are no external marks to demarcate the border
between the two countries. Quite out of her wits, she asks her son:
But if there aren’t any trenches or anything, how are people to
know? I mean where’s the difference then? And if there’s no dif-
ference, both sides will be the same: it’ll be just like it used to be
before, when we used to catch a train in Dhaka and get off in
Calcutta the next day without anybody stopping us. What was it
all for then – partition and all the killing and everything – if
there isn’t something in between? (p. 151)
The second reflection on borders is provided by Thamma’s senile old
Jethamoshai, who was the chief reason behind her Dhaka visit, and
who quite surprisingly, provides a very refreshingly different perspective
on the Partition. When people insist that he must leave Dhaka and ac-
company his extended family who have come to fetch him all the way
from Calcutta, he (as Suvir Kaul notes) ‘like another more-than-sane lit-
erary character, Sadaat Hassan Manto’s Toba Tek Singh’36 simply re-
fuses to leave and says:
I know everything, I understand everything. Once you start mov-
ing you never stop. That’s what I told my sons when they took
the trains. I said: I don’t believe in this India-Shindia. It is all
very well, you are going away now, but suppose when you get
here they decide to draw another line somewhere? What will you
do then? Where will you move to? No one will have you any-
where. As for me, I was born here, and I will die here. (p. 215)
122
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Jethamoshai’s words incidentally remind one of Nirmal’s poignant re-
sponse to the defiance of the Morichjhapi settlers in the face of govern-
ment repression in Ghosh’s novel, The Hungry Tide. Listening to them
crying out ‘Amra kara, bastuhara/ Morichjhapi chharbona’, (‘Who are
we? The homeless. We won’t leave Morichjhapi’), he says, ‘Where else
could you belong, except in the place you refused to leave’ (2004: 254)37.
Something of Jethamoshai’s sentiment is echoed by Robi fifteen
years after he heard it spoken out. He had been a mere slip of a boy
then; fifteen years later, while he relates his version of Tridib’s death to
the protagonist in London, he is an Indian Administrative Service offi-
cer, with first-hand knowledge of many riots and communal distur-
bances on the subcontinent. He muses on the word ‘freedom’, since
the root of all problems seemed to lie there.
Free, he said laughing. You know, if you look at the pictures on
the front pages of the newspapers at home now, all those pic-
tures of dead people – in Assam, the north east, Punjab, Sri Lan-
ka, Tripura – people shot by terrorists and separatists and the
army and the police, you will find somewhere behind it all, that
single word; everyone’s doing it to be free (…). I think to myself
why don’t they draw thousands of little lines through the whole
sub-continent and give every little place a new name? What
would it change? It’s a mirage; the whole thing is a mirage. How
can anyone divide a memory? (pp. 246-247)
What is important to note here is that the above three viewpoints about
borders are provided by three characters belonging to three contiguous
generations as figured in The Shadow Lines. The first is spoken by
Thamma, the protagonist’s grandmother; the second by her uncle, Jet-
hamoshai (i.e. the protagonist’s granduncle); and the third by Robi,
Thamma’s nephew, who is roughly the same age as the protagonist and
is his friend. Jethamoshai had lived in a world where borders were not
of paramount importance, and what was regarded as important was
one’s sense of belonging to the place one was born and brought up in.
Hence, the tone of finality in his concluding remark, ‘As for me, I was
born here, and I will die here.’ He does not believe in arbitrary lines
and is shrewd enough to realize that once a man started to move, there
would be no end to it. His words also appear to be prophetic, for within
less than a decade of their utterance, in 1971, East Pakistan became
Bangladesh. Rather differently, Grandma, the second character to muse
on borders, grew up in the momentous opening decades of the twenti-
eth century, i.e. in the heyday of the anticolonial struggle against the
British rule in India. Struggle was the most formative of her experi-
ences, something that defined her worldview, and Ghosh’s narrative
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
123

makes it clear that though she had not literally participated in the na-
tionalist movement, the spirit of the times had entered her soul and
contributed to the creation of her own perception of self. Different,
again, is the third speaker on borders, Robi, who as an individual be-
longing to a post-Partition generation, and having an intimate knowl-
edge of the communally coloured disturbances that rent the national
fabric of India, notes how freedom seemed to lie at the very root of all
the subcontinent’s problems. As Ghosh narrativizes it, Robi’s response
is much more philosophical than his elders’ to the whole issue of bor-
ders and nationhood.
As already pointed out, the three characters of Jethamoshai, Thamma
and Robi not only belong to three contiguous generations in the novel,
but they belong to eras both colonial and post-colonial. Hence, one of
the most interesting aspects of The Shadow Lines is that it gives us re-
presentations of ideas about the ‘nation’ in both colonial and post-colo-
nial times. And ultimately it falls to the narrator in the novel to assimi-
late all the earlier perspectives projected about borders and nationhood.
Through him, Ghosh emphasizes the fact that it is impossible to live by
the notions that had sustained an earlier generation. In fact, what
Ghosh further points to here is the concept of nation as an ‘imagined
community’. For Ghosh’s conceptualization of the world is reminiscent
of the conclusions of Benedict Anderson about nationhood in his semi-
nal work, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of
Nationalism.38
Imagined communities
Partha Chatterjee sums up the basic contention of Anderson’s book as
follows:
In this book, Anderson demonstrates with much subtlety and ori-
ginality, that nations are not the determinate products of given
sociological conditions such as language or race or religion; and
that they have been, in Europe and everywhere else in the world,
imagined into existence. Anderson further describes some of the
major institutional forms through which this imagined commu-
nity came to acquire concrete shape, especially the institutions of
what he so ingeniously calls ‘print-capitalism’. He then argues
that the historical experience of nationalism in Western Europe,
in the Americas, and in Russia has supplied for all subsequent
nationalisms a set of modular forms from which nationalist elites
in Asia and Africa have chosen the ones they liked. (1999: 5)
124
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Chatterjee concludes that ‘Anderson’s book has been (…) the most in-
fluential in the last few years [i.e. the 1980s/1990s] in generating new
theoretical ideas on nationalism’39. (1999: 5) But it is not only social
scientists who have accorded a signal position to Anderson’s work, for
even literary critics like Anjali Gera have pointed out the impact of An-
derson’s book on Indian historians and writers alike:
Following Anderson’s idea of ‘nations’ as ‘imagined commu-
nities’, the nation, along with other ‘narratives’, has been rigor-
ously investigated in post-colonial discourse in the last two dec-
ades. This contestation is most directly addressed in the works of
the Subaltern Studies group and the historiographic fiction of
Rushdie, Ghosh and others.40
Undoubtedly, among Indian writers in English, it was Salman Rushdie
who first addressed this question of what constitutes a ‘nation’ at some
length in his work, both fiction and non-fiction. In Imaginary Home-
lands, for example, in an essay written on the fortieth anniversary of In-
dian independence, he raises the fundamental question, ‘Does India ex-
ist?’ He unravels this riddle through the central metaphor of a nation’s
birth in Midnight’s Children. In the novel he emphasizes the ‘imaginary’
nature of the newly created nation in a famous key passage in the final
chapter of Book I, entitled ‘Tick, Tock’. The narrator, Saleem Sinai, com-
menting on the momentous event of Indian Independence says here:
(…) a nation which had never previously existed was about to win
its freedom, catapulting us into a world which, although it had
five thousand years of history, (…) was nevertheless quite imagin-
ary; into a mythical land, a country which would never exist ex-
cept by the efforts of a phenomenal collective will – except in a
dream we all agreed to dream. (1980: 112)
But as has been noted in Chapter III, this was written in 1980 and
clearly anticipates what Anderson was to say in Imagined Communities
three years later.
Ghosh, as erudite a scholar as he is an eminent novelist, obviously
seems to have been influenced by the new ideas of nationalism that
were in circulation in academia as well as literary circles in the 1980s,
towards the end of which The Shadow Lines was written. In fact, as A.N.
Kaul points out,
In viewing nationalism as both an invention and a force for de-
struction, Ghosh had put himself alongside a considerable num-
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
125

ber of modern western scholars ranging from Elie Kedourie and
Hans Kohn to Tom Nairn and Benedict Anderson. (2002: 301)41
Anjali Gera, similarly, draws our attention to the palpable influence of
another eminent political thinker, Ernest Gellner, on Ghosh’s novel. Ac-
cording to her, ‘Ghosh’s emphasis on the “invented” nature of places
echoes Ernest Gellner’s reading of nations almost verbatim; “a place
does not merely exist, (…) it has to be invented in one’s imagination” ’
(2003: 110-111)42.
Warring critics, and an author in denial
But while critics are united in pointing out the possible political sources
of Ghosh’s novel, they appear not to agree on the significance of
Ghosh’s central point in The Shadow Lines. On the one end of the spec-
trum, for example, we have Robert Dixon, who, in his excellent study of
several of Ghosh’s works, notes that The Shadow Lines is ‘(…) a fictional
critique of classical anthropology’s model of discrete cultures and the
associated ideology of nationalism’43 (2003: 20). On the other end, we
find A.N. Kaul, who, in what amounts to a stinging denunciation of
Ghosh’s idealistic vision, says
Shadow Lines is a metaphor for evading rather than exploring
political realities. For if the happenings of Dhaka prove anything,
they prove precisely that war or friendship between nations is a
continuing political reality.44(1995: 303)
Somewhere in between the above judgements about the novel is Jon
Mee’s opinion. While Mee does not exactly share Dixon’s point of view,
he also disagrees with Kaul. Pointing out that Kaul’s major problem
with Ghosh’s novel is due to Ghosh’s valorizing of the imaginative fa-
culty, Mee argues that Kaul is wrong in making Ghosh’s use of the
word ‘imagination’ co-extensive with the English Romantic ideal. As he
argues:
Kaul may be too quick to read the western literary history of the
word imagination into The Shadow Lines. After all, Tridib actively
seeks to train the narrator to use imagination in a particular kind
of way. Kaul’s critique seems to ignore the anthropological nat-
ure of the imagination explored in the novel. Tridib’s mind, for
instance, delights in the specificities of material culture rather
than ‘fairy tales’.45 (2003: 100)
126
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

It is interesting to note here that though most critics and readers take
the political element in his work to be a given, Ghosh himself denies it.
But there is clearly a contradiction between the manifest intentions of
Ghosh’s novels on the one hand and his public disavowal of an overt
political stand on the other. What he writes and what he speaks do not
seem to match. In an interview he said,
I’m not interested in speaking for anyone or creating a kind of
political vision which will supplant other political visions. I
mean, there are things in politics that I don’t like. Obviously I
hate these fundamentalists, I hate extreme nationalism (…) and I
suppose that emerges from my work (…) but I don’t see myself
as political. I would go even further and say that I don’t think it’s
particularly interesting to write about politics.46
Many critics have not taken kindly to such statements. In this respect,
Brinda Bose’s very forthright observation on Ghosh’s denials merits at-
tention. In the ‘Introduction’ to her edited book, Amitav Ghosh: Critical
Perspectives (2003), she says:
Such pronouncements (‘(…) history, the kind of history exploring
causes, causality, is of no interest to me’) – along with his avowal,
‘By instinct I’m non-political’, that has, understandably, dismayed
a huge number of his readers (…) amounts to something of an
insult to those who particularly appreciate his keen understand-
ing – and rendering – of the political, historical, sociological and
cultural nuances of his subjects, and believe that it is this sensi-
bility that sets him apart from the clutch of Indian novelists in
English that are springing from the woodwork ever since Rush-
die immortalized the genre.47 (2003: 18)
Anshuman Mondal, similarly, is of the opinion that:
The striking interdisciplinarity of his [Ghosh’s] work and its close
relation to academic debates about the nature of knowledge that
have taken shape in the latter decades of the 20th century – in
other words, to ‘critical theory’ – is obvious, notwithstanding his
own disaffiliation from it. Despite his denials, such links to cur-
rent thinking in the academy are an important dimension of his
work and one that gives his writing an intellectual rigour and
substance that his contemporaries can seldom match. What
really sets him apart from much academic discourse is the acces-
sibility of his work, the ways in which his intellectualism is worn
lightly on the fabric of his prose.48 (2007: 7)
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
127

Ghosh’s real antecedents
In his monograph on Ghosh, Mondal gives some very original insights
into Ghosh’s intellectual heritage. Most strikingly, he draws attention to
the author’s real (but often forgotten) Indian antecedents – Jawaharlal
Nehru and Rabindranath Tagore. He argues that Ghosh’s work has an
undeniable secular and humanist orientation, and says that though his
‘ideological affiliations were moulded by Nehruvian nationalism (and
thus indirectly by Tagore), he would gravitate towards the poet rather
than the politician in his own critique of the nation-state’49 (2007: 35).
Tagore’s influence on Ghosh can best be understood if we remember
Tagore’s antipathy towards nationalism. As early as 1917, in the very
midst of the anticolonial movement against the British in India, Tagore
had declared ‘Nationalism is a great menace’50 (1917; 2002: 121). The
way he saw it, the concept of the ‘nation’ was built on a premise of ‘ex-
clusivity’ and narrowness that ultimately detracted from the humanity
of man; and it was his contention that the goals of ‘humanity’ and those
of the ‘nation’ are not the same. In effect, this is what Ghosh says in
The Shadow Lines – albeit in a more postmodern way.
Ghosh has never quite stopped thinking about the nation. Thus, thir-
teen years after writing The Shadow Lines (within which period India
saw many more riots, the most notable being the post-Ayodhya riots of
1993), Ghosh, in an interview with The Hindu, had this to say on what
he felt about the future of nations:
To date we do not know what is going to take the place of the na-
tion state. Ideally it would be something like the EU; realistically,
in most places it’s probably going to be more like the fusion that
occurred between southern Afghanistan and Pakistan over the
last decade – a world of porous borders, warlords and trafficking
in everything available. So it seems right now that we are in a
moment when the future is still unborn and the past is not quite
dead.51
Ghosh’s novel belongs to a mature phase of Indian Writing in English
in general and Indian-English fiction in particular. Post-Independence,
this body of literature had evolved considerably; post-Rushdie, it flow-
ered and came of age. This is reflected equally in form and content,
both of which are strikingly different from all that before. However, the
interesting thing to note here is that from the 1980s onwards, there
was a preoccupation with the theme of ‘Nation’ just as in an earlier gen-
eration there was a preoccupation with the nationalist struggle and/or
the Gandhian movement. As a writer, Ghosh is clearly involved in this
process and The Shadow Lines, in this sense, is one of the most repre-
128
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

sentative works of fiction of its kind. Put simply, it represents a particu-
lar phase in the development of Indian Writing in English and voices
its chief concerns.52 Indeed, as Meenakshi Mukherjee has rightly
pointed out,
Amitav Ghosh’s The Shadow Lines (1988), is (…) the one novel
written in the 1980s that will survive all the rest that appeared in
that boom decade. The novel betrays no anxiety because it at-
tempts to prove nothing and interrogates rather than defines the
concept of a totalizing India.53 (2002: 184)
IMAGINED COMMUNITIES: QUESTIONING THE BORDER
129


Conclusion
Independent India is now more than sixty years old, and so is the origi-
nal Partition of the subcontinent into a secular India and an Islamic Pa-
kistan. In the history of Indian Writing in English which is roughly
200 years old1, this span of time coincides with the rise of the novel
form from its being the chosen vehicle of the famous trio of Indian-
English fiction – Raja Rao, Mulk Raj Anand and R.K. Narayan – who
started their careers as novelists in the 1930s and 1940s, to its establish-
ment as arguably the most pre-eminent and successful form of creative
writing in English on the subcontinent in the 1980s.2 Indeed, it may be
claimed in all fairness that the most stupendous achievements in In-
dian Writing in English in the past few decades have undoubtedly been
in the genre of the novel.
It is possible to understand today that virtually every decade in India’s
sixty-year-old history has had its own special concerns in so far as the
evolution of the Indian English novel is concerned. Many novels of the
1930s and 1940s, for example, were preoccupied with the nationalist/
Gandhian movement; a number of novels of the 1950s and 1960s with
the acute sense of the alienation of characters belonging to the privi-
leged sections of Indian society who were caught up in the contrary
pulls of tradition and modernity, post-Independence; and several of the
novels of the 1980s and 1990s, with the concept of the nation. Yet, re-
markably enough, there has been one theme which has remained com-
mon to the fiction written over almost all these decades, and this is the
theme of the Partition.3 The Partition has proved to be an enduring
theme in Indian-English fiction for over six decades, recurring at regu-
lar intervals and never failing to produce an impact. Hence, it is impor-
tant to unearth the reason behind this almost obsessive preoccupation
with the Partition on the part of Indian novelists writing in English,
and to discern why so many novelists from different generations were
concerned with the depiction of the Partition in the first place.

Three factors determining the thrust of the narratives
The Partition, in the words of the historians Ayesha Jalal and Sugata
Bose, has been ‘the central event in modern South Asian history’4, a
cataclysmic event that impinged upon the lives of millions on the sub-
continent, in a way that even the two World Wars had not, in terms of
the sheer brutality and damage that it inflicted upon a considerable por-
tion of the population, the mass exile and displacement that it caused
and the new schisms that it created among people. This being so, it
was therefore perhaps inevitable that the subcontinent’s fiction (both in
English and in the vernaculars) would reflect the many problems that
the new nations faced, post-Independence, and the many changes that
they suffered either as direct consequences or as indirect spin-offs of
the Partition of 1947.
In its previous chapters, this book has examined a cross-section of
English novels dealing with the Partition written on the subcontinent
between the mid-1950s and the late 1980s. But what emerges as most
striking is the fact that the treatment of the theme of Partition itself
changed significantly over the decades. The novels studied so far have
revealed that the most important factors that shaped the contours and
determined the thrust of the different Partition narratives were the time
in which the novelists were writing (that is, whether close to or distant
from the event of the Partition); the value they attached to women as
the ‘subjects’ of this traumatic history and the way they perceived the
concepts of nation and nationalism.
Concepts of nation and nationhood are crucially linked with the
theme of Partition, but there is a marked difference in the way these
concepts were perceived by novelists like Khushwant Singh, Manohar
Malgonkar, Anita Desai, Bapsi Sidhwa, Salman Rushdie and Amitav
Ghosh. The idea of nationalism as a patriotic ideal had much currency
during the struggle for independence. This is reflected in the writings
of people who grew up at that time. Malgonkar’s A Bend in the Ganges
is a case in point. This novel, along with Singh’s Train to Pakistan
shows that novels written in the early years of Independence had a
tendency to be preoccupied with political events, probably because the
authors lived very near to the events they describe.5 However, this
changed over time. Novelists writing at a later date, especially in the
1980s, whether they be Anita Desai or Bapsi Sidhwa who did not ex-
actly live through the Partition the way Malgonkar and Singh did, or
Rushdie or Amitav Ghosh who belong to a more distanced post-Parti-
tion generation, clearly have a very different perspective from those
writing in the 1950s and the 1960s while dealing professedly with the
same theme of Partition.
132
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Set against the early novels of Singh and Malgonkar, Desai’s and
Sidhwa’s novels (Clear Light of Day and Ice-Candy-Man, respectively)
have a more psychological orientation, and they primarily focus on wo-
men and their predicament at the time of the Partition, thus highlight-
ing the fact that the Partition not only victimized women but proved to
be (in some cases at least) an enabling experience as well. Rushdie and
Ghosh, on the other hand, being novelists who are able to write from a
certain vantage point in history, not only study the impact of the Parti-
tion on the lives of the principal characters (in Midnight’s Children and
The Shadow Lines, respectively) but also scrutinize the long-term
changes wrought by it in the national life. Moreover, the concept of na-
tions as ‘imagined communities’ informs their vision and underpins
the very fabric of their texts. They are, in fact, concerned not so much
with representing the cataclysmic event of the Partition as in exploring
(in different ways) the idea of a nation.
Thus, as one journeys from the mid-1950s to the late 1980s, one may
discern in a number of the Partition novels of this period a palpable
shift from something akin to direct reportage to a more distinct theore-
tical accent; a shift also from the representation of the immediate prac-
tical consequences of the Partition to the depiction of the more subtle
nuances of its impact on public and private life. To put it simply, the
Partition novels of the 1950s and the 1960s register the shock and awe
of the Partition, while those of the 1980s theorize about it. However, it
would be obviously wrong to make this an absolute statement, as there
are notable exceptions. As this book shows, there are at least two novels
of the 1980s that do not share the predominant concerns of the major-
ity of the Partition novels written in that decade. Thus, Clear Light of
Day is different from every other novel in this category in its subtle evo-
cation of the personal ramifications of the Partition in its uncanny abil-
ity to alter and transform intimate spaces,6 and Ice-Candy-Man, though
it was published last of all among the novels discussed in this book,
seems to have more in common with the novels of the 1950s and
1960s discussed here, in its detailed description of the events that led
to the Partition in the Punjab (Lahore to be more precise) than with
Rushdie’s or Ghosh’s novels. But here again, Ice-Candy-Man admits of
another qualification. For, unlike Singh’s or Malgonkar’s Partition no-
vels, Sidhwa’s fiction is a feminine perspectivization of the Partition,
and we are given here a glimpse into the roles and lives of women as
both victims and agents, as sufferers and arbiters of fate. Certainly, the
violation of women on an unprecedented scale was one of the defining
features of the Partition, for much Partition violence was synonymous
with rape, loot and arson. Sidhwa’s novel faithfully represents this as-
pect of the Partition, while at the same time not forgetting to show the
CONCLUSION
133

ironically enabling role that the Partition played in the lives of many of
the subcontinent’s women.7
The six novels in this book thus represent three major ways of look-
ing at the Partition. In as many as three of them, there is a preoccupa-
tion with the Partition, these novels being Train to Pakistan, A Bend in
the Ganges and Ice-Candy-Man. But while Train to Pakistan records
events that happen on a border village (on the western frontier) at the
time of the Partition, in both A Bend in the Ganges and Ice-Candy-Man,
the events depicted lead up to the Partition, Partition figuring as a kind
of climax in the narrative. But here again, there are important differ-
ences. Ice-Candy-Man focuses primarily on the city of Lahore and re-
cords its transformation from the end of the Second World War (when
the Parsees celebrate the Allied victory) to the Partition of the subconti-
nent in August 1947 (when the Boundary Commission declares the city
to be a part of the newly created state of Pakistan). A Bend in the
Ganges, on the other hand, is much more panoramic in scope. It has a
much wider canvas, both in terms of time and space, for its narrative
time frame covers the entire period of the nationalist struggle from the
early 1920s to 1947, and its locales are spread over far-flung parts of the
subcontinent and also include the various theatres of war in South-East
Asia.
Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children is unique in that it is the only Partition
novel where we are shown the events leading up to the Partition as well
as those that followed in its aftermath. It is the only novel to deal with
the two Partitions of the subcontinent, in 1947 and 1971; and again, it
is the only novel to be set in all three partitioned states of India, Paki-
stan and Bangladesh. The characters in this novel inhabit all these
places, and through their experiences we are privileged to see the very
different trajectories of democracy in these nascent states. We are also
shown what it was like to live in newly independent India and Pakistan
and (more importantly) the differences between these life experiences.
Thus, Saleem, we are told, at the inception of his adolescence, leaves
the ‘highly-spiced non-conformity of Bombay’ (Rushdie 1981: 308) for
Karachi in Pakistan, where ‘truth is what it is instructed to be’ (Rushdie
1981: 326).8 In a more concrete way, Midnight’s Children charts the dis-
integration and the peculiar predicament of the Muslim community on
the subcontinent for whom neither Independence nor the Partition
managed to deliver the promised goals, because between the largely hy-
pocritical secularism of independent India and the stifling of all civic
freedoms in Islamic Pakistan, they had very little to choose from.
Yet, if Midnight’s Children’s uniqueness in its depiction of the Parti-
tion lies (among other things) in the fact that it takes within its ambit
both the prelude to and the aftermath of this cataclysmic event, then
Amitav Ghosh’s The Shadow Lines: stands out among the novels dis-
134
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

cussed in this study in its exclusive focus on the aftermath of the Parti-
tion. It explores the far-reaching consequences of the Partition of the
subcontinent in terms of communal violence in a way no other novel
does. In fact, it is not so much about the Partition as a deep introspec-
tion on what constitutes ‘freedom’ and an equally incisive interrogation
of the very concept of a ‘nation’. It shares with Midnight’s Children this
emphasis on the theorization of the Partition, and in a way continues
what was already begun by Rushdie, i.e. an engagement with the impli-
cations of dividing a country on the basis of religion.
Interflows of images/motifs
Finally, it is also important to note that while there are admittedly all
these different ways in which the Partition has been perspectivized in
fiction, it is true that cutting across these divisions there are also intri-
guing interflows of images, themes, and motifs. The first of these is the
image of the trainload of corpses, which is one of the most common
themes in Partition literature, immortalized in many books and films.9
It is good to remember here the symbolic significance of trains at the
time of the Partition, for the reality of the newly created lines were actu-
ally being concretized by trains, which carried millions of hapless refu-
gees across the new borders. In fact, it would not be wrong to say that
the drama of the exchange of populations was being played out on the
railway tracks of the two nations. And frequently, these trainloads of re-
fugees turned into trainloads of corpses.
An interesting history of this trope can be further traced from within
the novels discussed in this book itself. From the main plot itself revol-
ving around a trainload of corpses in Train to Pakistan (where the whole
story is about how another such instance is prevented from happening),
this image is reduced to being an element at a crucial moment in the
narrative in Ice-Candy-Man (as the Gurdaspur train incident transforms
the happy-go-lucky popsicle man into an avowed communalist pledged
to revenge and violence), before being further reduced to just a rumour
in The Shadow Lines: (a rumour which still has the potential to act
powerfully on the minds of the masses, as the Tala drinking water Tank
in Calcutta is supposedly poisoned on the basis of this).
It is then the concept of the line that divides nations that generates
the greatest degree of cogitation in most Partition novels. The border
symbolizes, stands for or means different things to different novelists.
The most common opinion expressed in the early Partition novels is
that arbitrarily drawn border lines sundered the Indian subcontinent
into two bits of unequal land, and most of these fictions regret this fact
as something that was imposed and should not have happened. A great
CONCLUSION
135

deal is said in these texts about what happened on the borders of the
two newly created nations; but there is no questioning of the concept of
the border as such, at least in the first few novels. Train to Pakistan for
instance is totally preoccupied with how to get a train across the border.
The second part of Ice-Candy-Man is also taken up with all the efforts
that were being made by Ayah’s wellwishers to send her across the bor-
der to her family in Amritsar. Like Khushwant Singh’s novel, a train-
load of dead crossing a border does play its part here too (though in a
very different way, as has already been discussed above). It needs to be
added here, however, that there is much reflection on the arbitrariness
of the Radcliffe line in Sidhwa’s novel, underlining the unfairness and
injustice of the all too hasty work of the Boundary Commission.
Yet, it is only when we come to Midnight’s Children that we get a radi-
cally different stance on the issue of borders. In effect, what Rushdie
says here in Book I, Chapter 9 (‘Tick, Tock’), is that it is the line that di-
vided the subcontinent in 1947 that gave Indians (and the Pakistanis)
their true identity. However, The Shadow Lines: is the only Partition no-
vel examined in this book that really questions the concept of the bor-
der, questions very seriously whether the shadow line that we inscribe
to separate people into different nations has any validity, or whether it
is an absurd illusion. It is Ghosh’s contention in this novel that borders
themselves are fictive and illusive, that they defeat and negate the very
reason behind their ostensible existence. What Tridib’s atlas demon-
strates to the narrator, the lesson he learns after a harrowing seventeen-
year-long search for the truth of Tridib’s death, is that in the ultimate
analysis, borderlines do not mean anything at all. But beyond this, yet
another interesting aspect of the The Shadow Lines: is that it gives us a
representation of the nation in both colonial and post-colonial times
through characters who belong to three contiguous generations (Jetha-
moshai, Thamma and Robi); and it shows how the narrator, with the
gift of vision bequeathed by Tridib, not only uncovers but also bridges
all the earlier perspectives towards nationhood.
The loss of a dear one because of communal violence is another
trope that recurs in the Partition novels studied here. It is interesting to
note that the plots of both Ice-Candy-Man and The Shadow Lines: centre
around an irrevocable loss, that of a parent figure or loved one, by a
child. Tridib in The Shadow Lines is to the nameless protagonist of
Ghosh’s novel10 what Ayah is to Lenny in Ice-Candy-Man. The loss, in
both cases, changes the protagonists’ lives forever, and it is while cop-
ing with this loss that they both learn to come to terms with themselves
and the larger sociopolitical realities that affect their lives. Both actually
grow up in the shadow of loss. To this extent, the two novels share a
common strand. But whereas in Ghosh’s novel Tridib’s loss leads the
protagonist to explore questions about national identity and nationhood,
136
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

to learn the ‘meaning of distance’, Ayah’s loss in Ice-Candy-Man gives
Lenny insights into the vulnerability and predicament of being a wo-
man. In other words, if Ghosh leads the narrator to ruminate on the
world outside, Sidhwa shows Lenny’s awakening to the complexities of
the mind within, and so to an understanding of the immense distance
that lies between the public sphere and private self.
Each of the Partition-centered works of fiction examined here is an
act of remembrance and the product of a quest to understand why a po-
litical
event
caused
so
much
hostility,
internecine
violence
and
bloodshed among communities that had peacefully coexisted for almost
half a millennium on a common landmass. Understandably, each nove-
list has his or her own perspective and unique way of depicting the
theme of Partition. But, ultimately, each attempt, each narration, and
each novel tells us a great deal about how the telling and the tale are in-
tertwined. For Partition novels stridently contradict Aristotle’s dictum
that ‘the poet’s function is to describe, not the thing that has happened,
but a kind of thing that might happen’11, even as they appear to valorize
George Lukac’s point that novelists thematizing historical issues ‘should
re-experience the social and human motives which led men to think,
feel and act as they did in historical reality’.12
CONCLUSION
137


Glossary
Dacoit means “bandit”. It is the anglicized version of the word ‘daku’
(in Hindi) and ‘dakat’ (in Bangla). The word came into English usage
during the British colonial period in India. Originally, dacoits were a
class of robbers active in India and Burma, who plundered in armed
bands.
Jashan means “celebration”. It is an Urdu word used widely by people
of many communities in the subcontinent. For the Parsees, it has a reli-
gious connotation as well. For them, ‘Jashan’ is a religious service held
in honour of the eleven divinities of the Zoroastrian pantheon. In the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, however, the Parsees of British In-
dia organized several [public] jashans in honour of British war victories.
[See note 32 of CH II, on page 206].
The protagonist of Bapsi Sidhwa’s novel Ice-Candy-Man, the eight-
year-old Lenny, celebrates one such victory, the Allied victory of 1945, in
a ‘Jashan’ in Lahore, along with her Parsee parents, relatives and
friends.
Junglewallah is a Parsee last name. A common trait of a lot of Parsee
last names is that they have a ‘wallah’ or ‘wala’ at the end. Usually, it is
an occupation indicator (‘Daruwala’ is a wine merchant, ‘Aloowala’, a
potato merchant).
The protagonist of Bapsi Sidhwa’s first novel, The Crow-Eaters, is a
humorous character named Faredoon Junglewallah.
Lambardar Under British rule, a ‘lambardar’ was the tax-collector and
the headman of a village, in the province of Punjab. The name literally
means “person holding a number” (‘Lambar’ is the English ‘number’,
and ‘dar’ is Persian for ‘holder’). It arose from the fact that, in the sys-
tem of British tax collection, each village headman was assigned a num-
ber in the government registers,
Maulvi is an honorific title for an Islamic religious scholar. It is derived
from the Arabic word “Mawla”, which means “master” or “lord”.

In Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children, Saleem’s mother’s family,
on the insistence of his grandmother, receives religious instruction
from a maulvi in their home.
Pathan refers to an ethnic, Pushtu-speaking Afghan. Primarily a martial
race, the Pathan population predominates in Afghanistan, the North
West Frontier Province and Baluchistan province of Pakistan.
Sepoy An Indian soldier serving in the British Indian army was called a
‘sepoy’.
The word has been immortalized in history with the Sepoy Mutiny of
1857 (also called the Great Revolt or the First War of Indian Indepen-
dence) – when Indian sepoys spearheaded a revolt against the British
Empire.
Sethis is a surname common to Hindus, Muslims and Parsees of the
subcontinent.
It is derived from the Sanskrit word “sresthi” or “shresth”, which
means “the best among all”. Sethis have for centuries distinguished
themselves in the civil, administrative and military services, as well as
business, in the subcontinent.
Lenny, the protagonist of Bapsi Sidhwa’s novel Ice-Candy-Man, be-
longs to a ‘Sethi’ Parsee household.
Zenana is Urdu for “women’s quarters” in Muslim houses of the sub-
continent.
It encapsulates the private, sequestered nature of women’s existence
in orthodox Muslim families.
140
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Notes
Introduction
1
Ahsan, Aitzaz (1996), The Indus Saga and the Making of Partition. Karachi: Oxford
University Press. On the myth of a unified, primordial Muslim nation, see Mushirul
Hasan (2001), ‘The Myth of Muslim Unity: Colonial and Nationalist Narratives,’ in
Legacy of a Divided Nation: India’s Muslims since Independence. New Delhi: Oxford
University Press.
2
Banerjee, Anil Kumar (1985), History of Modern India. Calcutta: A. Mukherjee & Co.
Pvt. Ltd.
3
Sarkar, Sumit (1983), Modern India. New Delhi: Macmillan.
4
Chandra, Bipan (1999), India’s Struggle for Independence: 1857-1947, New Delhi: Pen-
guin Books.
5
Nehru once described Jinnah as ‘one of the most extraordinary men in history’ whose
‘success in life arose from never agreeing to anything’.Cited in ‘Partition in Retrospect’
(1999), in Diana Mansergh (ed.), Independence Years: The Selected Indian and Com-
monwealth Papers of Nicholas Mansergh. New Delhi: Oxford University Press. After
giving this quote, the author adds:
Indeed, nobody could deny the supreme skill of Jinnah as a negotiator. However
frustrating and difficult others found him, he never made a concession which com-
promised his main goal. (p. 235)
6
Jalal, Ayesha (1985), The Sole Spokesman: Jinnah, the Muslim League and the Demand
for Pakistan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
7
An excellent analysis of Jalal’s thesis may be found in Prof. Rajat Kanta Ray’s article
‘League, Congressmen and the British: The Pakistan Movement of 1940-47’, pub-
lished in The Indian Historical Review (1995, pp. 127-46).
8
In 2009, almost a quarter of a century after Jalal’s study, the renowned Indian politi-
cian and diplomat, Jaswant Singh, created a furore in India with his book, Jinnah: In-
dia, Partition, Independence (New Delhi: Rupa & Company). His sympathetic portrayal
of Jinnah and his critique of the Congress leadership and its role in the Partition of
India cost him his membership of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), a shocking event
that initiated a whole new debate on ‘freedom of expression’ in India.
9
Campbell-Johnson, Alan (1952), Mission with Mountbatten. London: Robert Hale.
10 Ziegler, Philip (1985), Mountbatten. London: Collins.
11
Wolpert, Stanley (2006), Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
12
Roberts, Andrew (1994), ‘Lord Mountbatten and the Perils of Adrenalin,’ in Eminent
Churchillians. London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
13
Wolpert, Stanley (2006), Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India,
op. cit. p. 2.
14
Sarila, Narendra Singh (2005), The Shadow of the Great Game: The Untold Story of In-
dia’s Partition. New Delhi: Harper Collins.

15
Mansergh, Diana (ed.) (1999), Independence Years: The Selected Indian and Common-
wealth Papers of Nicholas Mansergh, 220. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
16 Page, David (1999), Prelude to Partition: The Indian Muslims and the Imperial System
of Control 1920-1932. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
17
Singh, Anita Inder (1987), ‘Preface’, The Origins of the Partition of India 1936-1947.
New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
18
Ibid., p. v.
19 Ibid., p. vii.
20 Chatterjee, Joya (1994), Bengal Divided: Hindu Communalism and Partition 1932-1947.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
21
Ibid., p. 227.
22 Two seminal works on the Partition published in the 1980s that had a regional focus
(Punjab/North-West/North-East India) were – Talbot, Ian (1988), Provincial Politics
and the Pakistan Movement: The Growth of the Muslim League in North-West and North-
East India 1937-1947. Oxford: Oxford University Press, and; Gilmartin, David (1988),
Empire and Islam: Punjab and the Making of Pakistan. Berkeley: University of Califor-
nia Press.
23
See Kudaisya, Gyanesh & Tai Yong Tan (2000), The Aftermath of Partition in South
Asia (Routledge Studies in the Modern History of Asia), 14. London: Routledge.
24 Chatterjee, Joya (1994), Bengal Divided: Hindu Communalism and Partition 1932-1947,
op. cit. p. 17.
25
Bose, Sugata & Ayesha Jalal (2004), Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political
Economy, 160. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
26 Ibid., p. 162.
27 See Chapter 9 of Lappierre, Dominique & Larry Collins (1976), Freedom at Midnight,
New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House Pvt. Ltd.
28 See Chapter 3 of Mansergh, Diana (ed.) (1999), Independence Years: The Selected In-
dian and Commonwealth Papers of Nicholas Mansergh.
29 Hamid, Shahid (1986), Disastrous Twilight. London: Leo Cooper. Cited by Arjun Ma-
hey (2001) in his essay ‘Partition Narratives: Some Observations’, in Ravikant & Tar-
un K. Saint (eds.), Translating Partition. New Delhi: Katha.
30 Bhalla, Alok (ed.) (1994), ‘Introduction’, Stories about the Partition of India. New Del-
hi: Harper Collins India.
31
Nehru, Jawaharlal (1936; 1988), An Autobiography. New Delhi: Nehru Memorial
Fund.
32
Nehru, Jawaharlal (1945; 1988), The Discovery of India. New Delhi: Nehru Memorial
Fund.
33
Page, David (1999), Prelude to Partition: The Indian Muslims and the Imperial System
of Control 1920-1932, op.cit. p. xxxvii.
34 Economic and Political Weekly, 24 April 1993. The two articles were – Ritu Menon
and Kamala Bhasin’s Recovery, Rupture and Resistance: the Indian State and the Abduc-
tion of Women during Partition; and Urvashi Butalia’s Community, State and Gender:
On Women’s Agency during Partition. Cited in David Page, ‘Introduction to the Paper-
back Edition’, Note no. 62, p. li.
35
These authors later published full-length books elaborating on these themes. They
were: Menon, Ritu & Kamla Bhasin (1998), Borders & Boundaries: Women in India’s
Partition. New Delhi: Kali for Women. Butalia, Urvashi (1998), The Other Side of Si-
lence: Voices from India’s Partition. New Delhi: Viking.
36 Bose, Sugata & Ayesha Jalal (2004), Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political
Economy, op.cit. p. 164 A representative selection of Saadat Hasan Manto’s Partition
writings can be found in Mottled Dawn: Fifty Sketches and Stories of Partition, trans-
lated from the Urdu by Khalid Hasan. This is a commemorative volume that was
142
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

brought out by Penguin India on the Golden Jubilee of India’s Independence in
1997. While talking of Ritwik Ghatak’s films centering round Partition, special men-
tion should be made of Meghe Dhaka Tara (The Cloud-capped Star), 1960; Komal
Gandhar (E Flat), 1961; and Subarnarekha (The Golden Thread), 1962. In this con-
text, it may be pertinent to quote Nitish Sen Gupta’s comment on Ghatak’s films in
his book Bengal Divided: The Unmaking of a Nation (New Delhi: Penguin/Viking,
2007). Sen Gupta says:
For Ritwick Ghatak, the film-maker, the indivisible Bengal was an article of faith
and the cruelty of dividing this unity was shown in his series of memorable films.
(p. 167)
37
Representative examples of this kind would be Azeez Ahmad’s Kaali Raat (Dark
Nights), Hayat Ullah Ansari’s Shukar Guzar Ankhien (Grateful Eyes) and Premnath
Dar’s Akh Thu (I Spit On It All). All these stories may be found in the book edited by
Alok Bhalla.
38 Manto, Saadat Hasan (2003), Siyah Hashye. New Delhi: Rupa & Co.
39 Manto, Saadat Hasan (1997), ‘Introduction’, Mottled Dawn: Fifty Sketches and Stories
of Partition, translated from the Urdu by Khalid Hasan, New Delhi: Penguin, pp. xx-
xxi.
40 Bhalla, Alok (ed.) (1994), ‘Introduction’, Stories about the Partition of India, op.cit. p.
xvii.
41
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2002), The Perishable Empire: Essays on Indian Writing in Eng-
lish, 180. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
42 Rushdie, among others, has dismissed Rajmohan’s Wife as a ‘dud’ (in the ‘Introduc-
tion’ to The Vintage Book of Indian Writing in English). On the whole, it is remem-
bered mostly as a ‘false start’ in English by Bankimmchandra Chatterjee, who (like
Michael Madhusudan Dutt), after trying his hand at English poetry, reverted to writ-
ing in Bengali, and soon earned eminence in it. A very interesting narrative of the
history of its publication can be found in the 2005 Rupa Edition of the text of Rajmo-
han’s Wife, annotated by the eminent critic and scholar, Meenakshi Mukherjee.
43 Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2002), The Twice-born Fiction: A Study of the Themes and
Techniques of Indian Novels in English 1930-1964, 19. New Delhi: Pencraft Interna-
tional.
44 Bhattacharya, Shankar (1994), Manohar Malgonkar: A Study of His Mind & Art, 2.
New Delhi: Creative Books.
45 Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2002), The Perishable Empire: Essays on Indian Writing in Eng-
lish, op.cit. p. 173.
46 See Naik, M.K. (2004), A History of Indian English Literature, 114-186. New Delhi: Sa-
hitya Academy.
47 One of the most interesting novels to be written on the subject after Independence is
R.K. Narayan’s Waiting for the Mahatma (1956) – which, unlike most fiction dealing
with the Mahatma, is a humorous take on the Gandhian movement.
48 The two most interesting aspects of Baldwin’s novel are that it tells the Partition story
from a purely Sikh perspective and has a stridently feminist stance in its depiction of
the central character of Satya. It won the Commonwealth Writers’ Prize for 2001.
49 For a detailed discussion of this much-neglected aspect of the administrative conse-
quences of the Partition of 1947, see Chatterjee, Joya (2001), ‘Right or Charity? The
Debate over Relief and Rehabilitation in West Bengal, 1947-50’, in Suvir Kaul (ed.),
The Partitions of Memory: The Afterlife of the Division of India. New Delhi: Permanent
Black. Also see the ‘Introduction’ to Jasodhara Bagchi & Subhoranjan Dasgupta (eds.)
(2003), The Trauma and the Triumph: Gender and Partition in Eastern India. Calcutta:
Stree.
NOTES
143

50 Chatterjee (2007) explores this theme in great detail in her next book, The Spoils of
Partition: Bengal and India, 1947-1967. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
51
Of late, this trend has changed a bit. See Fraser, Bashabi (2006), Bengal Partition
Stories: An Unclosed Chapter. London: Anthem Press.
52
Actually, it was the third Partition of Bengal – after 1905 (which was later annulled
in 1911) and 1947. For a history of the 1905 Partition of Bengal and a detailed study
of the famous nationalist movement (Swadeshi) that it engendered, see Sarkar, Sumit
(1973), The Swadeshi Movement in Bengal 1903-1908. New Delhi: People’s Publishing
House.
53
Train to Pakistan (published in the United States under the title Mano Majra) was
popular from the time of its very first publication in 1956, and in fact won the ‘Grove
India Fiction prize’ the same year.
54 Other well-known Partition novels penned by Pakistani authors are – Mumtaz Shah
Nawaz’s The Heart Divided (1957; Lahore: ASR Publications, 1990); Zulfikar Ghose’s
The Murder of Azim Khan (London: Macmillan, 1967); Nasir Ahmed Farooki’s Faces
of Love and Death (Lahore: Watan Publications, 1961) and Snakes and Ladders (Lahore:
Watan Publications, 1969); and Mahmud Sipra’s Pawn to King Three (London: Mi-
chael Joseph, 1985). To learn more about these authors and understand their works
(especially that of Ghose and Sidhwa) in the larger tradition of Pakistani writing in
English, see Rahman, Tariq (1991), A History of Pakistani Literature in English. Lahore:
Vanguard.
55
1947: Earth was the second in a series of films directed by Mehta named after the ele-
ments. The first in the series was Fire; and the third, the Oscar-nominated Water.
56 Please refer back to note 18.
57
See Bodh Prakash’s essay (2001), ‘The Woman Protagonist in Partition Literature’, in
Ravikant & Tarun K. Saint (eds.), Translating Partition, 194-209. New Delhi: Katha.
58 Financed by Booker McConnell, a multinational conglomerate company, the Booker
is awarded annually for the best full-length novel in the British Commomwealth of
Nations. In 2002, the Man Group became sponsor of the Booker Prize Foundation,
and the prize is currently named the ‘Man Booker Prize for Fiction’. It may be noted
here that three other Indians won the Booker after Rushdie – Arundhati Roy for The
God of Small Things in 1997; Kiran Desai for The Inheritance of Loss in 2006; and
most recently, Aravind Adiga for The White Tiger in 2008. For an interesting history
of the Booker Prize and the way it has shaped contemporary British fiction, see Todd,
R.K. (1996), Consuming Fictions: The Booker Prize and Fiction in Britain Today. Lon-
don: Bloomsbury.
59 For a discussion of this aspect of the novel, see Dhar, Subir (2004), ‘Postmodernism
and Midnight’s Children’ in Tapan K. Ghosh (ed.), Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Chil-
dren: A Reader’s Companion, 268-279. New Delhi: asia book club.
60 It may be helpful to refer to Priyamvada Gopal’s insightful comment about the spe-
cial quality of Ghosh’s writing in this context – the one that endears him to both the
general reader as well as scholars and critics:
Although [his novels] vary substantially in subject matter and quality, they are all
marked by a remarkable synthesis of creative energy and intellectual acuity. A simi-
lar combination of literary flair and sober analysis distinguishes Ghosh’s essays
and travelogues; they are generally incisive and always highly readable.
Among the many luminaries who dot the landscape of Indian Writing in English
today, Ghosh stands out both for the clarity of his prose and his sharp yet always
humane insights. ‘Amitav Ghosh’ (2004), in Jay Parini (ed.), World Writers Series,
pg.no. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, Thomson Gale.
61 Kundera, Milan (1978; 1996), The Book of Laughter and Forgetting. London: Faber &
Faber.
144
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

62 Rao, Raja (1938), Kanthapura. London: George Allen & Unwin.
63 Narayan, R.K. (1955; 1997), Waiting for the Mahatma. Mysore: Indian Thought Publi-
cations.
64 Hossain, Attia (1961; 1992), Sunlight on a Broken Column. New Delhi: Penguin
Books.
65 Abbas, Khwaja Ahmed (1958), Inquilab. New Delhi: Jaico Publishing House.
66 Markandaya, Kamala (1955), Some Inner Fury. London: Putnam.
67 Sahgal, Nayantara (1958), A Time to be Happy. New York: Knopf.
68 Nahal, Chaman (1975; 2001), Azadi. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
69 Kesavan, Mukul (1995), Looking Through Glass. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
70 Dhawan, R.K. (ed.) (1982), Explorations in Modern Indo-English Fiction. New Delhi:
Bahri Publications Private Limited.
71
Pathak, R.S. (ed.) (1994), Recent Indian Fiction. New Delhi: Prestige.
72 Ravi, P.S. (2003), Modern Indian Fiction: History, Politics and the Individual in the No-
vels of Salman Rushdie, Amitav Ghosh, Upamanyu Chatterjee. New Delhi: Prestige.
73
Bhatnagar, M.K. (2003), Modern Indian English Novel: A Critical Study of the Political
Motif. New Delhi: Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.
74 Paranjape, Makarand (2000), Towards a Poetics of the Indian English Novel, 122. Shim-
la: Indian Institute of Advanced Study.
75
Ibid.
76 Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2005), The Twice-born Fiction: Themes and Techniques of In-
dian Novels in English. New Delhi: Pencraft International.
77 Riemenschneider, Dieter (2005), The Indian Novel in English: Its Critical Discourse
1934-2004. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
78 Singh, P.K. (2005), The Novels of Khushwant Singh: A Critical Evaluation. New Delhi:
Book Enclave.
79 Mondal, Anshuman (2007), Amitav Ghosh (Contemporary World Writers Series).
Manchester & New York: Manchester University Press.
80 Neb, Narinder & Tejinder Kaur (eds.) (2006), Perspectives on the Partition Fiction of
the Indian Sub-continent, 147-158. Jalandhar: Nirman Publications.
81
Dhawan, R.K. & Neena Arora (eds.) (2010), Partition and Indian Literature, Vol. 2, 24-
38. New Delhi: Prestige.
82 Gundur, N.S. (2008), Partition and Indian English Fiction. New Delhi: Adhyayan Pub-
lishers & Distributors.
83 More, D.R. (2008), The Novels on the Indian Partition. Jaipur: Shruti Publications.
84 Mukherjee, Meenakshi (ed.) (1999), Rushdie’s ‘Midnight’s Children’: A Book of Read-
ings. New Delhi: Pencraft International.
85 (2002), The Shadow Lines:: Educational Edition. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
86 Gaur, Rashmi (ed.) (2004), Bapsi Sidhwa’s ‘Ice-Candy-Man’: A Reader’s Companion.
New Delhi: asia book club.
Chapter 1
1
Wolpert, Stanley (2006). Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
2
Singh, Khushwant (1956; 1988), Train to Pakistan. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
3
The high point of Khushwant Singh’s journalistic career was his editorship of The Il-
lustrated Weekly of India, which became India’s pre-eminent newsweekly during his
tenure in the 1970s.
4
Khushwant Singh started writing history long before he attempted fiction; and at reg-
ular intervals over five decades, has written on various facets of the history of the
NOTES
145

Punjab, and especially, that of his own community, the Sikhs. His most notable
works as a historian include – A History of the Sikhs 1469-1964, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1963; Ranjit Singh: Maharajah of the Punjab 1780-1839, London: Al-
len and Unwin, 1963; Tragedy of the Punjab: Operation Bluestar and After, with Kuldip
Nayar, New Delhi: Vision, 1984; A History of the Sikhs: 1469-1838, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2004; A History of the Sikhs: 1839-2004, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2005.
5
As Editor-in-chief of Penguin India, Khushwant Singh actively encouraged and pro-
moted fresh talent in Indian-English writing; and over the last few decades, Indian-
English fiction has become one of the hallmarks of Penguin publishing in India.
6
Singh, Khushwant (1959; 1997), I Shall Not Hear the Nightingale. New Delhi: Ravi
Dayal.
7
Singh, Khushwant (1990), Delhi: A Novel. New Delhi: Penguin Books India.
8
Singh, Khushwant (1999), The Company of Women. New Delhi: Viking Press.
9
Singh, Khushwant (2004), Burial at Sea. New Delhi: Penguin Viking.
10 Rushdie said this in an interview with Salil Tripathi for Celebrity (May 1983). This in-
terview has been anthologized in Reder, Michael R. (ed.) (2000), Conversations with
Salman Rushdie (Literary Conversations Series), 25. Jackson: University Press of Mis-
sissippi.
11
Ghosh paid this tribute to Khushwant Singh when the latter launched his novel, The
Hungry Tide, in New Delhi in July 2004. Source: http://kitabkhana.blogspot.com/
2004/08/amitav-in-dilli.html
12
Iyengar, K.R. Srinivasa (1962; 1996), Indian Writing in English. New Delhi: Sterling.
13
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2005), The Twice-born Fiction: Themes and Techniques of In-
dian Novels in English. New Delhi: Pencraft International.
14
Walsh, William (1990), Indian Writing in English. London & New York: Longman.
15
Brians, Paul (2003), Modern South Asian Literature in English (‘Literature as Windows
to World Cultures’ Series). London & Westport: Greenwood Press.
16 Singh, Khushwant (2002), Truth, Love & a Little Malice: An Autobiography. New Delhi:
Ravi Dayal Publisher & Penguin Books India.
17
Ibid., p. 102.
18
Ibid., p. 108.
19 Iyengar, K.R. Srinivasa (1962; 1996), Indian Writing in English, op.cit. 502.
20 Two of these three books are collections of Urdu and Hindi short stories of the Parti-
tion in English translation – Bhalla, Alok (ed.) (1994), Stories about the Partition of In-
dia. New Delhi: Harper Collins India; and Memon, M.U. (ed. & tr.) (1998), An Epic
Unwritten. New Delhi: Penguin India. The third – Ravikant & Tarun K. Saint (eds.)
(2005), Translating Partition. New Delhi: Katha – is another such selection with criti-
cal commentary on the included stories and a few relevant essays/articles as an addi-
tional feature.
21
All three stories can be found in Alok Bhalla’s book mentioned above.
22 Singh, Khushwant (1956; 1988), Train to Pakistan, 91-92. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal. All
page references to the text are from this edition, and will subsequently be marked in
parentheses.
23
The confusion in the village is caused by the anomaly of the name ‘Iqbal’, which
could easily be either Muslim or Sikh or Hindu (Iqbal Khan or Iqbal Singh or Iqbal
Chand). One is reminded here of Raja Choudhury in Aparna Sen’s film Mr & Mrs
Iyer (2004), who is first mistaken as Hindu by his co-traveller, Mrs Iyer, because of
his name and then forced to become Mr Iyer when a bunch of Hindu fanatics attack
their bus. He muses on the irony of religious identity in India towards the end of the
film, recalling, that way back in 1984 in Calcutta, he had felt grateful for being a
146
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Muslim when, in front of his own eyes, he had seen a Sikh shopkeeper being mur-
dered.
24 Gandhi seems to have believed in the same logic. In chapter XVIII of Hind Swaraj
(1907; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004) entitled ‘Education’, the editor
asks his reader, ‘What do you propose to do by giving him [the Indian peasant] a
knowledge of letters? Will you add [by that means] an inch to his happiness?’ (p.
101).
25
Iyengar, K.R. Srinivasa (1962; 1996), Indian Writing in English, op. cit. 501.
26 Rushdie, Salman & Elizabeth West (eds.) (1997), The Vintage Book of Indian Writing
in English, 237-49. London: Vintage.
27 Azad, Maulana Abul Kalam (1958; 1988), India Wins Freedom, p. 208. New Delhi:
Orient Longman.
28 Modern social historians have indicated as much. See, for instance, Gyanendra Pan-
dey’s examination of the very crucial role played by rumours during the Partition
riots of 1947 in the Punjab in Remembering Partition: Violence, Nationalism & History
in India (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
29 Kaul, Suvir (ed.) (2001), The Partitions of Memory: The Afterlife of the Division of India,
18. New Delhi: Permanent Black.
30 Naik, M.K. (2004), A History of Indian English Literature, 220. New Delhi: Sahitya
Academy.
31
Kaul, Suvir (ed.) (2001), The Partitions of Memory: The Afterlife of the Division of India,
op.cit. p. 15.
32
Malgonkar, Manohar (1964), A Bend in the Ganges. London: Pan Books Ltd.
33
Padmanabhan, A. (2002), The Fictional World of Manohar Malgonkar, 2. New Delhi:
Atlantic Publishers.
34 Ibid., p. 4.
35
It is a rather dismissive statement in an otherwise perceptive chapter, entitled ‘The
Making of a Nation’ (2005), in The Twice-born Fiction: Themes and Techniques of the In-
dian Novel in English, 65. New Delhi: Pencraft International.
36 Dayananda, James Y. (1974), Manohar Malgonkar. Boston: Twayne Publishers.
37
Padmanabhan, A. The Fictional World of Manohar Malgonkar, op.cit. p. 38.
38 Bhattacharya, Shankar (1994), Manohar Malgonkar: A Study of His Mind & Art. New
Delhi: Creative Books.
39 Two other common assumptions in post-colonial theory is that post-colonial litera-
tures (invariably) attempt to subvert the colonizer’s language and utilize native narra-
tive techniques. See Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths & Helen Tiffin (eds.) (1989), The
Empire Writes Back: Theory and practice in post-colonial literatures. New York: Routle-
dge. None of the above is, however, applicable to A Bend in the Ganges.
40 Bose, Sugata & Ayesha Jalal (2004), Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political
Economy, 135. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
41
Malgonkar, Manohar (1964), A Bend in the Ganges. London: Pan Books Ltd. All page
references to the text are from this edition, and will subsequently be marked in par-
entheses.
42 According to Muhirul Hasan, a splendid opportunity for building a united India was
lost in 1927-1928. He analyzes this at length in Nationalism and Communal Politics in
India 1916-1928. (New Delhi, 1979). A detailed discussion of the reasons behind the
failure of this particular initiative can also be found in Prof. Rajat Kanta Ray’s article
‘League, Congressmen and the British: The Pakistan Movement of 1940-47’, pub-
lished in The Indian Historical Review (1995, 127-146).
43 Malgonkar traces the history of communalism in India (in the final decades of the
British rule) in just the way that the historian Bipan Chandra has analyzed this phe-
nomenon in three successive chapters in his book India’s Struggle for Independence:
NOTES
147

1857-1947 (New Delhi: Penguin Books, 1999). The respective chapters of the book
are: ‘The Rise and Growth of Communalism’ (398-413), ‘Communalism - The Liberal
Phase’ (414-427), and ‘Jinnah, Golwalkar and Extreme Communalism’ (428-442).
44 Malgonkar himself gives a very different picture of the communal mentality of those
in the armed forces in 1947 (and immediately thereafter) in Distant Drum (1960). In
this novel, he shows how the soldiers of the Indian army were the only ones who
stayed above sectarian prejudices/bias during the 1947 holocaust, and it was largely
because of this component in the defence forces that the unprecedented riots of 1947
could be tackled to some degree. While Malgonkar focuses on the city of Delhi in
Distant Drum, Chaman Nahal shows a similar thing happening in the town of Sialkot
in his novel Azadi (1975; New Delhi: Penguin Books, 2001).
45 See Chapter 15 of Bipan Chandra’s India’s Struggle for Independence: 1857-1947.
46 Andamans/Rangoon/Burma – A Bend in the Ganges is the only Indian-English novel
to deal with these other theatres of the Second World War in Asia. In most works of
fiction, it is usually only kept in the background and never allowed to come alive (as
it were).
47 The Bombay dock explosion, too, is another event of the 1940s that does not find a
place in any other novel dealing with this period.
48 It is important to note that the Second World War and its effects on the lives of In-
dians are referred to in all of Malgonkar’s novels. Most of the battles in his fictional
world are, in fact, fought at this time. In Princes (London: Viking Press, 1963), Ab-
hayraj’s well-ordered life turns topsy-turvy during the War; in Combat of Shadows
(1962), Henry Winton’s relationship with Sir Jeffrey Dart is broken as the latter with-
holds the former’s application for Commission; while it is as a result of the Japanese
attack on the Andamans that Gian Talwar and Debi Dayal are able to come out of
their imprisonment in A Bend in the Ganges.
49 Kakkar, Sudhir (2004), Mira & the Mahatma. New Delhi: Penguin/Viking. In this
context, one may also cite R.K. Narayan’s Waiting for the Mahatma (1955; Mysore: In-
dian Thought Publications, 1997) which is a humorous take on the Gandhian move-
ment. It is Narayan’s contention here that not everyone who joined the movement
was high on ideology or avowed patriots. His protagonist, Sriram, for example, is a
good-for-nothing twenty-year old who joins the Satyagraha movement not out of poli-
tical idealism but only for the love of a girl, Bharati (a committed Gandhian), who
had come to Malgudi as part of the Mahatma’s entourage. She initiates Sriram into
the movement with great zeal but what she does not understand is that, for him,
joining the Mahatma’s mission is simply the surest means to his beloved’s heart, the
only way to gain her esteem and approval; her acceptance. In fact, till the very end,
Bharati remains the goal towards which his life moves. In this novel, Narayan thus
fundamentally questions the supposedly pervasive and compelling magnetism of the
Mahatma, his hold on the masses. And this is exactly what is so unusual and unique
about the work. Contrary to popular opinion, we are given the impression that Gand-
hi’s tenets perhaps seldom percolated down to the grassroots level. (There are ample
examples in the novel to support this thesis.)
50 There is an almost identical passage in Amitav Ghosh’s cyber correspondence with
Dipesh Chakraborty centering round the latter’s book Provincializing Europe: Histori-
cal Thought and Postcolonial Difference (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000),
from December 14-23, 2000, that was posted on Ghosh’s official website, www.ami-
tavghosh.com. Speaking about the racial attitude of the British in the conduct of its
colonies, Ghosh says:
Race (…) was the foundational social fact of the post-1857 Empire – an idea em-
bedded more in practice than in discourse – and it grew ever stronger from the
mid-19th century onward. I was struck by this when I was researching the British
148
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

response to the Japanese invasion of Malaya and Burma. In Malaya, while evacuat-
ing their government from the north, they stuck absolutely resolutely to the princi-
ples of race: trains were forbidden to transport ‘non-Europeans’ (…) Similarly, in
Northern Burma in 1942, in a moment of total crisis with hundreds of thousands
of civilians heading for the mountains, the British still found time to set up ‘white’
and ‘black’ evacuation routes.
After giving these Second World War examples, Ghosh concludes:
‘Race was much more than just a tool of Empire: it was (in the Kantian sense) one
of the foundational categories of thought that made other perceptions possible.’
51
Source: http://audiopoetry.wordpress.com/category/poet/bismil-azimabadi/
For the English translation, I would like to thank my friend Sangita Parikh. This
poem has been used to marvellous effect by the Indian director Rakesh Omprakash
Mehra in his Hindi film Rang de Basanti (2006) with the Indian superstar Aamir
Khan in a leading role. The film is a modern take on the story of the Punjabi revolu-
tionary terrorists of the early 1930s led by the legendary Bhagat Singh. Mehra’s work
was one of the best among a spate of Hindi films (all released within a year) on the
charismatic young revolutionary who died a martyr to his cause.
52
Nicholas Mansergh, during his visit to India at that time, noted that:
By not a few wealthy Hindus it was felt that Gandhi’s doctrine had served its day.
Warm though the tribute be to the unique contribution which Gandhi had made
to the Indian national movement, it was felt the time had now come when he
should stand aside. There was no longer, so it was argued, any alternative to fight-
ing it out because by this means alone could the partition of India be averted.
Mansergh, Nicholas (1999), ‘The Last Days of British Rule in India: Some Personal
Impressions’, in Diana Mansergh (ed.) Independence Years: The Selected Indian and
Commonwealth Papers of Nicholas Mansergh, 55.
53
Padmanabhan, A. (2002), The Fictional World of Manohar Malgonkar, op.cit. 110.
54 Chandra, Bipan (1999), India’s Struggle for Independence, op.cit. p. 259.
Chandra, however, adds that:
(…) all the same, they made an abiding contribution to the national freedom move-
ment. Their deep patriotism, courage and determination, and sense of sacrifice
stirred the Indian people. They helped spread nationalist consciousness in the
land; and in northern India the spread of socialist consciousness owed a lot to
them.
55
Bhattacharya, Shankar (1994), Manohar Malgonkar: A Study of His Mind & Art, op.cit.
p. 153.
56 Khushwant Singh’s comment is self-explanatory: ‘Malgonkar, who is more easily
readable than any other Indian, may (…) survive [till 2000] with A Bend in the
Ganges.’ Cited in G.S. Amur’s Manohar Malgonkar (p. 148). R.K. Narayan too is on re-
cord as having praised Malgonkar, for as Shankar Bhattacharya tells us in the ‘Intro-
duction’ to his book, Manohar Malgonkar: A Study of His Mind & Art, ‘R.K. Narayan,
for instance, for whom Malgonkar himself has the deepest of admiration, is reported
to have said that Malgonkar is his favourite novelist in English.’ (p. 3)
Chapter 2
1
Sidhwa, Bapsi (1989), Ice-Candy-Man. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
2
Rushdie, Salman & Elizabeth West (eds.) (1997), The Vintage Book of Indian Writing
in English. London: Vintage.
3
Laurel Graeber, ‘The Seeds of Partition’, New York Times, 6 October 1991.
NOTES
149

4
Montenegro, David (1991), Points of Departure: International Writers on Writing & Poli-
tics. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
5
‘Writer-in-Residence Bapsi Sidhwa Takes Laughter Seriously.’ (28 March 1997) On-
line. The College Street Journal. Internet. 2 April 1997. [http://www.mtholyoke.edu/of-
fices/comm/csj/970328/sidhwa.html]
6
Sidhwa, Bapsi (1989), Ice-Candy-Man. New Delhi: Penguin Books. All page refer-
ences to the text are from this edition, and will subsequently be marked in parenth-
eses.
7
Bharucha, Nilufer (1994), ‘The Parsi Voice in Recent Indian English Fiction’, in Vilas
Sarang & Nilufer Bharucha (eds.), Indian English Fiction 1980-90, 81. New Delhi.
8
Zaman, Niaz (2004), ‘Bapsi Sidhwa: “I am Pakistani”’, in Rashmi Gaur (ed.), Bapsi
Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy Man: A Reader’s Companion, 98. New Delhi: asia book club.
9
In an informal chat I had with the author on 5 October 2005 at Calcutta’s Oxford
Bookstore (after the launch of a Penguin book that she had edited – City of Sin and
Splendour: writings on Lahore), she herself told me that to date, her personal favourite
among her own novels is The Crow-Eaters.
10 Bharucha, Nilufer (1994), ‘The Parsi Voice in Recent Indian English Fiction’, in Vilas
Sarang & Nilufer Bharucha (eds.), Indian English Fiction 1980-90, op. cit. 81.
11
Cited in Kapadia, Novy (2004), ‘Communal Frenzy and Partition: Bapsi Sidhwa, Attia
Hosain and Amitav Ghosh’, in Rashmi Gaur (ed.), Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man: A
Reader’s Companion, op. cit. 90.
12
For a historical attestation of this fact, see Pandey, Gyanendra (2000), Memory, His-
tory and the Question of Violence: Reflections on the Reconstruction of Partition, 45. Cal-
cutta: Centre for Studies in Social Sciences. Pandey quotes here a ‘letter written a
fortnight after the official Partition of India by a Muslim subaltern (non-commis-
sioned-officer) to a fellow-villager or kinsman, about his platoon’s “destruction” of
Hindus and Sikhs in the villages of the Gurdaspur region.’ It goes as follows:
Whosoever from the Hindus and Sikhs came in front of us, were killed. Not only
that, we got them to come out of their houses and ruthlessly killed them and dis-
graced their womenfolk. Many women agreed to come with us and wished us to
take them, but we were out for revenge (…) this Indian government cannot last
much longer. We will very soon conquer this and on the whole of India the flag of
Pakistan will fly.
13
Sudhir Kakkar, in his exploration of how communities fantasize about violence, says
that sexual mutilation figures prominently in this, and that the castration of males
and the amputation of breasts ‘incorporate the (more or less conscious) wish to wipe
the enemy off the face of the earth by eliminating the means of reproduction and
nurturing.’ Cited in Menon, Ritu & Kamla Bhasin (2000), Borders & Boundaries: Wo-
men in India’s Partition, 44. New Delhi: Kali for Women.
14
Kudchedkar, Shirin L. (1994), ‘The Second Coming: Novels of the Partition,’ in Vilas
Sarang & Nilufer Bharucha (eds.), Indian-English Fiction 1980-90: An Assessment, op.
cit. 62.
15
It may be noted here that it is after marrying Ayah that Ice-candy-man undergoes his
most incredible transformation in the novel – when he plays out the role of a poet
and spurned lover to perfection. It is remarkable the way this happens, even after we
take into account Ice-candy man’s protean character, his marvellous ability to change
his image (popsicle-man, birdman, sufi, government house servant, rogue, raconteur)
at the drop of a hat to suit his purpose. As Lenny says at the beginning of the con-
frontation scene between the Ice-candy man and Godmother in Chapter 29 of the
novel:
We absorb his incredible transformation. He has changed from a chest-thrusting
paan-spitting and strutting goonda into a spitless poet. His narrow hawkish face,
150
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

as if recast in a different mould, has softened into a sensual oval. He is thinner,
softer, droopier; his stream of brash talk replaced by a canny silence. No wonder I
didn’t recognize him in the taxi.
16 Kudchedkar, Shirin L. (1994), ‘The Second Coming: Novels of the Partition,’ in Vilas
Sarang & Nilufer Bharucha (eds.), Indian-English Fiction 1980-90: An Assessment, op.
cit. 69.
17
Brians, Paul (2003), Modern South Asian Literature in English (‘Literature as Windows
to World Cultures’ Series), 106. London & Westport: Greenwood Press.
18
For a discussion of this aspect of the film, see Raisinghani, Neelam (2007),
‘Wounded India in Deepa Mehta’s 1947: Earth’, in Jasbir Jain (ed.), Films, Literature &
Culture: Deepa Mehta’s Elements Trilogy, 156-67. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
19 Bahri, Deepika (2008), ‘Telling Tales: Women and the trauma of partition in Sidh-
wa’s Cracking India’, in Gyanesh Kudaisya & Tai Yong Tan (eds.), Partition and Post-
Colonial South Asia: A Reader, Vol. II, 98. London & New York: Routledge.
20 Menon, Ritu & Kamla Bhasin (1998), Borders & Boundaries: Women in India’s Parti-
tion, 43. New Delhi: Kali for Women.
21
Butalia, Urvashi (1998), The Other Side of Silence: Voices from India’s Partition. New
Delhi: Viking.
22 Ranna’s Story – It was inspired by a true incident about which Sidhwa has written in
‘New Neighbours’. (11 August 1997) http://www.pathfinder.com/time/magazine/
1997/int/970811/spl.neighbors.html
23
See Sapra, Rahul (2004), ‘A Postcolonial Appraisal of Sidhwa’s Fiction’, in Rashmi
Gaur (ed.), Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man: A Reader’s Companion, op. cit. 200.
24 Mansergh, Diana (ed.) (1999), Independence Years: The Selected Indian and Common-
wealth Papers of Nicholas Mansergh, 56. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
25
Lappierre, Dominique & Larry Collins (1976), Freedom at Midnight, 323. New Delhi:
Vikas Publishing House Pvt. Ltd.
26 Jeffrey, Robin. ‘The Punjab Boundary Force and the Problem of Order, August 1947,’
Modern Asian Studies, Vol. 8, No. 4, 1974.
27 Guha, Ramachandra (2007), India After Gandhi: The History of the World’s Largest De-
mocracy, 29. New York: Harper Collins.
28 Talbot, Ian (1999), ‘Literature and the Human Drama of the 1947 Partition’, in Ian
Talbot & Gurharpal Singh (eds.), Region & Partition: Bengal, Punjab and the Partition
of the Subcontinent, 231. Karachi: Oxford University Press.
29 Sahni, Bhisham (1974), Tamas. (Translated by Jai Ratan) New Delhi: Penguin, 1988.
30 Talbot, Ian (1999), ‘Literature and the Human Drama of the 1947 Partition’, in Ian
Talbot & Gurharpal Singh (eds.), Region & Partition: Bengal, Punjab and the Partition
of the Subcontinent, 231. Karachi: Oxford University Press.
31
Menon and Bhasin’s pioneering study offers a detailed critique of the Indian and Pa-
kistani governments’ policies regarding the recovery and rehabilitation of abducted
women on both sides of the border, and the manifold and unforeseen problems faced
by social workers while trying to implement them on the ground.
32
The point to note here is the fidelity to reality that Bapsi Sidhwa maintains in depict-
ing the behaviour of the Parsees in the novel. The sentiments and ideas of Colonel
Bharucha represent a prominent social code of behaviour amongst the Parsees. As a
minority community in India, they have always venerated loyalty. The ‘Jashan’ after
the Allied Victory in 1945 was no isolated incident. In much the same way, the Par-
see community in colonial India had previously also celebrated other events of impor-
tance of the British Empire. To cite a few:
On 16 July 1854, a jashan was performed where about 6,000 Zoroastrians offered
prayers for Britain during its war with Russia. As a mark of celebration, a mam-
moth jashan was organized on Queen Victoria’s Golden Jubilee on 16 February
NOTES
151

1887 and again on 20 June 1897 to commemorate her Diamond Jubilee.
The above list appears in Homi B. Dhalla’s ‘The Zoroastrian Moral Imperative: Its
Relevance in the Late 19th and Early 20th Centuries’, published in Delhi Parsi Anju-
man’s Dar-E-Meher silver jubilee celebrations souvenir, 1986. The quotation has been
cited by Niaz Zaman in ‘Bapsi Sidhwa: “I am Pakistani”’, in Rashmi Gaur (ed.), Bapsi
Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man: A Reader’s Companion, op. cit. 98.
33
Menon, Ritu & Kamla Bhasin (2000), Borders & Boundaries: Women in India’s Parti-
tion, op. cit. 140, 147.
34 Going against the stridently critical stance of most historians and creative writers re-
garding the inadequacy/inefficiency of the new governments of both India and Paki-
stan to tackle the manifold human problems as a consequence of the Partition, Syed
Sikander Mehdi, in an unusual article, gives a very sympathetic account of the var-
ious measures undertaken by these governments (individually and jointly) to con-
front and contain the crisis of 1947. In the said article, he argues:
Another aspect [of the Partition of 1947] begging for special mention is the fact
that both the governments of India and Pakistan, headed respectively by Jawaharlal
Nehru and Liaquat Ali Khan, did work very hard to control post-Partition commu-
nal violence, and extensively co-operated with each other to protect human lives,
provide shelter to the threatened, arrange rail and road transports with escorts to
hundreds of thousands of Muslims, Sikhs, and Hindus migrating from India to
Pakistan and from Pakistan to India. The officials often organized joint patrolling
in the most sensitive areas.
Mehdi, Syed Sikander (2003), ‘Refugee Memory in India and Pakistan’, in Ghislaine
Glasson Deschaumes & Rada Ivekovic (eds.) (2003), Divided Countries, Separated Ci-
ties: The Modern Legacy of Partition, 91. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
35
Bhalla, Alok (2006), Partition Dialogues: Memories of a Lost Home, 233. New Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
36 Incidentally, this is what the film version of the novel, 1947: Earth (Director: Deepa
Mehta. Producer: Jhamu Sughand, 1999) completely misses out on, for it ends with
Ayah’s abduction, thus leaving out the most unique aspect of the book. It even ex-
cludes such an important character as Godmother. In the informal chat that I had
with the author on 5 October 2005, at Calcutta’s Oxford Bookstore (mentioned earlier
in note 9), I asked her whether she was satisfied with the film’s interpretation of her
novel. She replied that after seeing what had been done to Khushwant Singh’s Train
to Pakistan (she was referring to Pamela Rooks 1997 film), she felt ‘grateful’ for the
way Deepa Mehta handled her book.
37
In their book, Ritu Menon and Kamla Bhasin especially cite the case of Begum An-
ees Qidwai (sister-in-law of the UP Congress leader Rafi Ahmed Qidwai). Qidwai
wrote a book on her experiences, Azadi ki Chhaon Mein (Delhi: 1990), that remain a
prime source for scholars working on the history of those times.
38 There seems to be a certain confusion about the narrative voice in the novel. Paul
Brians aptly summarizes it thus:
Many readers have felt that Lenny, the little girl in the book, is too knowing, dis-
playing at times a distinctly adult understanding of her surroundings. Others ar-
gue that we are supposed to understand there is a second narrative voice in the
novel, the adult Lenny, commenting on matters she had not understood as a child.
Brians, Paul (2003), Modern South Asian Literature in English (‘Literature as Windows
to World Cultures’ Series), 104. London & Westport: Greenwood Press.
Sidhwa herself seems to corroborate the latter view in a conversation with Alok
Bhalla:
The novel tries to capture a child’s memories, but is informed by an adult con-
sciousness. There is a sophisticated adult’s interpretation of childhood experiences.
152
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Bhalla, Alok (2006), Partition Dialogues: Memories of a Lost Home, 232. New Delhi:
Oxford University Press.
39 Desai, Anita (1980), Clear Light of Day. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
40 Narayan, Shyamala A. & Jon Mee (2006), ‘Novelists of the 1950s and 1960s’, in Ar-
vind Krishna Mehrotra (ed.), An Illustrated History of Indian Literature in English, 318-
336. New Delhi: Permenant Black.
41
Naikar, Basavaraj, ‘The Paradox of Time in Clear Light of Day’, in Suman Bala & D.K.
Pabby (eds.) The Fiction of Anita Desai – Volume II, 231-32. New Delhi: Khosla Pub-
lishing House.
42 Chakravertty, Neeru, ‘Ambivalence of Choice: A Study of Where Shall we go This Sum-
mer, Fire on the Mountain and Clear Light of Day’, in (ed.) Quest for Self-fulfilment in
the Novels of Anita Desai, 103-4. New Delhi: Khosla Publishing House.
43 Walsh, William (1990), Indian Writing in English, 111. London & New York: Long-
man.
44 Rushdie, Salman (1991), ‘Anita Desai’, Imaginary Homelands: Essays and Criticism
1981-91, 71. London: Granta Books.
45 For a fuller discussion of this point, see Pathak, R.S. (1989), ‘The Alienated Self in
the Novels of Anita Desai’, in R.K. Dhawan (ed.) The Fiction of Anita Desai, New Del-
hi: Prestige.
46 Cited in Singh, R.A., ‘Clear Light of Day: A Four-Dimensional Novel’, in Suman Bala
& D.K. Pabby (eds.) The Fiction of Anita Desai – Volume II, 9-10. New Delhi: Khosla
Publishing House.
47 In an interview Desai said that ‘time is presented as the fourth dimension of human
existence’ in the novel, and went on to add that Clear Light of Day is ‘about time as a
destroyer, as a preserver and about what the passage of time does to people.’
48 Desai, Anita (1980), Clear Light of Day, 47. New Delhi: Penguin Books. All page refer-
ences to the text are from this edition, and will subsequently be marked in parenth-
eses.
49 Uniyal, Rani, The Fiction of Margaret Drabble and Anita Desai: Women & Landscape,
207. New Delhi: Creative Books.
50 Beauvoir, Simone de (1949; 1997), The Second Sex. London: Vintage.
51
Karuna Chanana, ‘Partition and Family Strategies: Gender Educational Linkages
among Punjabi Women in Delhi’, Economic and Political Weekly. Vol. XXVIII. No. 17.
24 April 1993. Cited in Kumar, Sukrita Paul (2004), Narrating Partition: Texts, Inter-
pretations, Ideas, 101. New Delhi: Indialog Publications Pvt. Ltd.
52
See, for example, Nicholas Mansergh’s essay, ‘The Last Days of British Rule in India:
Some Personal Impressions’, in Diana Mansergh (ed.) Independence Years: The Se-
lected Indian and Commonwealth Papers of Nicholas Mansergh, op. cit. 51-70.
53
Nabar, Vrinda. ‘The Four-Dimensional Reality: Anita Desai’s Clear Light of Day’, 107.
In her essay, Nabar goes on to quote Desai herself on this issue, who, while gra-
ciously admitting her limitations as a novelist, defends herself by saying: ‘I do restrict
myself to writing about people and situations I know or can understand (…) Lack of
experience may be a handicap but lack of sensitivity, thought, intelligence or memory
would be far greater ones.’
54 A comparable example would be Nayantara Sahgal’s short-story ‘Martand’. (Contem-
porary Indian Short Stories in English, compiled by Shiv Kumar, New Delhi: Sahitya
Academi, 2004.) ‘Martand’ is essentially about love and loss at a time of intense poli-
tical crisis. The protagonist (who is never named) is a woman who finds herself
caught up in a triangular relationship with her husband Naresh (a civil servant) on
the one hand, and a doctor, Martand, on the other. The love story is a poignant one.
In a few deft strokes, Sahgal successfully portrays the agony of a divided heart as also
the beauty of the feeling of love itself. But the singular feature for which ‘Martand’
NOTES
153

stands out is the way in which it retells the Partition story from the official point of
view. In fact, ‘Martand’ can be usefully discussed keeping Anita Desai’s narrative in
mind; and remembering that, while Desai in Clear Light of Day shows how even com-
mon people who were not victimized by communal violence were affected by the Par-
tition, Sahgal actually goes a step further. She gives us, if we may put it like this, the
official side of things. We see here the aftermath of the Partition – but from the other
side of violence. The focus of the story is not the millions of refugees who were dis-
placed by Partition, but the government officers who had to deal with them. And
‘Martand’ very effectively conveys their helplessness when faced with this unprece-
dented crisis – and their (untold) sacrifices.
Chapter 3
1
Rushdie, Salman (1980), Midnight’s Children. London: Jonathan Cape.
2
Bradbury also acclaimed the novel’s achievement in The Modern British Novel (Pen-
guin, 1994) as ‘a new start for the late-twentieth-century novel’.
3
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (ed.) (1999), Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children: A Book of Readings,
9. New Delhi: Pencraft International.
4
Ibid, p. 15.
5
In his essay, ‘Salman the Funtoosh: Magic Bilingualism in Midnight’s Children’ (in
Meenakshi Mukherjee ed. Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children: A Book of Readings), Harish
Trivedi suggests that in Midnight’s Children, Rushdie, far from giving voice to a conti-
nent, actually continues speaking in the master’s voice. To quote him, ‘To use the
master’s language is immitigably to speak in the master’s voice.’ In this essay, Trivedi
basically examines the alleged subversiveness of Rushdie’s linguistic agenda, and
questions the author’s claim that ‘conquering’ the English language through infiltra-
tion is a strategic step towards decolonization.
6
Walsh, William (1990), Indian Writing in English, 122. London & New York: Long-
man.
7
Brennan, Timothy (1989), Salman Rushdie and the Third World: Myths of the Nation.
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
8
Harrison, James (1992), Salman Rushdie. New York: Twayne.
9
Cundy, Catherine (1997), Salman Rushdie. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
10 Rushdie, Salman (2003), ‘Adapting Midnight’s Children’, Step Across This Line: Col-
lected Non-Fiction 1992-2002, 79. London: Vintage.
11
Brennan, Timothy (1989), Salman Rushdie and the Third World: Myths of the Nation,
83. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
12
Ibid., 84.
13
Interview given to Salil Tripathi, for Celebrity (India) in May 1983. Reprinted by per-
mission of Salil Tripathi, in Reder, Michael R. (ed.) (2000), Conversations with Salman
Rushdie, 25. Jackson: United Press of Mississippi.
14
Rushdie, Salman (1980), Midnight’s Children, 121. London: Jonathan Cape. All page
references to the text are from this edition, and will subsequently be marked in par-
entheses.
15
Kortenaar, Neil Ten (1999), ‘Midnight’s Children and the Allegory of History’, in Mee-
nakshi Mukherjee (ed.), Midnight’s Children: A Book of Readings, op. cit. 38.
16 Montefiore, Simon Sebag (ed.) (2005), Speeches that Changed the World: The words
and stories of the moments that made history, 120. London: Quercus.
17
Interview given to Chandrabhanu Pattanayak, for The Literary Criterion (India) 18.3
(1983): 19-22. Reprinted by permission, in Reder, Michael R. (ed.) (2000), Conversa-
tions with Salman Rushdie, 19. Jackson: United Press of Mississippi.
154
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

18
Bhattacharya, Nandini (2005), A Love Song to our Mongrel Selves: Problematics of Iden-
tity in the Novels of Salman Rushdie, 219. New Delhi: Worldview.
19 The relevant part of Nehru’s speech goes:
A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the
old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed,
finds utterance.
20 According to Benedict Anderson (in Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin
and Spread of Nationalism, London: Verso, 1983), the nation
(…) is imagined because the members of even the smallest nation will never know
most of their fellow members, meet them, or even hear of them, yet in the minds
of each lives the image of their communion. (p. 6)
21
For a discussion of this aspect of Rushdie’s work (and also its connection with Homi
Bhabha’s theorizations), see Trivedi, Harish (2000), ‘Post-Colonial Hybridity: Mid-
night’s Children’, in Harish Trivedi & Richard Allen (eds.), Literature & Nation: Britain
& India 1800-1990, 161. New York: Routledge, in association with The Open Univer-
sity.
22 Rushdie, Salman (1991), ‘The Riddle of Midnight: India, August 1987’, Imaginary
Homelands: Essays and Criticism 1981-91, op.cit. p. 27.
23
Rushdie, Salman (2003), ‘India’s Fiftieth Anniversary’, Step Across This Line: Collected
Non-Fiction 1992-2002, op.cit. p. 178.
24 Rushdie, Salman. ‘A Dream of Glorious Return’, Step Across This Line: Collected Non-
Fiction 1992-2002, op.cit. p. 195.
25
Rushdie, Salman (2003), ‘India’s Fiftieth Anniversary’, Step Across This Line: Collected
Non-Fiction 1992-2002, op.cit. p. 176.
26 Pakistan’s politicians, in later years, tried to stifle the truth about the real reasons be-
hind the Bangladesh War. A glaring example of such mentality can be found in Bena-
zir Bhutto’s autobiography, Daughter of the East, where (according to Rushdie’s review
of the book in Imaginary Homelands, p. 57) ‘she falsifies Bhutto’s role in the events
leading to the secession of Bangladesh to a quite scandalous degree (…) [and] places
the blame firmly on the shoulders of Sheikh Mujib, the leader of the then East Pakis-
tani Awami League’.
27 When it comes to the question of the migration of refugees on the subcontinent, it is
important to remember that though both Punjab and Bengal were partitioned in
1947, they traversed very different trajectories as far as the refugee movement is con-
cerned. While the Punjab Partition was a one-time event that was marked by a two-
way exodus, the Partition of Bengal turned out to be a continuing process, with mi-
gration predominantly happening only in one direction – i.e. from East to West Ben-
gal. At the time of the Bangladeshi War of Independence, however, this migration of
refugees (on the eastern border of India) was at an all-time high.
28 Rushdie makes this point on page 420 of the novel where he writes:
Religion was the glue of Pakistan, holding the halves together; just as conscious-
ness, the awareness of oneself as a homogenous entity in time, a blend of past and
present, is the glue of personality, holding together our then and our now.
29 ‘CUTIA’ is a most ingenious acronym coined by Rushdie, as the word in Hindi
means ‘bitch’.
30 Ghosh, Amitav (1986), The Circle of Reason. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
31
van Schendel, Willem (2009), A History of Bangladesh. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
32
For the general’s own version of the events of 1971, see Niazi, Lt-Gen. (R) A.A.K.
(1998), The Betrayal of East Pakistan. USA: Oxford University Press.
33
The available facts and figures regarding the massacre at Jallianwalabagh are not uni-
form. According to Dominique Lappierre and Larry Collins in Freedom at Midnight
NOTES
155

(New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., 1976), for instance, ‘For twenty full
minutes, while the trapped Indians screamed for mercy, the soldiers fired. They fired
1650 rounds. Their bullets killed or wounded 1516 people.’ (p. 47) Krishna Dutta, in
Calcutta: A Cultural and Literary History (New Delhi: Lotus/Roli, 2005), however,
avers that Dyer’s orders on that April day in 1919 ended up ‘(…) killing some 350 and
wounding 1,200 others.’ (p. 137).
34 The idea that religion is less cohesive a force than culture seems to be a liberal-Mus-
lim perception. Maulana Azad, for instance, wrote in his India Wins Freedom (1959;
New Delhi: Orient Longman, 1999) that the Partition of 1947 (on the basis of reli-
gion) was a ‘fraud that had been perpetrated upon the nation.’ (p. 230)
35
A very detailed discussion of the history of the Language Movement in East Pakistan
can be found in Chapter 7 (‘Bengali Or Urdu, 1947-54’) of Part II (‘Two Bengals: A
Split Family’) of Nitish Sengupta’s Bengal Divided: The Unmaking of a Nation, New
Delhi: Penguin/Viking, 2007.
36 Bipan Chandra, Mridula Mukherjee & Aditya Mukherjee (2000), India After Indepen-
dence: 1947-2000, 23. New Delhi: Penguin.
37
Ganguly, Sumit (2007), ‘The roots of religious violence in India, Pakistan, and Ban-
gladesh’, in Linell E. Cady & Sheldon W. Simon (eds.), Religion and Conflict in South
and Southeast Asia: Disrupting Violence, 71. London & New York: Routledge.
38 General Tiger Niazi, the commander of the Pakistan forces, surrendered to General
Jagjit Singh Aurora, the commander-in-chief of the joint forces of the Indian Army
and the Mukti Bahini, and not Sam Maneckshaw. This wrong fact is one among sev-
eral such mistakes (deliberate) in the novel.
39 There is a characteristic Rushdian irony here too – for quite astonishingly, the two
generals, both victor and vanquished, are shown as meeting in the theatre of war, not
with animosity but a kind of old-chum camaraderie and are depicted as speaking
nostalgically about their days in the erstwhile British Indian Army. Rushdie makes it
seem as if they would much rather have been in the same camp than heading oppos-
ing armies. This conversation between the two generals also reminds one of the two
friends in Manohar Malgonkar’s novel, Distant Drum – who (like Sam and the Tiger
in Rushdie’s novel) were once part of the British Indian army but found themselves
in opposite camps in the Indo-Pak war of 1965.
40 Gurnah, Abdulrazak (2008), ‘Themes and structures in Midnight’s Children’, in Ab-
dulrazak Gurnah (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Salman Rushdie, 102. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
41
Khan, Sorayya (2003; 2006), Noor. Wilmington: The Publishing Laboratory, Univer-
sity of North Carolina.
42 Cilano, Cara (2006), ‘Introduction’ to Sorayya Khan’s Noor, xx. Wilmington: The Pub-
lishing Laboratory, University of North Carolina.
43 Other Pakistani English novels to have engaged with the 1971 War (though with dif-
ferent emphases) are – Hamid, Mohsin (2000), Moth Smoke. New York: Picador; and
Shamsie, Kamila (2003), Kartography. New York: Harcourt.
Chapter 4
1
Ghosh, Amitav (1988), The Shadow Lines:. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
2
Conrad, Joseph (1917; 2007), The Shadow-Line. New York: Vintage.
3
Proust, Michel (1982), In Remembrance of Things Past. London: Vintage.
4
Ghosh, Amitav (2002), ‘The Greatest Sorrow: Times of Joy Recalled in Wretched-
ness’, in The Imam and the Indian: Prose Pieces, 314. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
156
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

5
Ghosh, Amitav (2002), ‘The Ghosts of Mrs. Gandhi’, in The Imam and the Indian:
Prose Pieces, 60-61. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
6
Hawley, John C. (2005), Amitav Ghosh (CIWE – Contemporary Indian Writers in
English Series), 8-9. New Delhi: Foundation Books.
7
Of the seventeen Indian-English novels that won the Sahitya Academy Award since it
was instituted in 1955, The Shadow Lines: has been one of the most popular till date,
second only to R.K. Narayan’s The Guide, which was the first Indian-English novel
ever to win the Award (in 1960).
8
It is interesting to note here that the plots of both Ice-Candy-Man and The Shadow
Lines: centre round an irrevocable loss – that of a parent figure/loved one by a child.
Tridib in The Shadow Lines is to the nameless protagonist of Ghosh’s novel what Ayah
is to Lenny in Ice-Candy-Man. The loss, in both cases, changes the protagonists’ lives
forever, and it is while coping with this loss that they both learn to come to terms
with themselves and their lives. Both actually grow up in the shadow of that loss.
9
Kundera, Milan (1978; 1996), The Book of Laughter and Forgetting. London: Faber &
Faber.
10 Hawley, John C. (2005), Amitav Ghosh (CIWE – Contemporary Indian Writers In
English Series), 8-9. New Delhi: Foundation Books.
11
Bartholomeo’s Atlas (and the story of Tristan) is what Tridib bequeaths to his nephew.
Tridib had himself described Tristan as ‘a man without a country who fell in love
with a woman across the seas’. This ‘very sad story’, which he relates one day to his
nephew and niece, could well have been the story of his and May’s relationship, as
his nephew realizes much later in his adult life. The Atlas and the Tristan story had
become an integral part of the narrator’s life after Tridib’s death, but it takes him a
long time to learn the lessons that they have to teach.
12
Ghosh, Amitav (2002), The Imam and the Indian: Prose Pieces. New Delhi: Ravi Day-
al.
13
Ghosh, Amitav (1992), In an Antique Land. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
14
Ghosh’s work clearly has a connection with Subaltern Studies. As Anshuman Mondal
has rightly pointed out in his monograph on the author,
Both dimensions of the Subaltern Studies project – its affirmation of the subaltern,
and its critique of prevailing conceptions of Indian nationhood – are clearly dis-
cernible in most of Ghosh’s work, and he has himself acknowledged that they
‘came out of a similar moment in the intellectual life of India and that’s really
been the connection.’ (2007: 27)
15
Ghosh, Amitav (1996), Dancing in Cambodia, At Large in Burma. New Delhi: Ravi
Dayal. One particular passage of the book eloquently sums up this nightmarish
phase of modern Burmese history:
It was in 1962 that General Ne Win, the man who would be Burma’s long time
dictator, seized power in a coup. Almost immediately, he slammed the shutters
and switched off the lights: Burma became the dark house of the neighbourhood,
huddled behind an impenetrable, overgrown fence (…) General Ne Win was able
to render his country invisible to both its neighbours and the world at large. (p.
66)
16 Ghosh, Amitav (2000), The Glass Palace. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal. Burma was one of
the major theatres of the Second World War in Asia, and one of Ghosh’s outstanding
achievements in this novel has been to bring alive the INA chapter of the Indian na-
tional movement in it. Incidentally, Ghosh rejected a nomination for the Common-
wealth Prize for Literature that he had won for this novel in 2000.
17
Ghosh, Amitav (1999), Countdown. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
18
Ghosh, Amitav (2004), The Hungry Tide. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
NOTES
157

19 In an interview with Sangitaa Advani (of the Sunday Times of India) on 11 February
2007, Ghosh admitted that – ‘One of the many continuous threads in my books is
the Bay of Bengal – the geology of it, the ecology, the climate, all interest me very
much’.
20 Ghosh, Amitav (2008), Sea of Poppies. London: John Murray. It may, however, be
noted here that the first novel to explore this silenced chapter in the history of British
Imperialism was Kunal Basu’s The Opium Clerk (New Delhi: Penguin, 2001). But
though the opium trade features in both novels, the thrust of their narratives are very
different.
21
It may be noted here that the Calcutta Ananda Bazar Patrika editions of 9 and 10
January 1964 do carry reports of communal violence in the two cities of Dhaka and
Calcutta, but it is difficult to make out from these reports whether the scale of vio-
lence was the same in both places across the border.
22 Gopal, Priyamvada (2004), ‘Amitav Ghosh’, in Jay Parini (ed.), World Writers Series,
142. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, Thomson Gale.
23
Rajan, Rajeshwari Sunder (2002), ‘The Division of Experience in The Shadow Lines:’,
in The Shadow Lines: Educational Edition, 296. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
24 Mee, Jon. ‘“The Burthen of the Mystery”: Imagination and Difference in The Shadow
Lines’, in Tabish Khair (ed.), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion, 106. New Delhi:
Permanant Black.
25
Tharoor, Shashi (2001), Riot. New Delhi: Penguin India.
26 Hawley, John C. (2005), Amitav Ghosh (CIWE – Contemporary Indian Writers In
English Series), op. cit. 139.
27 W.H. Auden, perhaps, best summed up the ironic role that Sir Cyril Radcliffe played
in the story of Britain’s final withdrawal from the subcontinent in his poem ‘Parti-
tion’, which runs in part:
Unbiased at least he was when he arrived on his mission
Having never set eyes on this land he was called to partition
Between two peoples fanatically at odds,
With their different diets and incompatible gods.
‘Time,’ they had briefed him in London, ‘is short.
It’s too late for mutual reconciliation or rational debate:
The only solution now lies in separation…,
He got down to work, to the task of settling the fate
The maps at his disposal were out of date
And the census returns almost certainly incorrect,
But there was no time to check them, no time to inspect
Contested areas…
But in seven weeks it was done, the frontiers decided.
A continent for better or worse divided.
Cited by Sugata Bose & Ayesha Jalal (2004), in Modern South Asia: History, Culture,
Political Economy, 165-166. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
28 There is a very poignant passage in Maulana Azad’s India Wins Freedom (1959; New
Delhi: Orient Longman, 1999), where Azad talks about his first encounter with the
dangerous doctrine of reprisals and hostages:
In the meeting of the AICC, the members from Sind opposed the resolution
(namely, the AICC official resolution on Partition, moved on 14th June, 1947) ve-
hemently. They were given all kinds of assurances. Though not on the public plat-
form, in private discussions they were told that if they suffered any disability or in-
dignity in Pakistan, India would retaliate on the Muslims in India.
When I first became aware of such suggestions, I was shocked. I immediately saw
that this was a dangerous sentiment and could have the most unfortunate and far-
158
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

reaching repercussions. It implied that partition was being accepted on the basis
that in both India and Pakistan, there would be hostages who would be held re-
sponsible for the security of the minority community in the other state. The idea
of retaliation as a method of assuring the rights of minorities seemed to me bar-
barous. Later events proved how justified my apprehensions were. The river of
blood which flowed after partition on both sides of the new frontier grew out of
this sentiment of hostages and retaliation. (p. 216)
Azad’s eloquent lament of such a doctrine was written soon after the Partition. What
he did not know then (and could not have foreseen) was that this doctrine would be-
come an almost permanent feature of subcontinental politics for the next fifty years.
29 For a comprehensive history of the concept of ‘Nationalism’, see Nationalism (Oxford
Readers Series), edited by John Hutchinson & Anthony D. Smith (Oxford University
Press: 1994).
30 Kaul, Suvir (2002), ‘Separation Anxiety: Growing Up Inter/National in The Shadow
Lines’, in The Shadow Lines: Educational Edition, 278. New Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
31
Mee, Jon. ‘“The Burthen of the Mystery”: Imagination and Difference in The Shadow
Lines’, in Tabish Khair (ed.), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion, 106. New Delhi:
Permanent Black.
32
Ibid., pp. 94-95.
33
This phrase, used by Thamma, in a moment of great agitation, echoes the words of
Ghosh himself in his celebrated essay, ‘The Imam and the Indian’ (the title essay in
The Imam and the Indian: Prose Pieces):
At that moment, despite the vast gap that lay between us, we understood each
other perfectly. We were both travelling, he and I: we were travelling in the West.
The only difference was that I had actually been there, in person: I could have told
him about the ancient English university I had won a scholarship to, about punk
dons with safety pins in their mortar-boards, about superhighways and sex shops
and Picasso. But none of it would have mattered. We would have known, both of
us, that all that was mere fluff: at the bottom, for him as for me and millions and
millions of people on the landmasses around us, the West meant only this –
science and tanks and guns and bombs. (p. 11) (emphasis added)
34 Gera, Anjali (2003), ‘Des Kothay? Amitav Ghosh tells Old Wives Tales’, in Tabish
Khair (ed.), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion, 118. New Delhi: Permanent Black.
35
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2002), ‘Maps and Mirrors: Co-ordinates of Meaning in The
Shadow Lines’, in The Shadow Lines: Educational Edition, 265. New Delhi: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
36 Kaul, Suvir (2002), ‘Separation Anxiety: Growing Up Inter/National in The Shadow
Lines’, in The Shadow Lines: Educational Edition, 280. New Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
37
Ghosh, Amitav (2004), The Hungry Tide, op.cit. p. 254.
38 Anderson, Benedict (1983), Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso. It may also be pertinent to mention here that
in an interview with Amitav Ghosh on 22 July 2005, I asked the author whether An-
derson’s book informed his vision in any way while he wrote The Shadow Lines:. He
replied that he had not read the book then, implying thereby that there was no ques-
tion of any kind of influence and in fact, went on to ask me when Anderson’s book
was published.
39 Chatterjee, Partha (1999), ‘Whose Imagined Community’, The Nation and its Frag-
ments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories, 5. New Delhi: Oxford University Paper-
backs.
NOTES
159

40 Gera, Anjali (2003), ‘Des Kothay? Amitav Ghosh Tells Old Wives Tales’, in Tabish
Khair (ed.), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion, 110. New Delhi: Permanent Black.
41
Kaul, A.N. (2002), ‘A Reading of The Shadow Lines’, in The Shadow Lines: Educational
Edition, 301. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
42 Gera, Anjali (2003), ‘Des Kothay? Amitav Ghosh Tells Old Wives Tales’, in Tabish
Khair (ed.), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion, 110-111. New Delhi: Permanent
Black.
43 Dixon, Robert (2003), ‘“Travelling in the West”: The Writing of Amitav Ghosh’ in
Tabish Khair (ed.), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion, 20. New Delhi: Permanent
Black.
44 Kaul, A.N. (2002), ‘A Reading of The Shadow Lines’, in The Shadow Lines: Educational
Edition, 303-304. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
45 Mee, Jon ‘“The Burthen of the Mystery”: Imagination and Difference in The Shadow
Lines’, in Tabish Khair (ed.), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion, 100. New Delhi:
Permanent Black.
46 Cited in Hawley, John C. (2005), Amitav Ghosh, op.cit. p. 125.
47 Bose, Brinda (ed.) (2003), Amitav Ghosh: Critical Perspectives (‘New Orientations’ Ser-
ies). New Delhi: Pencraft International.
48 Mondal, Anshuman (2007), Amitav Ghosh (Contemporary World Writers Series), 7.
Manchester & New York: Manchester University Press.
49 Ibid., 35.
50 Tagore, Rabindranath (1917; 2002), Nationalism. Calcutta: Rupa & Co.
51
Interview given to Rahul Sagar for The Hindu, 16 December 2001.
52
There is a very comprehensive discussion of this aspect in ‘After Midnight: The Novel
in the 1980s and 1990s’ by Jon Mee (2006), in Arvind Krishna Mehrotra (ed.), An Il-
lustrated History of Indian Literature in English, 318-336. New Delhi: Permanent Black.
53
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2002), The Perishable Empire: Essays on Indian Writing in Eng-
lish, 184. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
Conclusion
1
A very concise and insightful study of the main trends and issues that shaped the de-
velopment of this unique body of literature over two centuries can be found in the
‘Introduction’ of Mehrotra, Arvind Krishna (ed.), (2006), An Illustrated History of In-
dian Literature in English, 1-28. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
2
For a detailed discussion of this point, see Mee, Jon (2006), ‘After Midnight: The No-
vel in the 1980s and 1990s’, in Arvind Krishna Mehrotra (ed.), An Illustrated History
of Indian Literature in English, 318-336. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
3
Indeed, this is one aspect that Indian-English fiction shares with many bhasa litera-
tures of India. As Meenakshi Mukherjee observes in The Perishable Empire: Essays on
Indian Writing in English (New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks, 2002):
(…) writers in at least four languages of the country (Hindi, Urdu, Bangla and Pun-
jabi) have gone back again and again to this rupture to understand our present.
(p.180)
4
Bose, Sugata & Ayesha Jalal (2004), Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political
Economy, New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
5
In an interview given to P.K. Singh in 2005, Khushwant Singh spoke candidly about
his Partition experience:
Partition was a traumatic experience for me. I had gone to Lahore expecting to live
there, to become a lawyer or a judge (…) then to be brutally torn out and never
really being able to go back. That was what put me to writing (…) and I wrote
160
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Train to Pakistan. I had no intention of becoming a writer.
Singh, P.K. (2005), The Novels of Khushwant Singh: A Critical Evaluation, New Delhi:
Book Enclave.
6
Clear Light of Day clearly goes beyond Anita Desai’s own professed aims and compul-
sions as a writer. She has been on record saying:
Writing is to me a process of discovering the truth – the truth that is nine-tenths
of the iceberg that lies submerged beneath the one-tenth visible portion we call
Reality. Writing is my way of plunging to the depths and exploring this underlying
truth (…) my novels are no reflection of Indian society, politics, or character.
Cited in Narayan, Shyamala A. & Jon Mee (2006), ‘Novelists of the 1950s and
1960s’, in Arvind Krishna Mehrotra (ed.), An Illustrated History of Indian Literature in
English, 227. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
7
As Sukrita Paul Kumar says:
Those women who survived the partition riots emerged with a greater existential
autonomy. Not only did they accord space to themselves for growth, they also cre-
ated in themselves the enterprise for independent living. ‘Re-membering Woman:
Partition, Gender and Reorientations’, in Ravikant & Tarun K. Saint (eds.) (2004),
Narrating Partition: Texts, Interpretations, Ideas, 99. New Delhi: Indialog Publica-
tions Pvt. Ltd.
8
Rushdie would later expand on these very themes in his next two novels – Shame
(New York: Vintage Books, 1982), and The Moor’s Last Sigh (London: Jonathan Cape,
1995), which are located, once again, in Karachi and Bombay, respectively. The for-
mer chronicles the sad tale of Pakistan’s contemporary history, while the latter la-
ments the irrevocable loss of the Bombay of Saleem’s childhood.
9
The most memorable picturization of refugee trains can be found in Richard Atten-
borough’s 1982 Oscar-winning film Gandhi.
10 It is interesting to note that many of Amitav Ghosh’s novels are framed around an
uncle-nephew relationship. Apart from Tridib and the narrator in The Shadow Lines:,
we also get an uncle-nephew pair in The Circle of Reason (Balaram/Alu) as well as
The Hungry Tide (Nirmal/Kanai). It is also noticeable that a kind of primacy is given
to this relationship in all these novels, where it is almost prioritized over all others.
In delineating such relationships, Ghosh is being culturally accurate, as the uncle-
nephew relationship (be it mama/bhagne or kaka/bhaipo) is a very popular strand of
male bonding in Bengali social life.
11
Aristotle (Translated by Ingram Bywater) (1974), On the Art of Poetry, 43. London: Ox-
ford at the Clarendon Press.
12
Lukacs, George (Translated by H. Mitchell and S. Mitchell) (1962), The Historical No-
vel, 42. London.
NOTES
161


Bibliography
Abbas, Khwaja Ahmed (1958), Inquilab. New Delhi: Jaico Publishing House.
Adiga, Aravind (2008), The White Tiger. London: Atlantic Books.
Afzal-Khan, Fawzia (1993), Cultural Imperialism and the Indo-English Novel: Genre and Ideol-
ogy in R.K. Narayan, Anita Desai, Kamala Markandaya, and Salman Rushdie. Pennslyvania:
The Pennslyvania State University Press.
Ahmed, Aijaz (1992), In Theory: Classes, Nations, Literatures. London & New York: Verso.
Ahsan, Aitzaz (1996), The Indus Saga and the Making of Partition. Karachi:Oxford University
Press.
Ali, Tariq (1985), Salman Rushdie. New York: Picador.
Anderson, Benedict (1983), Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Na-
tionalism. London: Verso.
Aristotle, Translated by Ingram Bywater, (1974), On the Art of Poetry. London: Oxford at the
Clarendon Press.
Arnold, John H. (2000), History: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Ashcroft, Bill & Gareth Griffiths (eds.) (1995), The Post-Colonial Studies Reader. London &
New York: Routledge.
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths & Helen Tiffin (eds.) (1989), The Empire Writes Back: Theory
& Practice in Post-colonial Literatures. New York: Routledge.
Atwood, Margaret (2002), Negotiating with the Dead: A Writer on Writing. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Azad, Maulana Abul Kalam (1958; 1988), India Wins Freedom. New Delhi: Orient Longman.
Bagchi, Jasodhara & Subhoranjan Dasgupta (eds.) (2003), The Trauma and the Triumph: Gen-
der and Partition in Eastern India. Calcutta: Stree.
Bala, Suman & D.K. Pabby (eds.) The Fiction of Anita Desai – Volume I. New Delhi: Khosla
Publishing House.
Baldwin, Shauna Singh (1999), What the Body Remembers. Canada: Vintage.
Bandyopadhyay, Sekhar (2004), From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India. New
Delhi: Orient Longman.
Banerjee, Anil Kumar (1985), History of Modern India. Calcutta: A. Mukherjee & Co. Pvt. Ltd.
Basu, Kunal (2001), The Opium Clerk. New Delhi: Penguin India.
Beauvoir, Simone de (1949; 1997), The Second Sex. London: Vintage.
Bhabha, Homi (1994), Location of Culture. London & New York: Routledge.
Bhabha, Homi (ed.) (1990), Nation and Narration. London: Routledge.
Bhalla, Alok (ed.) (1994), Stories about the Partition of India. New Delhi: Harper Collins India.
Bhalla, Alok (2006), Partition Dialogues: Memories of a Lost Home. New Delhi: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Bhatnagar, M.K. (2003), Modern Indian English Novel: A Critical Study of the Political Motif.
New Delhi: Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.

Bhattacharya, Nandini (2005), A Love Song to our Mongrel Selves: Problematics of Identity in
the Novels of Salman Rushdie. New Delhi: Worldview.
Bhattacharya, Shankar (1994), Manohar Malgonkar: A Study of His Mind & Art. New Delhi:
Creative Books.
Bhutto, Benazir (1989), Daughter of the East. London: Hamish Hamilton.
Boehmer, Elleke (1995), Colonial and Post-Colonial Literatures: Migrant Metaphors. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Booth, Wayne C. (1961), The Rhetoric of Fiction. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bose, Brinda (ed.) (2003), Amitav Ghosh: Critical Perspectives (‘New Orientations’ Series).
New Delhi: Pencraft International.
Bose, Sugata & Ayesha Jalal (2004), Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy.
New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Brennan, Timothy (1989), Salman Rushdie and the Third World: Myths of the Nation. New
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Butalia, Urvashi (1998), The Other Side of Silence: Voices from India’s Partition. New Delhi:
Viking.
Cady, Linell E. & Sheldon W. Simon (eds.) (2007), Religion and Conflict in South and South-
east Asia: Disrupting Violence. London & New York: Routledge.
Campbell-Johnson, Alan (1952), Mission with Mountbatten. London: Robert Hale.
Chakrabarty, Bidyut (ed.) (2003), Communal Identity in India: Its Construction and Articulation
in the Twentieth Century. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Chakravertty, Neeru (2003), Quest for Self-fulfillment in the Novels of Anita Desai. New Delhi:
Khosla Publishing House.
Chandra, B. Mridula Mukherjee & Aditya Mukherjee (eds.) (2000), India After Independence:
1947-2000. New Delhi: Penguin.
Chandra, Bipan (1999), Essays on Colonialism. New Delhi: Orient Longman.
Chandra, Bipan (1999), India’s Struggle for Independence: 1857-1947. New Delhi: Penguin
Books.
Chatterjee, Partha (1999), The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories.
New Delhi: Oxford University Paperbacks.
Chatterji, Joya (1994), Bengal Divided: Hindu Communalism and Partition 1932-1947. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Chatterji, Joya (2007), The Spoils of Partition: Bengal and India, 1947-1967. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Chaudhuri, Amit (ed.) (2004), The Vintage Book of Modern Indian Literature. New York: Vin-
tage.
Conrad, Joseph (1917; 2007), The Shadow-Line. New York: Vintage.
Culler, Jonathan (1997), Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Cundy, Catherine (1997), Salman Rushdie. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Das, Gurcharan (2002), India Unbound. New Delhi: Penguin Viking.
Dayananda, James Y. (1974), Manohar Malgonkar. Boston: Twayne Publishers.
Desai, Anita (1980), Clear Light of Day. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Desai, Kiran (2006), The Inheritance of Loss. London: Penguin Books.
Deschaumes, Ghislaine Glasson & Rada Ivekovic (eds.) (2003), Divided Countries, Separated
Cities: The Modern Legacy of Partition. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Dhawan, R.K. & Neena Arora (eds.) (2010), Partition and Indian Literature, Vol. 2, 24-38.
New Delhi: Prestige.
Dhawan, R.K. & Novy Kapadia (ed.), The Novels of Bapsi Sidhwa. New Delhi: Prestige.
Dhawan, R.K. (ed.) (1994), Indian Women Novelists (Set 1, Vols. II & IV). New Delhi: Prestige.
164
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Dhawan, R.K. (ed.) (1999), The Novels of Amitav Ghosh. New Delhi: Prestige.
Dhawan, R.K. (ed.) (1989), The Fiction of Anita Desai. New Delhi: Prestige.
Dhawan, R.K. (ed.) (1982), Explorations in Modern Indo-English Fiction. New Delhi: Bahri
Publications Private Limited.
Dube, Saurabh (ed.) (2004), Postcolonial Passages: Contemporary History-writing on India. New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Dutta, Krishna (2005), Calcutta: A cultural and literary history. New Delhi: Lotus/Roli.
Eagleton, Terry (1996), Literary Theory: An Introduction. New Delhi: Maya Blackwell.
Fanon, Franz (1967), Black Skin, White Mask. New York: Grove Press.
Fanon, Franz (1967), The Wretched of the Earth. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Farooki, Nasir Ahmed (1961), Faces of Love and Death. Lahore: Watan Publications.
Farooki, Nasir Ahmed (1969), Snakes and Ladders. Lahore: Watan Publications.
Gandhi, Leela (1999), A Critical Introduction to Postcolonial Theory. New Delhi: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Gandhi, M.K. (1907; 2004), Hind Swaraj. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gaur, Rashmi (ed.) (2004), Bapsi Sidhwa’s ‘Ice-Candy-Man’: A Reader’s Companion. New Del-
hi: asia book club.
Ghose, Zulfikar (1967), The Murder of Aziz Khan. London: Macmillan.
Ghosh, Amitav (1986), The Circle of Reason. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (1988), The Shadow Lines. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (1992), In an Antique Land. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (1996), Dancing in Cambodia, At Large in Burma. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (1999), Countdown. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (2000), The Glass Palace. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (2002), The Imam and the Indian: Prose Pieces. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (2002): The Shadow Lines: Educational Edition. New Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Ghosh, Amitav (2004), The Hungry Tide. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (2006), Incendiary Circumstances. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Ghosh, Amitav (2008), Sea of Poppies. New Delhi: Penguin India.
Ghosh, Tapan K. (ed.) (2004), Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children: A Reader’s Companion.
New Delhi: asia book club.
Gundur, N.S. (2008), Partition and Indian English Fiction. New Delhi: Adhyayan Publishers
& Distributors.
Gurnah, Abdulrazak (ed.) (2008), The Cambridge Companion to Salman Rushdie. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hamid, Mohsin (2000), Moth Smoke. New York: Picador.
Hamid, Shahid (1986), Disastrous Twilight. London: Leo Cooper.
Harrison, James (1992), Salman Rushdie. New York: Twayne.
Hasan, Muhirul (1994), Legacy of a Divided Nation: India’s Muslims since Independence. New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Hasan, Muhirul (1979), Nationalism and Communal Politics in India, 1916-1928, New Delhi.
Hawley, John C. (2005), Amitav Ghosh. (CIWE – Contemporary Indian Writers in English
Series) New Delhi: Foundation Books.
Hosain, Intezar (1995), (Translated By Francis W. Pritchett) Basti. New Delhi: Indus.
Hossain, Attia (1961; 1992), Sunlight on a Broken Column. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Hutchinson, John & Anthony D. Smith (eds.) (1994), Nationalism. London & New York: Ox-
ford University Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
165

Hyder, Qurratulain (1998), River of Fire. New Delhi: Kali for Women.
Iyengar, K.R. Srinivasa (1962; 1996), Indian Writing in English. New Delhi: Sterling.
Jain, Jasbir (ed.) (2007), Films, Literature & Culture: Deepa Mehta’s Elements Trilogy. Jaipur:
Rawat Publications.
Jalal, Ayesha (1985), The Sole Spokesman: Jinnah, the Muslim League and the Demand for Paki-
stan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jassal, Smita Tewari & Eyal Ben-Ari (eds.) (2007), The Partition Motif in Contemporary Con-
flicts. New Delhi, California & London: Sage.
Kakkar, Sudhir (2004), Mira & the Mahatma. New Delhi: Penguin/Viking.
Kasturi, Bhashyam (1999), Walking Alone. New Delhi: Vision Books.
Kaul, Suvir (ed.) (2001), The Partitions of Memory: The Afterlife of the Division of India. New
Delhi: Permanent Black.
Kesavan, Mukul (1995), Looking Through Glass. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Khair, Tabish (2003), Amitav Ghosh: A Critical Companion. New Delhi: Permanent Black.
Khan, Sorayya (2003; 2006), Noor. Wilmington: The Publishing Laboratory, University of
North Carolina.
Khan, Yasmin (2007), The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan. New Haven &
London: Yale University Press.
Khosla, Gopal Das (1949; 1990), Stern Reckoning: A Survey of the Events Leading Up to and
Following the Partition of India. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
Kudaisya, Gyanesh & Tai Yong Tan (eds.) (2008), Partition and Post-Colonial South Asia: A
Reader. (Vols I-III) London & New York: Routledge.
Kudaisya, Gyanesh & Tai Yong Tan (eds.) (2000), The Aftermath of Partition in South Asia.
(Routledge Studies in the Modern History of Asia) London & New York: Routledge.
Kumar, Shiv K. (1998), A River with Three Banks, The Partition of India: Agony & Ecstasy. New
Delhi: UBSPD.
Kumar, Krishna (2001), Prejudice and Pride: School Histories of the Freedom Struggle in India
and Pakistan. New Delhi: Penguin.
Kundera, Milan (1978; 1996), The Book of Laughter and Forgetting. London: Faber & Faber.
Lappierre, Dominique & Larry Collins (1976), Freedom at Midnight. New Delhi: Vikas Pub-
lishing House Pvt. Ltd.
Lawrence, James (1998), The Rise and Fall of the British Empire. London: Abacus.
Loomba, Ania (1998), Colonialism/Post-Colonialism. London & New York: Routledge.
Lukacs, George (1962), The Historical Novel (translated by H. Mitchell and S. Mitchell). Lon-
don.
Lyon, David (2002), Postmodernity. New Delhi: Viva Books (South Asian Edition).
Malgonkar, Manohar (1960), Distant Drum.
Malgonkar, Manohar (1962), Combat of Shadows.
Malgonkar, Manohar (1963), The Princes. London: Viking Press.
Malgonkar, Manohar (1964), A Bend in the Ganges. London: Pan Books Ltd.
Mansergh, Diana (ed.) (1999), Independence Years: The Selected Indian and Commonwealth Pa-
pers of Nicholas Mansergh. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Manto, Saadat Hasan (1997), Mottled Dawn: Fifty Sketches and Stories of Partition. (translated
from the Urdu by Khalid Hasan) New Delhi: Penguin.
Manto, Saadat Hasan (2003), Siyah Hashye. New Delhi: Rupa & Co.
Markandaya, Kamala (1955), Some Inner Fury. London: Putnam.
166
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Mehrotra, Arvind Krishna (ed.) (2006), An Illustrated History of Indian Literature in English.
New Delhi: Permenant Black.
Mehta, Gita (1989; 1993), Raj. New Delhi: Penguin Books India.
Memon, Muhammad Umar (edited & translated from the Urdu) (1998), An Epic Unwritten.
New Delhi: Penguin India.
Memon, Muhammad Umar (edited & translated from the Urdu) (1991), The Colour of Noth-
ingness: Modern Urdu Short Stories. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Menon, Ritu & Kamla Bhasin (1998), Borders & Boundaries: Women in India’s Partition. New
Delhi: Kali for Women.
Mondal, Anshuman (2007), Amitav Ghosh (Contemporary World Writers Series). Manche-
ster & New York: Manchester University Press.
Montenegro, David (1991), Points of Departure: International Writers on Writing & Politics.
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Moon, Penderel (1962), Divide and Quit: An Eye-witness account of the Partition of India. Ber-
keley & Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Moore-Gilbert, Bart (1997), Post-Colonial Theory: Context, Practices, Politics. London & New
York: Verso.
More, D.R. (2008), The Novels on the Indian Partition. Jaipur: Shruti Publications.
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (ed.) (1999), Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children: A Book of Readings. New
Delhi: Pencraft International.
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2002), The Perishable Empire: Essays on Indian Writing in English.
New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
Mukherjee, Meenakshi (2005), The Twice-born Fiction: Themes and Techniques of Indian Novels
in English. New Delhi: Pencraft International.
Nahal, Chaman (1975; 2001), Azadi. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Naik, M.K. (2004), A History of Indian English Literature. New Delhi: Sahitya Academy.
Narayan, R.K. (1958), The Guide. Toronto: Methuen.
Narayan, R.K. (1955; 1997), Waiting for the Mahatma. Mysore: Indian Thought Publications.
Nawaz, Mumtaz Shah (1957; 1990), The Heart Divided. Lahore: ASR Publications.
Neb, Narinder & Tejinder Kaur (eds.) (2006), Perspectives on the Partition Fiction of the Sub-
continent. Jalandhar: Nirman Publications.
Nehru, Jawaharlal (1936; 1988), An Autobiography. New Delhi: Nehru Memorial Fund.
Nehru, Jawaharlal (1945; 1988), The Discovery of India. New Delhi: Nehru Memorial Fund.
Newton, K.M. (1988), Twenthieth-Century Literary Theory: A Reader. London: Macmillan.
Niazi, Lieutenant-General. (R) A.A.K. (1998), The Betrayal of East Pakistan. USA: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Padmanabhan, A. (2002), The Fictional World of Manohar Malgonkar. New Delhi: Atlantic
Publishers.
Page, David (1999), Prelude to Partition: The Indian Muslims and the Imperial System of Con-
trol 1920-1932. New Delhi: Oxford India Paperbacks.
Pandey, Bishwa Mohan (2003), Historiography of India’s Partition: An Analysis of Imperialist
Writings. New Delhi: Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.
Pandey, Gyanendra (2000), Memory, History and the Question of Violence: Reflections on the Re-
construction of Partition. Calcutta: Centre for Studies in Social Sciences.
Pandey, Gyanendra (2001), Remembering Partition: Violence, Nationalism & History in India.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Panja, Shormishtha (ed.) (2001), Many Indias, Many Literatures: New Critical Essays. New
Delhi: Worldview Publications.
Paranjape, Makarand (2000), Towards a Poetics of the Indian English Novel. Shimla: Indian
Institute of Advanced Study.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
167

Parini, Jay (ed.) (2004), World Writers Series. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, Thomson
Gale.
Pathak, R.S. (ed.) (1994), Recent Indian Fiction. New Delhi: Prestige.
Piciucco, Pier Paolo (ed.) (2004), A Companion to Indian Fiction in English. New Delhi:
Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.
Proust, Michel (1982), In Remembrance of Things Past. London: Vintage.
Rahman, Tariq (1991), A History of Pakistani Literature in English. Lahore: Vanguard.
Rao, Raja (1938), Kanthapura. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Rao, Rani & Raja (eds.) (2004), India-Pakistan: Partition Perspectives in Indo-English Novels.
New Delhi: Discovery Publishing House.
Ravi, P.S. (2003), Modern Indian Fiction: History, Politics and Individual in the Novels of Sal-
man Rushdie, Amitav Ghosh, Upamanyu Chatterjee. New Delhi: Prestige.
Ravikant & Tarun K. Saint (eds.) (2005), Translating Partition. New Delhi: Katha.
Reder, Michael R. (ed.) (2000), Conversations with Salman Rushdie (Literary Conversations
Series). Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Riemenschneider, Dieter (2005), The Indian Novel in English: Its Critical Discourse 1934-2004.
Jaipur: Rawat Publications.
Rimmon-Kenan, Shlomith (2003), Narrative Fiction: Contemporary Poetics. New York: Routle-
dge.
Roberts, Andrew (1994), ‘Lord Mountbatten and the Perils of Adrenalin’, in Eminent Church-
illians. London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson.
Roy, Arundhati (1997), The God of Small Things. New Delhi: India Ink.
Rushdie, Salman (1980), Midnight’s Children. London: Jonathan Cape.
Rushdie, Salman (1984), Shame. New York: Vintage Books.
Rushdie, Salman (1992), Imaginary Homelands: Essays and Criticism 1981-91. London: Vin-
tage.
Rushdie, Salman (1995), The Moor’s Last Sigh. London: Jonathan Cape.
Rushdie, Salman & Elizabeth West (eds.) (1997), The Vintage Book of Indian Writing in Eng-
lish. London: Vintage.
Rushdie, Salman (2003), Step Across This Line: Collected Non-Fiction 1992-2002. London: Vin-
tage.
Sahgal, Nayantara (1958), A Time to be Happy. New York: Knopf.
Sahgal, Nayantara (1999), Prison and Chocolate Cake. New Delhi: Harper Collins India.
Sahni, Bhisham (1974; 1988), Tamas. New Delhi: Penguin.
Said, Edward (1994), Culture and Imperialism. New York: Vintage.
Said, Edward (1978), Orientalism. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.
Sarang, Vilas & Nilufer Bharucha (eds.) (1994), Indian English Fiction 1980-90: An Assess-
ment. New Delhi: B.R. Publishing Corporation.
Sarila, Narendra Singh (2005), The Shadow of the Great Game: The Untold Story of India’s
Partition. New Delhi: Harper Collins.
Sarkar, Sumit (1983), Modern India. New Delhi: Macmillan.
Schendel, Willem van (2009), A History of Bangladesh. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Seervai, H.M. (1989; 2005), Partition of India: Legend and Reality. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Sengupta, Nitish (2007), Bengal Divided: The Unmaking of a Nation. New Delhi: Penguin/
Viking.
Shahane, Vasant A. (1972), Khushwant Singh. New York: Twayne.
Shamsie, Kamila (2003), Kartography. New York: Harcourt.
Sidhwa, Bapsi (1978; 1990), The Crow-Eaters. New Delhi: Penguin Books India.
168
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Sidhwa, Bapsi (1983; 1990), The Pakistani Bride. New Delhi: Penguin Books India.
Sidhwa, Bapsi (1988), Ice-Candy-Man. New Delhi: Penguin Books India.
Sidhwa, Bapsi (1993; 1994), An American Brat. New Delhi: Penguin Books India.
Sidhwa, Bapsi (2005), City of Sin & Splendour: Writings on Lahore. New Delhi: Penguin.
Singh, Anita Inder (1987), The Origins of the Partition of India 1936-1947. New Delhi: Oxford
University Press.
Singh, Bhupal (1974), A Survey of Anglo-Indian Fiction, London: Curzon Press.
Singh, Jaswant (2009), Jinnah: India-Partition Independence. New Delhi: Rupa & Co.
Singh, Khushwant (1956; 1988), Train to Pakistan. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Singh, Khushwant (1959; 1997), I Shall Not Hear the Nightingale. New Delhi: Ravi Dayal.
Singh, Khushwant (1990), Delhi: A Novel. New Delhi: Penguin Books India.
Singh, Khushwant (1999), The Company of Women. New Delhi: Viking Press.
Singh, Khushwant (2002), Truth, Love & a Little Malice: An Autobiography. New Delhi: Ravi
Dayal Publisher & Penguin Books India.
Singh, Khushwant (2003), The End of India. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Singh, Khushwant (2004), Burial at Sea. New Delhi: Penguin Viking.
Singh, P.K. (2005), The Novels of Khushwant Singh: A Critical Evaluation. New Delhi: Book
Enclave.
Sipra, Mahmud (1985), Pawn to King Three. London: Michael Joseph.
Sreedharan, E. (2004), A Textbook of Historiography – 500 BC to AD 2000. New Delhi: Orient
Longman.
Suleri, Sarah (1992), The Rhetoric of English India. Chicago & London: The University of Chi-
cago Press.
Tagore, Rabindranath (1917; 2002), Nationalism. Calcutta: Rupa & Co.
Talbot, Ian (ed.) (2007), The Deadly Embrace: Religion, Politics and Violence in India and Paki-
stan 1947-2002, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Talbot, Ian & Gurharpal Singh (eds.) (1999), Region & Partition: Bengal, Punjab and the Parti-
tion of the Subcontinent. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Teverson, Andrew (2007), Salman Rushdie (Contemporary World Writers Series). Manchester
& New York: Manchester University Press.
Tharoor, Shashi (2000), India: From Midnight to the Millennium. New Delhi: Penguin Books.
Todd, R.K. (2006), Consuming Fictions: The Booker & the British Novel. London: Bloomsbury.
Trivedi, Harish & Richard Allen (eds.) (2001), Literature & Nation: Britain & India 1800-1990.
New York: Routledge, in association with The Open University.
Uniyal, Rani (2000), The Fiction of Margaret Drabble and Anita Desai: Women & Landscape.
New Delhi: Creative Books.
Veer, Peter van der & Hartmut Lehmann (eds.) (1999), Nation and Religion: Perspectives on
Europe and Asia. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Viswanathan, Gauri (1989), Masks of Conquest: Literary Study and British Rule in India. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Walsh, William (1990), Indian Writing in English. London & New York: Longman.
Wolpert, Stanley (2006). Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Young, Robert J.C. (2003), Postcolonialism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
169

Zaman, Niaz (2000), A Divided Legacy: The Partition in Selected Novels of India, Pakistan, and
Bangladesh. New Delhi: Manohar Publishers & Distributors.
Zamindar, Vazira Fazila-Yacoobali (2007), The Long Partition & the Making of Modern South
Asia: Refugees, Boundaries, Histories. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ziegler, Philip (1985), Mountbatten. London: Collins.
170
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Index
15 August 1947
27, 93, 101
1984 Delhi riots
111
A Bend in the Ganges
13, 24-25, 35,
41, 47-50, 53, 58, 60-63, 67, 80-81,
132, 134, 147-149
A History of Bangladesh
103
A History of Indian English
Literature
143, 147
A History of Pakistani Literature in
English
144
A Time to be Happy
29, 145, 168
Abbas, Khwaja Ahmed
29, 145
Adapting Midnight’s Children
90
Ahsan, Aitzaz
14
Allied Victory in 1945
151
Amitav Ghosh: A Critical
Companion
158-160
Amitav Ghosh: Critical
Perspectives
127
Amur, G.S.
47, 149
An Autobiography
142
An Epic Unwritten
146
An Illustrated History of Indian
Literature in English
153, 160-161
Anand, Mulk Raj
89, 131
Anderson, Benedict
97, 124, 126,
155
Aristotle
137
assassination of Mahatma
Gandhi
86
Atlee, Clement
18
Auden, W.H.
158
Awami League
101-103, 155
Azad, Maulana
41, 147, 156, 158-159
Azadi
29, 88, 145, 148
Azadi ki Chhaon Mein
152
Azimabadi, Bismil
57
Bahri, Deepika
71, 151
Baldwin, Shauna Singh
22, 60, 143
Banerjee, A.K.
14
Bangladesh War of
Independence
24, 101, 103
Bapsi Sidhwa’s Ice-Candy-Man: A
Reader’s Companion
151-152
Beauvoir, Simone de
87
Bengal Divided: Hindu Communalism
and Partition 1932-1947
17, 142
Bengal Partition Stories: An Unclosed
Chapter
144
Bhalla, Alok
18, 20, 77, 142-143,
146, 152
Bharucha, Nilufer
66, 150-151
Bhasin, Kamla
71, 75, 142, 150-152
Bhatnagar, M.K.
30, 145
Bhattacharya, Nandini
95, 155
Bhattacharya, Shankar
21, 62, 143,
147, 149
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali
102
Bildungsroman
112
Blitz
112
Booker Prize
27, 89, 112, 144
Borders & Boundaries: Women in
India’s Partition
142, 150-152
Bose, Brinda
127, 160
Bose, Sugata
20, 50, 132, 142, 147,
158, 160
boycott
53
Bradbury, Malcolm
89, 154

Brennan, Timothy
90, 154
Brians, Paul
34, 71, 146, 151-152
British Empire
17-18, 33, 145, 151
British Indian Army
18, 48, 156
Burial at Sea
33, 146
Butalia, Urvashi
72, 142, 151
Campbell-Johnson, Alan
15, 141
Chakravertty, Neeru
81, 153
Chander, Krishan
35
Chandra, Bipan
14, 61, 106, 147-
148, 156
Chatterjee, Bankim Chandra
21
Chatterjee, Partha
124-125, 159
Chatterji, Joya
17
Civil Disobedience Movement
29,
53
Clear Light of Day
13, 26, 63, 80-82,
84-85, 87-88, 133, 153-154, 161
Combat of Shadows
49, 148
communal violence
23, 25, 61, 70,
72, 88, 109, 115, 120, 135-136, 152,
154, 158
Congress
14-17, 19, 51, 54, 56-57, 61,
73, 106
Conrad, Joseph
111, 156
Contemporary Indian Short Stories in
English
153
Countdown
114
Cundy, Catherine
90
CUTIA
102
Dancing in Cambodia
114
Dayananda, James Y.
47-48, 147
Desai, Anita
26, 63, 80-85, 87-88,
132-133, 153-154, 161
Desai, Kiran
144
Dhawan, R.K.
30-31, 145, 153
Disastrous Twilight
18
Distant Drum
48-49, 148, 156
divide and rule
14, 50
Divided Countries, Separated Cities:
The Modern Legacy of Partition
152
Does India exist?
125
Economic and Political Weekly
19
Emergency
90-91
Fire in the Mountain
82
Freedom at Midnight
73, 142, 151, 155
freedom struggle
49, 53, 106
Gandhi, Indira
111
Gandhian whirlwind
21-22
Ganguly, Sumit
107, 156
Gaur, Rashmi
31, 145, 150-152
Gellner, Ernest
126
General Ayub Khan
102
General Dyer
104
General Sam
103
General Yahya Khan
102, 106
genocide
23, 101, 103
Gera, Anjali
120, 125-126, 159
Ghatak, Ritwik
20, 143
Ghosh, Amitav
13, 24, 28, 30-31, 33,
63, 103, 109, 111-118, 120-121, 123-
129, 132-134, 136, 144, 146, 148-
149, 155-157, 159, 161
Graeber, Laurel
64, 149
Gramsci
19
Great Game
15
Great Revolt
48
Guha, Ramachandra
73, 151
Gundur, N.S.
31, 145
Gurnah, Abdulrazak
108
Hamid, Shahid
18, 142
Harrison, James
90, 154
Hawley, John C.
111, 118, 157-158,
160
Hindu Mahasabha
17, 52, 59
Hindu-Muslim question
49-50, 53
historiography
19-20, 28, 113
Holocaust
24, 33, 35, 37, 39, 41, 43,
45, 47, 49, 51-53, 55, 57, 59, 61
Hossain, Attia
28
I Shall Not Hear the Nightingale
33
172
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Ice-Candy-Man
13, 25-26, 31, 41, 60,
63-67, 71, 76, 78-80, 133-137, 145,
150, 157
Imaginary Homelands
81, 125, 153,
155
Imagined Communities: Reflections on
the Origin Spread of
Nationalism
97
In an Antique Land
114
In Custody
81
In Remembrance of Things Past
111,
156
In the Company of Women
33
Independence Years: The Selected
Indian and Commonwealth Papers of
Nicholas Mansergh
141-142, 149,
151, 153
India After Gandhi: The History of the
World’s Largest Democracy
151
India After Independence: 1947-
2000
156
India Today
82
India Wins Freedom
147, 156, 158
India-China war of 1962
91
Indian Civil Service
99
Indian historiography
18, 26
Indian Writing in English
89, 128,
131, 144, 146-147, 153-154
Indian-English fiction
22, 28-29,
47, 62, 101, 109, 128, 131, 146, 160
Indian-English novel
22, 29-30, 34,
104, 157
India-Pakistan War of 1965
91
India’s Struggle for Independence: 1857-
1947
141, 148
Indo-China war
116, 119
Inquilab
29, 145
Iqbal
68-69
Iyengar, K.R. Srinivasa
34-35, 40,
146-147
Jalal, Ayesha
14, 20, 50, 132, 142,
147, 158, 160
Jallianwalabagh
51, 90, 155
Jallianwallah Bagh
91
Jeffrey, Robin
73, 151
jewel in the crown
18
Jinnah
14, 17, 64-65, 68-69, 85, 141,
148
Kakkar, Sudhir
55, 148, 150
Kanthapura
28, 145
Kaul, A.N.
125-126, 160
Kaul, Suvir
44, 47, 119, 122, 143,
147, 159
Kaur, Tejinder
31, 145
Kedourie, Elie
126
Kesavan, Mukul
29, 145
Khair, Tabish
158-160
Khan, Liaquat Ali
152
Khan, Sorayya
108, 156
Kohn, Hans
126
Kudchedkar, Shirin L.
70-71, 150-151
Kundera, Milan
28, 113, 144, 157
Language Movement
105
Lappierre, Dominique and Collins,
Larry
73, 142, 155
Looking Through Glass
29, 145
Lukacs, George
137, 161
magic realism
27, 107
Malgonkar, Manohar
13, 21, 24-26,
35, 41, 47-56, 58, 60, 62-63, 80-81,
132-133, 147-149, 156
Mano Majra
33-34
Manohar Malgonkar: A Study of His
Mind & Art
21
Mansergh, Nicholas
15, 72, 149
Manto, Saadat Hasan
20-21, 122,
142-143
Markandaya, Kamala
29, 80, 145
Mee, Jon
80, 119, 126, 153, 160-161
Mehta, Deepa
25, 144, 151-152
Menon, Ritu
71, 75, 142, 150-152
Midnight’s Children
13, 24, 27-28, 31,
63, 89-92, 94, 97-105, 107-109,
112, 125, 133-134, 136, 154
INDEX
173

Mira & the Mahatma
148
Modern India
141
Modern South Asia: History, Culture,
Political Economy
50, 142, 147,
158, 160
Mondal, Anshuman
31, 127, 157
Montenegro, David
64, 72, 150
More, D.R.
31, 145
Morichjhapi
114, 123
Mottled Dawn: Fifty Sketches and
Stories of Partition
142-143
Mountbatten
15, 18, 65, 68
Mujib-ur-Rahman
101-102
Mukherjee, Aditya
106
Mukherjee, Meenakshi
21, 30-31, 34,
48, 89, 120, 129, 143, 145-146, 154,
159-160
Mukherjee, Mridula
106, 156
Mukti Bahini
102
Muslim League
14-16, 60, 73
Nahal, Chaman
29, 148
Naidu, Sarojini
64
Naik, M.K.
47, 143, 147
Naikar, Basavaraj
81
Nairn, Tom
126
Narayan, R.K.
28, 62, 89, 131, 143,
145, 148-149, 157
Narayan, Shyamala A.
80, 153, 161
narrative of the nation
28
nationalism
14, 16, 18-19, 27, 91,
119-120, 124-128, 132
Nationalism in Indo-Anglian
Fiction
21
nationalist discourse
19
nationalist movement
19, 22, 29,
49-50, 53, 91, 98, 109, 124
Naxalites
103
Neb, Narinder
31, 145
Nehru
17, 19, 23, 54, 64-65, 68-69,
85, 91, 93-95, 97, 128, 141-142, 152,
155
Nehru report
51
Nehruvian narrative
19
Non-Cooperation movement
29, 48
non-violence
25, 49, 53-56, 59, 61-
62
Noor
108
Opium War
114
Padmanabhan, A.
47, 49, 60
Page, David
16, 19, 142
Paranjape, Makarand
30, 145
Partition Awards
69
Partition Dialogues: Memories of a Lost
Home
152-153
Partition novels
13, 23, 25, 27, 29,
31, 71, 79, 81-82, 100, 109, 133, 135-
137
Partition of 1947
27, 90-91, 132, 152
Partition violence
20, 27, 72-73, 75,
77, 88, 133
Pathak, R.S.
30, 145, 153
People’s Party
102
Perspectives on the Partition Fiction of
the Indian Sub-continent
145
post-Ayodhya riots of 1993
128
post-colonial literatures
50, 147
post-colonial theory
50, 147
postmodern text
27
Pradhan, N.S.
47
Prelude to Partition: The Indian
Muslims and the Imperial System of
Control 1920-1932
16
Proust, Michel
111, 156
Punjab bias
23
Qidwai, Anees
152
‘Quit India’ movement
29, 98
Radcliffe Commission
69
Rai, Amrit
35
Rajan, Rajeshwari Sunder
116, 158
Rajmohan’s Wife
21, 143
Ranna’s Story
41, 72, 151
Rao, Raja
28, 89, 131
Ravi, P.S.
30, 145
174
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

recovery and rehabilitation
74, 151
refugees
21, 23, 36-39, 41-42, 44,
46-47, 87, 102-103, 135, 155
Region & Partition: Bengal, Punjab and
the Partition of the
Subcontinent
151
religious fundamentalism
112, 114
revolutionary terrorism
25, 49, 53-
54
Riemenschneider, Dieter
30, 145
Riot
118
Roberts, Andrew
15, 141
Rushdie, Salman
13, 24, 27, 30, 33,
41, 63-64, 81-82, 89-105, 108-109,
112, 125, 127-128, 132-136, 143-144,
146-147, 149, 153-156, 161
Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children: A Book
of Readings
31, 154
Sahgal, Nayantara
29, 80, 145, 153
Sahitya Academy Award
28, 157
Sahni, Bhisam
35, 73, 151
Salman Rushdie and the Third World:
Myths of the Nation
154
Sarfaroshi ki Tamanna
57
Sarila, Narendra Singh
15, 141
Sarkar, Sumit
14, 141, 144
satyagrahis
54
Schendel, Willem van
103, 155
Sea of Poppies
114
Second World War
16, 25, 48, 51-53,
56-57, 75, 112, 134, 148-149, 157
secularism
27, 100, 134
Sethi, Sunil
82
Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the
British Empire in India
15, 141
Sharma, Gobinda Prasad
21
Sidhwa, Bapsi
13, 25, 31, 41, 60, 63-
66, 68, 70-73, 75, 77-81, 132-133,
136-137, 144-145, 149-152
Singh, Anita Inder
16
Singh, Khushwant
13, 22, 24, 33-36,
41-42, 47, 62-63, 80-81, 91, 132,
136, 145-146, 149, 152, 160
Singh, P.K.
145, 161
Singh, P.S.
31
Singh, Tara
60, 68
Siyah Hashye
20-21, 143
Some Inner Fury
29, 145
South Asian history
14, 20, 132
Speeches that Changed the World: The
words and stories of the moments that
made history
154
Step Across This Line: Collected Non-
Fiction 1992-2002
154-155
Stories about the Partition of
India
142-143, 146
story of Tristan
113
Subaltern school
19
Subaltern Studies
114
Sunlight on a Broken Column
28, 145
Tagore, Rabindranath
128, 160
Talbot, Ian
73, 142, 151
Tamas
73
terrorist movement
25, 49, 51
Tharoor, Shashi
118, 158
The Betrayal of East Pakistan
155
The Book of Laughter and
Forgetting
28, 113, 144, 157
The Cambridge Companion to Salman
Rushdie
156
The Circle of Reason
28, 103, 111, 113,
155, 161
The Crow Eaters
66
The Devil’s Wind
48, 62
The Discovery of India
19, 142
The Empire Writes Back: Theory and
practice in post-colonial
literatures
147
The Fictional World of Manohar
Malgonkar
147, 149
‘The Ghosts of Mrs Gandhi’
111
The Glass Palace
114
‘The Greatest Sorrow’
111
The Hungry Tide
28, 114, 118, 123,
157, 159, 161
INDEX
175

The Indian Novel in English: Its
Critical Discourse 1934-2004
30,
145
The Indus Saga and the Making of
Partition
141
The Novels of Khushwant Singh: A
Critical Evaluation
31, 145, 161
The Origins of the Partition of India
1936-1947
16, 142
The Other Side of Silence: Voices from
India’s Partition
142, 151
The Pakistani Bride
66
The Partitions of Memory: The Afterlife
of the Division of India
45, 143,
147
The Perishable Empire: Essays on
Indian Writing in English
143, 160
The Princes
48-49, 62
The Shadow Lines
13, 24, 28, 31, 63,
109, 111-115, 118, 120, 123-126, 128-
129, 133-136, 145, 156-159, 161
The Shadow Lines: Educational
Edition
31, 158-160
The Shadow of the Great Game: The
Untold Story of India’s
Partition
141
The Shadow-Line
111, 156
The Slave of MS. H.6
114
The Sole Spokesman: Jinnah, the
Muslim League and the Demand for
Pakistan
141
The Tin Drum
90
The Twice-born Fiction: A Study of the
Themes and Techniques of Indian
Novels in English 1930-1964
30
The Vintage Book of Indian Writing in
English
41, 143, 147, 149
Tiger Niazi
104
Towards a Poetics of the Indian English
Novel
30
Train to Pakistan
13, 22, 24, 31, 33-
37, 42, 44, 47, 63, 67, 71, 80-81,
91, 132, 134-136, 144-146, 152, 161
transfer of power
14, 18, 92
Translating Partition
142, 144, 146
Tripathi, Salil
91, 146, 154
Tristam Shandy
90
Truth, Love & a Little Malice: An
Autobiography
34, 146
two nations theory
13
Uniyal, Rani
85, 153
Waiting for the Mahatma
28
Walsh, William
34, 81, 89, 146, 153-
154
What the Body Remembers
22, 60
white man’s burden
56
Williams, H.M.
47
Wolpert, Stanley
15, 33, 141, 145
Zaman, Niaz
66, 150, 152
Zeigler, Philip
15
176
SOUTH ASIAN PARTITION FICTION IN ENGLISH

Publications Series
Josine Stremmelaar and Paul van der Velde (eds.)
What about Asia? Revisiting Asian Studies
2006 (ISBN 978 90 5356 959 7)
Monographs
Alex McKay
Their Footprints Remain. Biomedical Beginnings Across the Indo-Tibetan
Frontier
Monographs 1
2007 (ISBN 978 90 5356 518 6)
Masae Kato
Women’s Rights? The Politics of Eugenic Abortion in Modern Japan
Monographs 2
2009 (ISBN 978 90 5356 793 7)
Jeroen de Kloet
China with a Cut. Globalisation, Urban Youth and Popular Music
Monographs 3
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 162 5)
Edited Volumes
Gijsbert Oonk (ed.)
Global Indian Diasporas. Exploring Trajectories of Migration and Theory
Edited Volumes 1
2007 (ISBN 978 90 5356 035 8)
Wen-Shan Yang and Melody Chia-Wen Lu (eds.)
Asian Cross-border Marriage Migration. Demographic Patterns and Social
Issues
Edited Volumes 2
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 054 3)

Margaret Sleeboom-Faulkner (ed.)
Frameworks of Choice. Predictive and Genetic Testing in Asia
Edited Volumes 3
2010 (ISBN 978 90 8964 165 6)
