South African Journal of Industrial Engineering Nov 2007 Vol 18(2): 187-201 
A BUSINESS FRAMEWORK TO NETWORK SMALL SOUTH AFRICAN 
ENTERPRISES FOR SUSTAINABILITY 
 
R.P. Brand1, N.D. du Preez2 and C. Schutte3 
 
Department of Industrial Engineering 
University of Stellenbosch, South Africa 
1riaan@indutech.co.za, 2nddp@sun.ac.za, 3corne@sun.ac.za  
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This paper describes the role and use of enterprise engineering concepts as a formal 
approach to the deployment of sustainable networks of small businesses in South 
Africa. Small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) operating in the informal 
South African economy struggle to survive for various reasons. A business 
framework is suggested that supports informal SMMEs through their initial stages of 
operation, and by doing so, improves sustainable growth and employment 
opportunities. This implies integration of informal business activities with the formal 
economy. The business framework is constructed using the Zachman Enterprise 
Reference Architecture, and is benchmarked by a small-scale fish farming project 
case study to validate the research hypothesis. 
 
OPSOMMING 
 
Hierdie artikel beskryf die toepassing van bedryfsingenieurswesebeginsels as 'n 
formele benadering tot die ontwikkeling van volhoubare netwerke van klein 
ondernemings in Suid-Afrika. Verskeie faktore dra by tot die sukkelende 
voortbestaan van “SMMEs” in die informele ekonomie van die land. As moontlike 
oplossing vir hierdie probleem word ‘n besigheidsraamwerk voorgestel wat 
informele “SMMEs” gedurende hul aanvangsfase ondersteun en daardeur volhoubare 
groei 
en 
werkskeppingsgeleenthede 
verbeter. 
Realisering 
van 
hierdie 
besigheidsraamwerk impliseer integrasie-aktiwiteite tussen die informele en formele 
ekonomieë. Die besigheidsraamwerk is ontwikkel met behulp van Zachman se 
Besigheidsverwysingsargitektuur. ‘n Visboerderyprojek dien as gevallestudie vir 
validasie van hierdie navorsingshipotese. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
1The author was enrolled for the degree of MSc in Engineering at the Department of Industrial 
Engineering, University of Stellenbosch. 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 
188 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
South Africa’s recent political history, and particularly its international isolation until 
the 1990s, is one of the main reasons for the country’s economic inequities. This 
phenomenon challenges the present government to implement innovative solutions 
that promote business development and create employment opportunities. Since the 
1994 elections, there has been a growing awareness of the importance of 
entrepreneurship and the implementation of the necessary support mechanisms 
required to sustain new businesses. Small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) 
play a significant role in employment creation and are one of the main drivers of 
economic growth. Balkenhol et al [1] argue that the high rate of unemployment in 
South Africa affects the number of informal SMMEs, as people are forced to make a 
living. Starting a successful new business venture requires both human and 
environmental resources (Baum et al [2]). Recent research recommends that 
government policies and development programmes be directed towards increasing 
awareness of entrepreneurial career possibilities, as well as providing the opportunity 
to gain entrepreneurial experience (Rotefoss et al [19] and Drennan et al [7]).  
 
In South Africa, enterprise development remains an important area of cooperation 
across all areas of government. In order to create suitable work for entrants into the 
labour market, it is necessary that new enterprises are created and that existing 
enterprises become more competitive (Burger [5]). Various programmes to improve 
the delivery of essential social services to the majority of the population are 
underway. These focus on the delivery of better opportunities in education and 
business. Unfortunately, they are not sufficient to address the country’s enormous 
need for employment opportunities in a timely fashion (Rogerson [18]).  
 
This paper highlights the factors that influence the sustainability of informal 
SMMEs, and suggests a method that can be used to transform them into more formal 
businesses that are integrated into the formal economy. A business framework is 
proposed – a concept that acts as a bridge between informal enterprises and the 
formal economy. In practice this business framework will be realised by the 
registration of a legal business entity to which similar SMMEs can be affiliated. 
Business solutions provided by such a business entity include financial services, 
customer and supplier management, logistic services, project planning, and business 
training. This business entity should not be too complex and must be easy to 
understand and implement; on the other hand, it must not be too simplistic. Role 
players in this business framework are informal SMMEs, formal enterprises, 
investors, and the government. 
 
2.  LITERATURE REVIEW AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT 
 
Although the current economic and political environment in South Africa is 
favourable towards entrepreneurs who operate their own businesses, most SMMEs in 
the informal economy find it difficult to survive or contribute formally to economic 
activities. A major concern is the availability of resources (e.g. finances, training, 
management skills, and general services) to support these SMMEs (Balkenhol et al 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 189
[1] and Lehohla [11], [12]). While the economy is in a process of transition, with 
business becoming more integrated into the international system, the local 
government still has to address economic disparities between population groups, 
stimulate growth, and create work opportunities. An understanding of the factors that 
influence the sustainability of informal SMMEs is necessary if the government is to 
develop policies and programmes that encourage entrepreneurship and improve 
business development (Drennan et al [7]). South Africa’s more than 2-million small 
businesses represent 98% of the country’s total number of firms, employing 55% of 
the labour force and contributing 42% of the country’s wage bill. Yet 87% of these 
enterprises are survivalist and operate outside the formal economy (Le Roux [13]). 
 
Conceptual issues and definitions 
 
Definitions for small enterprises differ from country to country and also between 
institutions within countries. The term ‘SMME’ is mostly South African-related and 
includes ‘micro’ enterprises, as opposed to the more general accepted term ‘SME‘. 
The South African Small Business Act of 1996 [20] defines SMMEs based on the 
number of employees per enterprise size category in combination with the annual 
turnover for the specific sector in which the enterprise operates. This article focuses 
on informal SMMEs that have five employees or fewer, and a turnover of less than 
R300,000. 
 
Eapen [8] adds to this: 
 
Some analysts define ‘informal’ activities in terms of the absence of 
characteristics that belongs to ‘formal’ activities like security of work, 
better earnings, existence of non-wage and long-term benefits, protective 
legislation and union protection. 
 
The International Labour Organisation [10] recommended at the 2002 International 
Conference for Labour Statistics (ICLS) that the informal sector be defined in terms 
of one or more of the following criteria (see also Devey et al [6]): 
 
• Non-registration of the enterprise in terms of national legislation such as taxation 
or other commercial legislation.  
• Non-registration of employees of the enterprise in terms of labour legislation. 
• Small size of the enterprise in terms of the number of people employed. 
• Small annual turnover. 
 
Impediments to business development 
 
Balkenhol et al [1] argue that a common constraint on business development in 
South Africa is the high failure rate of start-up SMMEs. It is reasonable to argue that 
survival of SMMEs in both the formal and informal economy is a major concern. 
Many business owners and employees in the informal economy are less skilled than 
their counterparts in the formal economy, placing these informal SMMEs in a high 
risk category (Burger [5]). The most prominent impediments to business 
development (and survival) are explained as follows: 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 
190 
• Access to finance. Finances are critically important, especially for firms that 
show entrepreneurial talent and skills to grow (Berry et al [3]). Financiers are 
unwilling to enter the informal SMME segment of the market owing to the high 
risks associated with these businesses (Balkenhol et al [1]). Sixty percent of non-
VAT-registered business owners required additional money to start their 
businesses, but only 5.1% of these informal SMMEs managed to obtain loans 
from commercial banks (Lehohla [11], [12]). South African SMMEs use their 
own funds as start-up capital (Balkenhol et al [1]). In an attempt to facilitate 
access to loan finance to SMMEs, the South African government established 
Khula Finance Ltd as a ‘wholesale’ institution to support financial intermediaries. 
It is believed, however, that this policy initiative has not lived up to expectations 
(Berry et al [3]). 
 
• Lack of business skills. Exposure to management experience further impacts on 
the management skills of entrepreneurs (Balkenhol et al [1]). Years of 
restrictions and control of access to entrepreneurial opportunities created a 
mindset focused on wage and salaried work rather than the establishment of 
small businesses and entrepreneurs (Balkenhol et al [1]). This process has led to 
an increasing number of people who become economically active but cannot find 
employment and do not have the capacity to embark on self-employment or other 
income-generating activities (Lehohla [11], [12]). 
 
• General services. It is reasonable to argue that being able to run a formal 
business assumes the presence of important infrastructural elements. Many of 
these SMMEs do not have access to general services such as business premises, 
electricity, telephone, water, or sanitation (Lehohla [11], [12]). 
 
• Influence of immediate communities. Operating a business in a poor community 
is extremely difficult, as potential customers are also struggling to make a living 
and have little money to spend (Devey et al [6]). 
 
• Isolated operation. Without a permanent address or telephone it is extremely 
difficult for these businesses to communicate efficiently. The lack of access to 
communication technologies hampers the exchange of ideas, the integration of 
services, and the ability to tender or to conclude contracts. This leads to many 
business processes being excluded (isolated) from business opportunities. 
 
• Business registration. Only 7.3% of non-VAT registered businesses obtained a 
licence or permit to operate their business (Lehohla [11], [12]). Business owners 
do not register their businesses because of the lack of general services.  
 
• Ineffective business processes. Without processes like supply, marketing, and 
distribution that enable customer or supplier interaction, these informal SMMEs 
cannot benefit from the stream of resources (or money) that is in circulation. 
 
• Competition and the nature of the economy. In South Africa most sectors are 
concentrated around a few large firms. Both formal and informal SMMEs 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 191
therefore find it difficult to enter highly competitive markets to compete against 
these larger established firms (Balkenhol et al [1]). 
 
The performance of the formal economy has an effect on the number of informal 
SMMEs and on their sustainability. Pressure in the formal economy (e.g. slow 
growth, high inflation, legislation, or low foreign investment) can lead to an increase 
in unemployment figures, which in turn increases the number of survivalist SMMEs 
(Balkenhol et al [1]). ‘Survivalist’ refers to that category of SMMEs whose owners 
started a business because they could not keep or acquire employment in the wage 
economy. Most survivalist SMMEs are disbanded or closed when the owner finds 
employment (Balkenhol et al [1]). SMME growth and prosperity are clearly not 
‘stand-alone’ aims to be pursued in ignorance of the broader economic policy. In 
fact, it is easy to understand that SMME growth can be strongly affected by the 
macroeconomic context (Berry et al [3]). 
 
Various governmental support policies and programmes have been implemented, but 
many of these initiatives have not lived up to expectations (Budlender et al [4] and 
Devey et al [6]). Another facility for sustainable business development is needed. 
This again launches the quest to find a sustainable solution that would support 
SMMEs and entrepreneurs with business structures that eliminate early risks and 
enable them to participate in the formal economy. The suggested business framework 
is aimed at fulfilling this role by integrating informal SMMEs with formal economic 
activities. The objective would be to create a legal business entity (based on the 
concept of the business framework) to which entrepreneurs and informal SMMEs are 
affiliated. This agreement allows them to operate a business under favourable 
conditions until the business is mature enough to function on its own. 
 
Hypothesis 
 
SMMEs in the second (informal) economy find it difficult to participate in formal 
economic activities. This raises questions about the ability of these enterprises to 
contribute to the formal economy in a sustainable manner. Ideally, one would like to 
use these SMMEs as a vehicle that provides inexperienced business owners with the 
opportunity of capitalising on the country’s competitive and comparative advantages. 
 
Developing a business framework that supports and grows networks of SMMEs may 
provide an answer to the abovementioned problem. This proposed solution has led to 
the following research hypothesis: 
 
SMMEs in the second economy struggle to survive, but when affiliated to a 
legal business entity (based on the concept of the business framework), they 
have the opportunity to grow in a sustainable manner and contribute to the 
formal economy. 
 
Validation of this concept is required to determine whether the research hypothesis 
can be accepted or not. 
 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 
192 
3.  RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY 
 
Establishing networks of small businesses, and then integrating these networks of 
SMMEs with formal economic activities, requires a platform through which 
resources, knowledge, and skills can be transferred to informal entrepreneurs. Such a 
platform would be realised through the establishment of a legal business entity based 
on the concept of the business framework. 
 
Since this objective relates to the field of enterprise engineering, it was appropriate 
first to identify relevant engineering tools for characterising these informal SMMEs, 
as well as methods that should be followed for developing the business framework. 
Once the necessary engineering tools had been selected, these informal SMMEs were 
characterised and evaluated to determine which business processes had to be re-
engineered to improve overall operation and sustainability. From this business 
assessment, a requirements list was compiled that acted as a specification sheet for 
the business framework. The next phase was to develop the business framework 
based on the specifications in the requirements list. Lastly, the concept of the 
business framework was tested by means of a case study. 
 
Enterprise engineering tools and methodologies 
 
Three enterprise engineering methodologies were selected to perform an assessment 
on SMMEs operating in the informal economy. The Enterprise Life Cycle 
Methodology (ELCM) of Himes and Swelfer [8] was used to determine the impact of 
environmental elements on high level business functions like strategic planning, 
enterprise planning, management, and the influence of business drivers. It also 
provided an understanding of the level of integration between internal business 
activities like project execution and operations. 
 
The Value Chain of Porter [17] was used to determine how business processes add 
value to the products or services provided by these SMMEs. It also assesses the level 
of maturity of customer and supplier interaction. The supporting activities were 
assessed to evaluate their effectiveness in providing a competitive advantage to the 
enterprises. 
 
Finally, a GAP Analysis was used to transform these informal SMMEs from their 
isolated existence into a networked environment where they could operate as role 
players in the business framework. 
 
SMME assessment 
 
In collaboration with Linge Lethu Business Support2 and the Global Competitiveness 
Centre3 (GCC), ten typical informal SMME businesses were interviewed. These 
                                                     
2 Linge Lethu Business Support is a non-governmental organisation supporting start-up SMMEs. 
3 The GCC at the Industrial Engineering Department of the University of Stellenbosch specializes in 
researching tools and methodologies for enterprise engineering with the aim of improving 
competitiveness. 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 193
business interviews covered three market areas (Figure 1). Assessments were made 
using the enterprise engineering tools mentioned above. The following business 
processes were selected as key processes for the GAP Analysis:  
 
• Customer and Supplier Management. 
• Marketing and Sales. 
• Logistics. 
• Operations. 
• Management Responsibilities. 
 
Market distribution of SMMEs being interviewed
Manufacturing, 
4
Real Estate, 3
Services, 3
Total Interviewed: 10
 
 
Figure 1:  Market distribution of SMMEs being interviewed. 
 
An analysis of these business processes led to a list of requirements for the business 
framework. The analysis was done for those SMMEs being interviewed, and findings 
were correlated with conditions pertaining to informal SMMEs as found in the 
literature. Table 1 lists these requirements. 
 
4.  BUSINESS FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT 
 
Developing a business framework that addresses all the aspects listed in Table 1 
requires collaboration between various role players (e.g. the government, companies 
from the formal economic sector, financial institutions, and investors), as shown in 
Figure 2. An important contributing factor to the success of such a venture is shared 
ownership of the legal businesses entity. Development of the business framework 
was done from a bottom-up perspective, where attention was given first to the 
requirements of SMMEs, then the legal business entity, and, lastly, linking the legal 
business entity with larger companies.  
 
It can be seen as enterprise integration implemented at three levels: 
 
• Integration of internal business processes for informal SMMEs  
• Integration between businesses affiliated to a legal business entity, and 
• Integration of such a legal business entity with larger companies. 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 
194 
The business framework should provide an environment that supports similar informal 
SMMEs. 
The business framework should help these SMMEs to build, manage, and maintain 
customer and supplier relationships. 
The business framework should support these SMMEs in the necessary marketing and 
sales activities. 
The business framework should provide a logistics infrastructure and support its 
management. 
The business framework should support these SMMEs through the growing pains of 
starting a business. This should include business plans, strategic planning, project 
management, production, quality control, access to finances, and enterprise integration.  
The business framework should support these SMMEs with general financial services 
like book keeping, financial analysis and forecasts, taxation, and cash flow management.
The business framework should provide an environment that stimulates innovative 
solutions to improve business processes, and adds value to products or services being 
sold to customers. 
The business framework should be aligned with the local government’s economic 
growth requirements in order to benefit from governmental support for these SMMEs. 
The business framework should address the socio-economic problems that most 
informal SMME-owners and entrepreneurs face every day. 
 
Table 1.  Requirements list for the business framework. 
 
 
The rationale 
 
As determined by the assessments in the previous section, many entrepreneurs and 
SMMEs in the informal economy operate in relative isolation and do not have formal 
management procedures in place. When some of these informal businesses 
(operating in the same line of business) are teamed together to form a network, they 
could be seen as workstations in a virtual supply chain, adding value to raw materials 
by performing physical actions on it. As with any supply chain, the system has to 
cater for raw materials (which implies suppliers) and deliver final products (which 
implies customers). The same arguments apply to businesses in the services industry. 
Transportation of raw materials to, and final products from, these virtual 
workstations requires a logistics infrastructure. 
 
If a business framework is designed in which a network of informal SMMEs fulfil 
the ‘operations’ activity, with a legal business entity taking responsibility for the 
other business activities, it results in a system that acts as a supply chain, with the 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 195
advantages of an integrated logistics infrastructure and customer and supplier 
relationships. In other words, the concept of a business framework would represent a 
normal company, except that the physical work would be done by informal SMMEs 
and not by employees of the legal business entity within the business framework. 
 
 
 
Figure 2:  Development of the business framework. 
 
Enterprise architecture 
 
This business framework’s enterprise architecture is complex, owing to the wide 
range of situations for which it has to cater. The main complexities are: 
 
• The interface between SMMEs from the informal economy and larger companies 
from the formal economic sector. 
 
• The range of services provided to SMMEs has to change over time. In order to 
allow SMMEs to mature and to start taking responsibility for their internal 
processes, the provision of services by the legal business entity has to change 
(that is, be reduced) over time. The resulting system should thus be designed to 
allow for changes at specific intervals. These changes will have an influence on 
the interfaces between the legal business entity and affiliated SMMEs. 
 
• Human factors will add to the complexities as various people are required to 
manage processes within such a business framework. These people would come 
from different backgrounds, from very formal to informal. Complexities increase 
with the number of people involved, especially if they are from different 
backgrounds. 
 
Developing such a composite enterprise architecture demands guidance from an 
enterprise reference architecture. The Zachman Framework was used as enterprise 
reference architecture for planning, designing, and building the business framework. 
A basic understanding of the Zachman Framework is given by O’Rourke et al [16] 
who state that the Zachman Framework for Enterprise Architecture “is a set of 
assumptions, concepts, values, and practices that constitutes a way of viewing reality. 
Zachman’s Framework is organised as 36 cells arranged in a six-by-six matrix… It is 
a two dimensional schema, used to organise the detailed representation of the 
enterprise”. Zachman’s Framework, as illustrated in Figure 3, is a valuable tool for 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 
196 
modelling how an organisation operates, and for enhancing the level of 
communication in and with an organisation.  
 
Zachman 
Framework 
Data 
(What) 
Function
(How) 
Network
(Where) 
People
(Who) 
Time 
(When) 
Motivation
(Why) 
Scope 
(Planner) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Model 
(Owner) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
System  
Model 
(Designer) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Technology 
Model 
(Builder) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detailed 
Representations 
(Sub-contractor) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functioning 
Enterprise 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  Outline of the Zachman Enterprise Reference Architecture. 
 
The columns classify answers to the interrogatives: WHAT, HOW, WHERE, WHO, 
WHEN, and WHY. The rows classify the audience perspectives of PLANNER, 
OWNER, DESIGNER, BUILDER, SUB-CONTRACTOR and FUNCTIONING 
ENTERPRISE (Locke [14] and Zachman [21], [22]). 
 
Business framework development 
 
In most cases a business opportunity will be initiated from outside the realm in which 
informal SMMEs operate. The government, for instance, may recognise a certain 
business opportunity or business driver. If this opportunity proves to have a viable 
business case, the government then has to find business partners from the private 
sector. Once the partners are identified, a team representing the government and 
business partners have to start with a business plan and the development of the 
business framework. This process should address aspects like registration of a legal 
business entity, opening bank accounts, assigning responsibilities to the management 
team, selecting a board of directors, developing a business plan, etc. Once the 
business framework was operational, the team would then search for SMME owners 
who would fit into the environment of the business framework. A contract between 
SMME owners and the registered legal business entity of the business framework 
would have to be signed, after which collaboration could start.  
 
Figure 4 is a high-level illustration of the interactions between the stakeholders. 
 
Design Specifications 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 197
Partners in such a business framework need to understand that the main aim is to 
develop an environment for SMMEs to grow, and that there would not always be 
large profit margins. While the objective is obviously to make profit, the focus 
should remain on social returns, community development, and sustainable work-
creation through self-employment. The business framework is seen as a mechanism 
to achieve this vision. 
 
5.  CASE STUDY 
 
This case study demonstrates that the concept of a business framework can be 
successful and rewarding for all role players. Information and data used in this case 
study was provided by the Department of Aquaculture of the University of 
Stellenbosch. The authors, together with Linge Lethu Business Support, acted as 
consultants for the project, obtaining funds from international investors4. This project 
initiated a long-term Small Farmers Development Programme. 
 
 
Figure 4:  Physical data model of the business framework. 
 
Business opportunity 
 
The Department of Aquaculture of the University of Stellenbosch saw a business 
opportunity to supply fish to the growing demand for trout in the South African 
market. The shortage of trout supplies is about 200 tons per year. Furthermore, the 
Western Cape provides an outstanding habitat for Rainbow Trout, and is an area with 
many farms and irrigation dams. The question was how to exploit the Western Cape 
as an environment for this business opportunity. Aquaculture provides an opportunity 
                                                     
4 Woord en Daad from the Netherlands provided funding for infrastructure lay-out of two farms. 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 
198 
for rural communities to participate in agribusiness and regional economies without 
owning land, which is usually a prerequisite.  
 
Business framework 
 
The objective of this research project was to develop a sustainable solution that could 
support SMMEs through their start-up phases, and enable them to grow into 
sustainable businesses that actively participate in the mainstream economy. This was 
achieved through: 
 
• Investigations of the reasons why many of these SMMEs struggle to survive. 
• Research into current principles and policies implemented by the South African 
government, and their effectiveness. 
• Evaluation of the business processes within these SMMEs, using engineering 
methodologies and tools. 
• The development of a business framework according to the Zachman Enterprise 
Architecture Framework. 
 
The successful application of the business framework concept in the small-scale fish 
farming project serves as evidence that the research hypothesis can be accepted. 
 
Hands-on Fish Farmers Co-operative 
 
This business structure supports participating small-scale fish farmers with 
purchases, marketing, loans, security, quality controls, and management tasks. The 
Hands-on Fish Farmers Co-operative has the following business objectives, 
according to co-operative practices: 
 
• To act as a fish dealer and undertake the marketing of fish and fish products. 
• To process fish and fish products. 
• To buy, hire, or otherwise acquire requisites, boats, permits, or quotas necessary 
for use in fishing operations. 
• To facilitate capacity-building, including training and extension services. 
• To supply members with essential inputs, e.g. feeds and fingerlings. 
• To assist members in accessing finance to run their businesses effectively and 
efficiently. 
• To assist members with financial services and bookkeeping practices. 
 
The operational structure with its role players is illustrated in  
Figure 5. 
 
Small Scale Fish Farming 
 
Small-scale fish farmers each implement a floating system that consists of a platform 
with two polyethylene cage nets of 10m x 10m x 5m each. Each unit can produce six 
tons of rainbow trout during the winter months, followed by the production of 1 to 
1.25 tons of tilapia during the summer months. Trout are supplied under contract to 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 199
existing processing companies for the manufacture of high-value products, while 
tilapia is sold as an affordable food source within local communities.  
 
 
 
Figure 5:  Operational structure of small-scale fish farming project. 
 
Fingerlings are bought at the beginning of each season and stocked in the floating 
cage systems. Fish farmers feed and take care of the fish during the production cycle. 
An extension officer from the co-operative visits the farmers on a monthly basis, 
during which performance and managerial systems are evaluated. 
 
Project conclusion 
 
The annual net profit of the small-scale farming units is up to three times the average 
annual wages of farm labourers in these rural areas (Oberholster [15]). The Small 
Farmers Development Programme has proven its ability to make a meaningful 
contribution to the income and nutritional status of these communities, while also 
providing a means for the development of human resources. The programme has the 
potential 
to 
create 
a 
substantial number 
of 
employment 
opportunities. 
Implementation of 30 farms over a three-year period will lead to 64 direct and 33 
indirect employment opportunities. Fourteen farms are already in operation. 
 
The Small Farmers Development Programme saw excellent co-operation from all 
role players in laying down a business framework for infrastructure, facilities, 
training, and extension services provision. The programme has developed a broad 
network between national and international institutions, allowing knowledge transfer 
through bilateral programmes. 
 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 
200 
 
 
6.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
From a business framework development perspective, the small-scale fish farming 
project fits the role of case study perfectly: it demonstrates the importance of a 
‘controlling company’ that acts on behalf of the associated businesses. Emphasis is 
placed on the lack of skills of these prospective business owners: although they can 
perform physical operations, they need training in the fields of business skills, 
managerial skills, system design, production planning, financial analysis, etc. 
 
The objective of this research project was to develop a sustainable solution that could 
support SMMEs through their start-up phases, and enable them to grow into 
sustainable businesses that actively participate in the mainstream economy. This was 
achieved through: 
• Investigations of the reasons why many of these SMMEs struggle to survive. 
• Research into current principles and policies implemented by the South African 
government, and their effectiveness. 
• Evaluation of the business processes within these SMMEs, using engineering 
methodologies and tools. 
• The development of a business framework according to the Zachman Enterprise 
Architecture Framework. 
 
The successful application of the business framework concept in the small-scale fish 
farming project serves as evidence that the research hypothesis can be accepted. 
 
7.  REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Balkenhol, B. and Evans-Clock, C. 2003. ‘Private equity and capitalisation of 
SMMEs in South Africa: Quo Vadis?’ Social Finance Programme & InFocus 
Programme on Boosting Employment through Small Enterprise Development, 
Working Paper No. 34, Ebony Consulting International (Pty) Ltd. 
[2] 
Baum, J.R., Locke, E.A. and Smith, K.G. 2001. ‘A multidimensional model 
of venture growth’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol 44, No 2, pp292-
303. 
[3] 
Berry, A., Blottnitz, M., Cassim, R., Kesper, A., Rajaratnam, B. and 
Seventer, D.E., 2002. The Economics of SMMEs in South Africa, Trade and 
Industrial Policy Strategies. 
[4] 
Budlender, D., Skinner, C. and Valodia, I. 2004. ‘Budgets and the informal 
economy: An analysis of the impact of the budget on informal workers in 
South Africa’, School of Development Studies, University of KZN, South 
Africa. 
[5] 
Burger, D. 2004. ‘Government Communication and Information System’, The 
South African Yearbook 2003/2004. 
[6] 
Devey, R., Skinner, C. and Valodia, I. 2006. ‘Second best? Trends and 
linkages in the informal economy in South Africa’, Development Policy 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za

 201
Research Unit, Working Paper 06/102, Human Science Research Council 
Press, Cape Town. 
[7] 
Drennan, J., Kennedy, J. and Renfrow, P. 2005. ‘Impact of childhood 
experiences 
on 
the 
development 
of 
entrepreneurial 
intentions’, 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation, pp 231-238. 
[8] 
Eapen, M. 2001. ‘Woman in informal sector in Kerala: Need for re-
examination’, Economic and Political Weekly, June 30.  
[9] 
Himes, G. and Swelfer, M. 2003. ‘Building an Enterprise Life Cycle’, MITRE 
Publications. 
[10] International Labour Organisation. 2002. ‘Woman and men in the informal 
economy, a statistical picture’, International Labour Organisation, Geneva. 
[11] Lehohla, P. 2002. Statistics South Africa: The contribution of small and micro 
enterprises to the economy of the country: A survey of non-VAT-registered 
business in South Africa: Part 1 – Summary and Tables, Stats SA Library, 
Pretoria, South Africa, November 2002. 
[12] Lehohla, P. 2002. Statistics South Africa: The contribution of small and micro 
enterprises to the economy of the country: A survey of non-VAT-registered 
business in South Africa: Part 2 – Narrative Report, Stats SA Library, Pretoria, 
South Africa, November 2002. 
[13] Le Roux, M. 2006. ‘South Africa: Mpahlwa offers help to small businesses off 
beaten track’, Business Day, Johannesburg, June 27.  
[14] Locke, S. 2003. ‘The Zachman Enterprise Architecture’, Metadata Systems 
Software Inc., Mississauga, Toronto, Canada. 
[15] Oberholster, J. 2001. An investigation into the long-term sustainability of 
small aquaculture systems in the Western Cape of South Africa, Division of 
Aquaculture of Stellenbosch University, p88. 
[16] O’Rourke, C., Fishman, N. and Selkow, W. 2003. ‘Enterprise Architecture 
using the Zachman Framework’, Thomson Course Technology, Boston, USA.  
[17] Porter, M.E. 1985. ‘Competitive advantage, creating and sustaining superior 
performance’, Free Press, 1985. 
[18] Rogerson, C. 2004 ‘The impact of the South African Government’s SMME 
programmes: A ten year review (1994-2003)‘, Development Southern Africa, 
Vol. 21 (5). 
[19] Rotefoss, B. and Kolvereid, L. 2005. ‘Aspiring, nascent and fledging 
entrepreneurs: 
An 
investigation 
to 
the 
business 
startup 
process’, 
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, Vol 17, No 2, pp109-127. 
[20] South Africa. 1996. National Small Business Act. No 92 of 1996. Pretoria: The 
President’s Office, No 1901. November, 27. [Laws] 
[21] Zachman, J.A. 1997. Concepts of the framework for enterprise architecture, 
background, description and utility, Zachman International, Inc., Information 
Engineering Services (Pty) Ltd. 
[22] Zachman, J.A. 2000. ‘Framework for enterprise architecture’, Enterprise 
Physics 101 Seminar, Zachman International, Inc., 2222 Foothill Blvd, Suite 
337, La Canada, Ca. 
http://sajie.journals.ac.za
