Projective techniques in Consumer Research 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 28, 2000 
47 
Projective techniques in consumer research 
Suné Donoghue 
OPSOMMING 
 
Projektiewe tegnieke behels 'n dubbelsinnige stimu-
lus waarvolgens die subjek sy/haar persoonlikheid, 
houdings, opinies en selfkonsep - as integrale deel 
van die self - in ‘n situasie projekteer ten einde 
struktuur of betekenis daaraan te gee.  Projektiewe 
tegnieke word in kwalitatiewe verbruikersgedrag- en 
bemarkingstudies gebruik om subjekte se onbe-
wuste of "verskuilde" gevoelens, houdings en mo-
tiewe bloot te lê en om stereotipiese en sydige re-
sponspatrone uit te skakel. 
 
Projektiewe tegnieke word in kwalitatiewe verbrui-
kersgedragnavorsing gebruik en aan die hand van 
die ontwerp en struktuur, verskillende tipes en die 
analise en interpretasie van data ontgin deur die 
gebruik 
van 
projektiewe 
tegnieke 
beskryf.  
Geldigheids- en betroubaarheidsoorwegings asook 
die nadele en voordele van projektiewe tegnieke 
word bespreek.  Gevallestudies word beskryf om te 
toon hoe projektiewe tegnieke met ander kwalita-
tiewe data-insamelingsmetodes (diepteonderhoude 
en fokusgroeponderhoude) gekombineer kan word 
om meer insig oor die hoe, waarom en wat van ver-
bruikers se gedrag te bekom. 
 
 
 
—  Ms S Donoghue 
Department of Consumer Science, University of Pretoria 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Various projective techniques for personality assess-
ment and psychoanalytic treatment in clinical psychol-
ogy have increasingly gained acceptance since World 
War II (Bellak, 1992; Graham & Lilly, 1984:212; Kas-
sarjian, 1974:3-85).  A set of projective techniques 
that were originally developed by clinical psychologists 
was adapted for use in consumer and marketing re-
search (Berkman & Gilson, 1986:365; Loudon & Della 
Bitta, 1993:619; Kassarjian, 1974:3-85).  These tech-
niques became generally known as motivation re-
search.  
 
Projective techniques are not exclusively used to 
study consumer motivation, nor do these techniques 
contain all the tools for such studies.  Motivation re-
search shares many techniques with other consumer 
research areas using qualitative rather than quantita-
tive research approaches (Loudon & Della Bitta, 
1993:619).  
 
Projective techniques may be classified as a struc-
tured-indirect way of investigating the whys of situa-
tions (Webb, 1992:125).  They are not used to meas-
ure (that is more the territory of other techniques such 
as surveys), but to uncover feelings, beliefs, attitudes 
and motivation which many consumers find difficult to 
articulate (Webb, 1992:125-126).  Projective tech-
niques help the researcher enter the private worlds of 
subjects to uncover their inner perspectives in a way 
they feel comfortable with (Gordon & Langmaid, 
1988:90; Loudon & Della Bitta, 1993:619). 
 
This article describes the use of projective techniques 
in qualitative consumer research.  Psychology's basic 
theoretical foundations - from which the use of projec-
tive techniques in consumer research evolved - are 
briefly discussed.  Projective techniques are described 
with reference to their design and structure, the differ-
ent types of projective technique are discussed, as are 
the analysis and interpretation of data generated by 
using projective techniques.  Their reliability and valid-
ity are investigated, and the advantages and disad-
vantages of projective techniques are discussed.  
Case studies are presented where projective tech-
niques have been used outside the clinical setting.  
 
 
THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS OF PROJECTIVE 
TECHNIQUES IN PSYCHOLOGY 
 
Projective techniques involve the use of vague, am-
biguous, unstructured stimulus objects or situations in 
which the subject "projects" his or her personality, atti-
tude, opinions and self-concept to give the situation 
some structure (Adams & Schvaneveldt in Burns & 

Projective techniques in Consumer Research 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 28, 2000 
48 
Lennon, 1993; Webb, 1992:113).  Projective tech-
niques uncover the innermost thoughts and feelings of 
a person, those aspects that are particular to this per-
son, in other words the essence of his or her individu-
ality (Kline, 1983:35).  Projective techniques are also 
used to discover the person’s characteristic modes of 
perceiving his or her world and how to behave in it 
(Chaplin in Sampson, 1986:41). 
 
In psychoanalytic literature the concept "projection" is 
viewed as a defence mechanism with which the ego 
protects itself from anxiety by externalising unpleasant 
feelings or experiential elements - often directly as-
cribing them to others (Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:95; 
Kline, 1983:35).  
 
Projective techniques are based on the underlying 
principle that unconscious desires and feelings can be 
inferred by presenting a subject with an ambiguous 
situation in which he or she has to use the ego de-
fence mechanism of projection.  The subject is free to 
interpret and respond to the ambiguous stimuli 
(material that can be variously interpreted) from his or 
her own particular frame of reference (Churchill, 
1991:322; Kassarjian, 1974:3-86; Loudon & Della 
Bitta, 1993:300; Solomon, 1994:25).  As there are no 
right or wrong answers, it is hoped that the subjects 
will project their own unconscious feelings in their an-
swers (Solomon, 1994:25). 
 
Examples of commonly used projective techniques for 
personality and clinical assessment include the Ror-
schach Inkblot Test, the Thematic Apperception Test 
(TAT), drawing techniques and sentence completion 
techniques (Janda, 1988:281-301; Piotrowski et al, 
1993; Crumbaugh, 1990:5). 
 
 
PROJECTIVE TECHNIQUES IN CONSUMER RE-
SEARCH 
 
Projective techniques - a way of transcending 
communication barriers  
 
In certain circumstances it is impossible to obtain ac-
curate information about what people think and feel by 
asking them to communicate their thoughts and feel-
ings with direct questioning (Haire, 1950).  In the typi-
cal interview, the subjects do not always share their 
innermost feelings with the researcher - who is after 
all a stranger.  Moreover, the subjects are frequently 
unaware of their underlying motives, aspirations, val-
ues and attitudes in buying a product or choosing one 
brand instead of another (Berkman & Gilson, 
1986:365; Haire, 1950).  They may fear being consid-
ered irrational or "stupid" and may therefore be reluc-
tant to admit to certain types of (purchasing) behav-
iour.  They consequently shade their responses to the 
interviewer.  
 
Some social conventions or barriers may constrain 
the expression of feelings and reporting of behav-
iours.  Subjects tend to offer answers that are socially 
acceptable and stereotypical in an interview situation 
(Green, 1984).  Many individuals avoid saying exactly 
what they think because they are, by nature, polite 
and tend to behave politely towards the interviewer 
(Berkman 
& 
Gilson, 
1986:365; 
Oppenheim 
in 
Sampson, 1986:42-43; Will et al, 1996).  
 
Instead of questioning them directly, the subjects may 
be asked to respond indirectly, either talking about 
other people, these other people's feelings, attitudes 
and opinions, or about objects or situations.  In talking 
about a third party or an object, the subjects project 
their covert feelings to the third party or object, and 
once these are in the open they may be discussed 
(Webb, 1992:125; Sampson, 1986:41; Dillon et al, 
1987:136).  
 
A subject's responses to projective techniques are not 
taken at face value, in other words meaning what the 
subject expects them to mean, but are interpreted in 
terms of underlying meanings of manifest behaviour 
(Levy, 1981; Sampson, 1986:42).  It therefore be-
comes possible to circumvent people's "defensive" 
reactions (Berkman & Gilson, 1986:365). 
 
Design and structure of projective techniques 
 
The stimuli range from structured (clear and definite) 
at one extreme, to very ambiguous (unstructured) at 
the other extreme.  It is assumed that the more un-
structured and ambiguous a stimulus, the more the 
subjects will project their emotions, motives, attitudes 
and values.  The structure of a stimulus determines 
the degree of choice available to the subject.  A highly 
structured stimulus, for example a questionnaire that 
requires the subjects to read a list of statements and 
answer "true” or “false" to each, leaves very little 
choice.  The subject has an unambiguous choice 
among clear alternatives and the stimuli will probably 
be interpreted similarly by almost everyone who reads 
them (Levy in Churchill, 1991:322, 324; Graham & 
Lilly, 1984:208).  Ambiguous stimuli (with little struc-
ture), for example Rorschach inkblots, present a wide 
range of alternative choices and the subjects may 
choose their own interpretations.  Semi-ambiguous 
pictures and sentence completion techniques repre-
sent an intermediate position on the stimulus contin-
uum (Wagner, 1995; Graham & Lilly, 1984:208).  
 
In consumer and marketing research applications, 
projective techniques should constitute relatively am-
biguous stimuli to permit the subjects to interpret the 
stimuli in terms of their own perceptions and in their 
own words.  The nature of the stimuli should however 
offer enough direction to evoke some association with 
the concept of interest (Churchill, 1991:322-324; 
Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:95; Thorndike in Berkman 
& Gilson, 1986:368). 
 
The stimuli can seldom be used directly as presented 
in the psychology literature.  In consumer and market-
ing research, the stimuli are changed or modified to 
direct the respondents to discuss their deepest feel-
ings and attitudes to a particular research problem 
(Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:95).  The TAT is perhaps 

Projective techniques in Consumer Research 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 28, 2000 
49 
the most flexible projective technique in marketing and 
consumer research as the TAT pictures may be modi-
fied to fit most marketing and consumer research 
problems, ranging from image studies to underlying 
consumer attitudes (Kassarjian, 1974:3-92; Churchill, 
1991:324; Berkman & Gilson, 1986:367).  
 
The Rorschach inkblot test has not been used much, 
nor has it been adapted for use in marketing research 
(Kassarjian, 
1974:3-93; 
Gordon 
& 
Langmaid, 
1988:96).  It is assumed that the Rorschach test re-
veals deep layers of the unconscious – the forces that 
give rise to psychoses.  It would therefore be folly to 
assume that these same forces underlie aspects of 
consumer behaviour (Kassarjian, 1974:3-94). 
 
Types of projective techniques 
 
Projective techniques have been categorised in terms 
of the response types required of subjects.  The first 
category is association.  The subjects are presented 
with a stimulus and they respond by indicating the first 
word, image or thought elicited by the stimulus (Burns 
& Lennon, 1993).  
 
In the case of word association, the subjects are 
asked to read a list of words and to indicate the first 
word that comes to mind.  The answers provide the 
researcher with a variety of "consumer vocabulary” 
associated with brands or products (Green, 1984).  
This can be useful in discovering a brand image or 
product attributes.  Brand personification requires the 
subjects to associate a brand or product with a person 
or personality type.  With the pictures and words tech-
nique, the subjects are given a number of words and 
pictures and are asked to choose those they associ-
ate with a brand or product and to explain their choice.  
This allows the researcher to discover the more emo-
tional responses to brands and imagery (Green, 1984; 
Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:95-98). 
 
In the second category, namely construction, the sub-
ject is asked to construct a story or a picture from a 
stimulus concept (Burns & Lennon, 1993).  The con-
struction procedure requires more complex and con-
trolled intellectual activity on the part of the subject.  
The subjects are for example handed a picture or a 
series of pictures in which consumers and products 
are the primary topics.  One or more persons are usu-
ally depicted in ambiguous situations and the subjects 
are asked to describe or assume the role of one of 
these people.  They have to tell what this person is 
thinking, saying and doing.  The subjects are asked to 
build a story around each picture, what led to it and 
what may happen in future (Dillon et al, 1987:136; 
Churchill, 1991:324; Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:101-
103).  These pictures derive from the psychologist’s 
TAT.  
 
Projective questioning (third person techniques) re-
quires the subjects to give opinions of other people's 
actions, feelings or attitudes.  “Bubble” drawings or 
cartoon tests provide an opportunity to fill in the 
thought or speech bubbles of the characters depicted 
in ambiguous situations that are of interest to the re-
searcher (Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:101-106).  
 
A third projective technique is completion.  The subject 
is given an incomplete sentence, story, argument or 
conversation, and asked to finish it (Burns & Lennon, 
1993).  Sentence completion is useful when time is 
limited, but depth of feeling still has to be tapped 
(Green, 1984; Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:99).  
 
According to Gordon and Langmaid (1988:101), brand 
mapping is a completion technique for which a variety 
of competing brands are displayed.  The subjects are 
asked to group these brands according to some sub-
ject-stipulated characteristic.  Brand mapping may be 
used in new product development and as a way to 
gain an understanding of how subjects view a product 
market. 
 
A fourth projective technique is termed “expressive”.  
A subject is asked to role-play, act, draw or paint a 
specific concept or situation (Burns & Lennon, 1993).  
Expressive techniques focus on the manner in which 
the subject constructs something, rather than on what 
it represents (Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:106). 
 
Choice ordering is a last type of projective technique 
and it is frequently used in quantitative research.  
However, the technique is informally used in qualita-
tive research when the subjects have to explain why 
certain things are "most important" or "least impor-
tant", or to "rank" or "order" or "categorise" certain fac-
tors associated with a product, brand or service 
(Gordon & Langmaid, 1988:112-113; Burns & Lennon, 
1993). 
 
Analysis and interpretation of data 
 
Interpreting data generated by using projective tech-
niques follows two broad approaches.  In quantitative 
analysis, the content of verbal or pictorial descriptions 
or sorted information is analysed by classifying the 
content into categories that are then given numerical 
values (Burns & Lennon, 1993).  Specific components 
of the test protocol are thus tabulated and used sys-
tematically to evaluate either a subject's responses or 
the empirical validity of generalisations about groups 
(Levy, 1981). 
 
Qualitative analysis accepts introspection as data and 
looks for subjective meanings, thus acknowledging the 
need for interpretation (Levy, 1981). Qualitative analy-
sis and interpretation of projective techniques are no 
different from the procedures for qualitative research 
in general.  There are no systems of scoring or tabula-
tion.  Instead the description and explanation of the 
projections by the subjects form the database which 
then requires ordering and interpretation (Gordon & 
Langmaid, 1988:118).  It is phenomenological and in-
terested in symbolic interactionism, trying to see what 
lies behind or is meant by manifest behaviour (Levy, 
1981).  Consumer researchers use a range of inter-
pretive approaches to data, including semiotic analysis 
(Alexander et al in Catterall & Ibbotson, 2000) and 

Projective techniques in Consumer Research 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 28, 2000 
50 
story grammars (Mick et al in Catterall & Ibbotson, 
2000).  
 
Reliability and validity 
 
The value of any instrument, whether it is a self-
administered questionnaire or a projective technique, 
is dependent on the validity and reliability of the col-
lected data (Kassarjian, 1974:3-95).  
 
Dozens of studies in the psychology literature point to 
adequate reliability and validity of the carefully devel-
oped and standardised projective techniques that are 
often used by psychologists.  On the other hand an 
equal number of studies suggest that these tech-
niques are not sufficiently reliable or valid (Kassarjian, 
1974:3-95).  One may well ask whether the projective 
techniques modified by marketing and consumer re-
searchers provide reliable and valid data (Kassarjian, 
1974:3-95).  
 
Reliability refers to the stability with which a tech-
nique yields information (Macfarlane & Tuddenham, 
1951:35).  In temporal reliability projective techniques 
must for example yield data that are stable over time.  
If subjects are tested and later retested, their re-
sponses must remain similar and highly correlated 
(Kassarjian, 1974:3-95).  Obviously, a subject's basic 
need-value system (his or her underlying motivations) 
are enduring.  If the responses are affected by situ-
ational factors, the technique is unreliable and the 
data are generally unusable (Kassarjian, 1974:3-95). 
 
Another form of reliability that is crucially important to 
any projective technique is coder or interpreter reli-
ability.  If two equally competent interpreters interpret 
the data in a significantly different manner, the tech-
nique should be questioned (Macfarlane & Tudden-
ham, 1951:36). 
 
Reliability may be established through triangulation, 
that is the use of two or more methods of data collec-
tion (Cohen & Manion in Burns & Lennon, 1993; Belk 
et al in Burns & Lennon, 1993).  Combining projective 
techniques with informal interviewing will enhance 
their value.  Projective stimuli are often used in con-
junction with individual interviews, and focus-group 
moderators also use projective stimuli to enhance 
focus-group 
discussions 
(Gordon 
& 
Langmaid, 
1988:114; Solomon, 1994:25). 
 
Validity refers to the degree in which the technique 
measures what it is supposed to measure.  If the pro-
jective technique purports to measure underlying mo-
tivation (need-value system), how well does it actually 
measure this basic substructure of the individual? 
(Kassarjian, 1974:3-96). 
 
The purpose of projective techniques is to get below 
the surface of the underlying need-value system of 
the individual, his or her personality and motivations 
(Kassarjian, 1974:3-97).  This implies that the re-
searcher must be skilled to categorise and interpret 
response protocols.  Allocating information to catego-
ries requires logical argumentation and interpretation 
of data.  A skilled and experienced researcher contrib-
utes to the inferential validity of a study, in other words 
the validity of the logical inferences drawn during exe-
cution of a research project. 
 
Whereas the clinician is concerned with internal valid-
ity, that is whether a study has generated accurate 
and valid findings about the individual who has been 
studied, the marketing and consumer researcher is 
concerned with external validity, that is whether the 
findings of a project can be generalised in similar 
cases (Kassarjian, 1974:3-96).  Kassarjian (1974:3-
96) questions the external validity of projective tech-
niques when the marketing or consumer researcher 
has to generalise from a small and perhaps unrepre-
sentative sample to a population of potential users or 
buyers.  Webb (1992:128) believes that projective 
techniques are useful in the exploratory stage of a re-
search project, when ideas and hypotheses are re-
quired.  When projective techniques have brought hid-
den attitudes or feelings into the open, other research 
techniques may be employed - techniques that are 
capable of rendering results that can be used to gen-
eralise about the characteristics of a population, for 
example survey methods and attitude scales (Webb, 
1992:129).  
 
Advantages and disadvantages of projective tech-
niques 
 
The primary disadvantage of projective techniques is 
the complexity of the data and the corresponding skills 
required of the researcher (Burns & Lennon, 1993).  
The responses have little meaning without careful 
evaluation by researchers who are both trained and 
skilled interpreters of information.  For this reason pro-
jective techniques are heavily criticised.  A consider-
able degree of subjectivity applies in the interpretation 
of responses to projective techniques, and the experts 
frequently disagree among themselves (Sampson, 
1986:42; Churchill, 1991:325). 
 
Projective techniques are expensive to administer be-
cause highly skilled research staff have to be em-
ployed.  Moreover, it is difficult to perform projective 
tests with statistically significant samples, and this re-
stricts generalisation of the results to the population as 
a whole (Webb, 1992:129). 
 
It may be difficult to get the subjects to project them-
selves into the roles the researchers wish them to as-
sume.  Some subjects may not agree to participate in 
exercises such as role playing (Webb, 1992:128; 
Berkman & Gilson, 1986:368). 
 
The reliability of measures is very difficult to establish.  
However, triangulation does establish reliability (Belk 
et al in Burns & Lennon, 1993). 
 
Employing projective techniques does have several 
advantages, for example the amount, richness and 
accuracy of the information that is collected (Burns & 
Lennon, 1993; Wagner, 1995).  Projective techniques 

Projective techniques in Consumer Research 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 28, 2000 
51 
can make a significant contribution if the research is 
concerned with beliefs, values, motivation, personality 
or other aspects related to individuals, their unique 
cognitions and behaviour (Kassarjian, 1974:3-97; 
Webb, 1992:128).  These techniques provide a view 
of the overall functioning of individuals (Thorndike in 
Berkman & Gilson, 1986:368).  
 
A variety of projective techniques is frequently used in 
the context of intensive individual interviews or con-
ventional 
focus-group 
discussions 
(Sampson, 
1986:40; Webb, 1992:125; Solomon, 1994:25).  
These techniques may be introduced at different 
stages in the discussion once the subjects feel com-
fortable with the moderator and each other (Green, 
1984).  Projective techniques may be used as a way 
of "breaking the ice" in a focus-group discussion at 
the start of a qualitative research project (Webb, 
1992:128).  Subjects enjoy projective techniques that 
create new energy in a group discussion and lighten 
the mood or tone of the proceedings (Gordon & Lang-
maid, 1988:89; Green, 1984). 
 
The nature of appraisals is usually well disguised and 
the subjects are not aware of the purpose of the exer-
cise.  Even if they are aware of the general nature of 
the appraisal, they do not know which aspects of their 
responses are significant or the extent of this signifi-
cance.  The tasks presented to the subjects are usu-
ally somewhat novel and quite unstructured.  They do 
not perceive right or wrong answers to the exercise 
and are encouraged to respond with a wide range of 
ideas (Burns & Lennon, 1993; Wagner, 1995; 
Thorndike in Berkman & Gilson, 1986:368). 
 
Projective techniques supplement and verify intuition 
in generating hypotheses - hypotheses on why con-
sumers behave as they do, why they buy or not and 
why they are influenced or not may emerge from the 
response protocols.  These hypotheses should subse-
quently be tested and verified by way of experimental 
techniques, panel studies and surveys among repre-
sentative samples according to carefully designed 
procedures (Kassarjian, 1974:3-97, 3-98). 
 
Most of these techniques make little or no demand in 
terms of literacy or academic skills.  They are pre-
dominantly nonreading, largely independent of par-
ticular languages, and in some cases do not involve 
speech at all.  Their scope is therefore much wider 
than that of self-reporting or rating procedures 
(Thorndike in Berkman & Gilson, 1986:368). 
 
Case studies 
 
Three case studies are discussed below to illustrate 
the use of projective techniques as a research tool.  
 
Will et al (1996) demonstrated that projective tech-
niques are extremely useful in opening discussions or 
debating issues that are socially sensitive, or where 
subjects may be embarrassed, lack knowledge or fear 
self-incrimination.  
 
The research aimed at exploring the respondents’ 
perceptions of factors that affect their health; aware-
ness and knowledge of contraceptives and well-
woman services; their attitudes, feelings and experi-
ence of these services; barriers to use, and knowl-
edge, attitudes and behaviour in connection with con-
traception.  
 
The research was conducted by using a qualitative 
focus-group methodology and projective techniques 
that were developed specifically for the project.  A 
word association technique was used to encourage 
the subjects to think about factors that affect their 
health.  The factors were written on cards and pre-
sented one at a time to the subjects for discussion.  
Using an association technique with prompt cards 
allowed the moderator to use a choice-ordering tech-
nique asking the subjects to rank the factors, for ex-
ample which were important for health and which 
were least important?  Sentence completion and pro-
jective questioning techniques involved asking the 
subjects how someone else might complete a sen-
tence or to comment on "other people's" experiences.  
The subjects reacted favourably to these sentences 
or "quotes" and began to discuss their own experi-
ences openly.  
 
Another technique these researchers used was an 
adaptation of an element of brand mapping.  The sub-
jects were encouraged to examine and discuss a 
range of contraceptives that were displayed on a tray.  
This allowed the research team to gather interesting 
insights into the subjects' awareness and perceptions 
of different contraceptives.  This information would 
otherwise have been difficult to generate through a 
more direct questioning approach without the use of 
visual aids to facilitate discussion (Will et al, 1996).  
 
Will et al (1996) stated that the application of projec-
tive techniques is not restricted to social cause issues 
and that these techniques would also be of value to 
those in commercial marketing and consumer re-
search who seek to understand how a product might 
overcome certain social barriers to entry. 
 
Donoghue (1998) followed a qualitative research 
strategy, using unstructured interviews and projective 
techniques to explore and describe the role of social 
motives and consumer stereotyping in selected up-
coming consumers' choice of large electrical house-
hold appliances.  
 
The projective techniques that were used included 
sentence completion and construction.  The construc-
tion techniques involved asking the subjects to re-
spond to pictures that depicted ambiguous situations 
relevant to the aspects that were being studied.  The 
subjects were asked to assume the role of and to 
characterise the person depicted in each picture.  
They had to describe what was going on in each pic-
ture, what gave rise to it and what they expected the 
outcome to be.  
 
 

Projective techniques in Consumer Research 
ISSN 0378-5254  Tydskrif vir Gesinsekologie en Verbruikerswetenskappe, Vol 28, 2000 
52 
The results of this study indicated among other things 
that social motives seemed to guide the subjects' 
choice of large electrical household appliances.  
These subjects apparently formed stereotypes of their 
reference groups and allocated certain symbolic 
meanings to them, based on their ownership of large 
electrical household equipment.  
 
Donoghue (1998) successfully demonstrated that pro-
jective techniques may be used to reveal consumers’ 
hidden attitudes, feelings, beliefs and motives that are 
intimately associated with the decision to buy or not to 
buy. 
 
Catterall and Ibbotson (2000) employed projective 
techniques in an education research project.  They 
had to contribute to the evaluation of a computer-
based guide to a university library.  The students 
were invited to use the guide and the researchers 
subsequently administered a range of projective tech-
niques.  
 
The projective techniques they used were word asso-
ciation, sentence completion, cartoon bubble comple-
tion, picture sorting and product personification.  The 
product personification technique required the stu-
dents to imagine that the guide was a person and to 
complete, on this person's behalf, a dating agency 
application 
form. 
 
Three 
distinctive 
"persons" 
emerged from the responses and the students helped 
to interpret them.  
 
When the students were asked to personify the guide, 
some thought of it as an electronic librarian (dull and 
boring).  Others thought of it as a rather superior li-
brarian (a well-informed person who lets you know 
the right way to go).  Still others personified the library 
guide in terms of the technology or platform 
(expensive and glossy, good to look at but not much 
underneath it all, or, nice form but not much sub-
stance).  
 
Although Catterall and Ibbotson (2000) experienced a 
few design pitfalls, they demonstrated that projective 
techniques could be fun and engaging for the sub-
jects, especially when they become involved in the 
analysis and interpretation. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Gordon and Langmaid (1993:3) believe that qualita-
tive research may be used optimally in situations that 
would increase understanding, expand knowledge, 
clarify the real issues, generate hypotheses, identify a 
range of behaviours, explain and explore consumer 
motivations, attitudes and behaviour, identify distinct 
behavioural groups, and provide input for future re-
search.  Qualitative research is mainly used for an-
swering “how”, “why” and “what” questions.  It is not 
used for "how many" questions, that is the prove-
nance of the quantitative research schools of thought 
(Webb, 1993:112).  
 
In consumer research qualitative data collection meth-
ods include group discussions, individual in-depth in-
terviews, observation and projective 
techniques 
(Webb, 1992:112).  Group discussions and individual 
in-depth interviews have both advantages and disad-
vantages.  Whereas direct questions elicit responses 
that may be simple to verbalise, projective techniques 
reveal subjective thoughts and emotions.  Projective 
techniques may be used in combination with individ-
ual interviews and group discussions to overcome 
some of the problems associated with both.  Projec-
tive techniques therefore complement other qualitative 
data collection methods by drawing complete portraits 
of consumers.  
 
Kidder in Webb (1992:125) says projective techniques 
are useful in ...encouraging in subjects a state of free-
dom and spontaneity of expression where there is 
reason to believe that subjects cannot easily evaluate 
or describe their motivations or feelings ... or where 
topics on which subjects may hesitate to express their 
opinions directly for fear of disapproval by the investi-
gator or when subjects are likely to consider direct 
questions as unwarranted invasion of privacy or to 
find them threatening for some other reason. 
 
It is possible to use projective techniques to find out 
from a consumer what the phenomenological charac-
teristics of various products may be, in other words 
the value character of a product in the consumer's life 
and not the physical characteristics of the product 
(Haire, 1950).  Projective techniques are fundamental 
to consumer research in that they provide a greater 
depth of understanding of what people truly think and 
feel about a product (Green, 1984; Will et al, 1996). 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
BERKMAN, HW & GILSON, C. 1986. Consumer behaviour. 
Concepts and strategies. 3rd ed. Boston. Kent.  
BELLAK, L. 1992. Projective techniques in the computer 
age. Journal of Personality Assessment 58(3):445-453. 
BURNS, LD & LENNON, SJ. 1993. Social perception: meth-
ods for measuring our perception of others. International 
Textile and Apparel Association Special Publication 5:153-
159.  
CATTERALL, M & IBBOTSON, P. 2000. Using projective 
techniques in education research. British Educational Re-
search Journal 26(2):245-247. 
CHURCHILL, GA. 1991. Marketing research methodological 
foundations. 5th ed. Chicago. Dryden. 
CRUMBAUGH, JC. 1990. The meaning of projective tech-
niques. In Crumbaugh, JC, Graca, J, Hutzell, RR, Whiddon, 
MF & Cooper, EC. 1990. A primer of projective techniques of 
psychological assessment. California. Libra. 
DONOGHUE, S. 1998. 'n Verkennend-beskrywende onder-
soek na die rol van sosiale motiewe en verbruikerstereotiper-
ing by bepaalde swart, vroulike, opkomende verbruikers se 
keuse van groot elektriese huishoudelike toerusting. Skripsie 
vir Magistergraad in Huishoudkunde. Pretoria. Universiteit 
van Pretoria. 
DILLON, WR, MADDEN, TJ & FIRTLE, NH. 1987. Marketing 
research in a marketing environment. St Louise. Times Mirror. 
GORDON, W & LANGMAID, R. 1988. Qualitative market re-
search. Aldershot. Gower. 
GRAHAM, JR & LILLY, RS. 1984. Psychological testing. Engle-

Projective techniques in Consumer Research 
ISSN 0378-5254   Journal of Family Ecology and Consumer Sciences, Vol 28, 2000 
53 
wood Cliffs, NJ. Prentice-Hall. 
GREEN, J. 1984. Approaching the core of consumer behaviour. 
Marketing Research November:19-20. 
HAIRE, M. 1950. Projective techniques in marketing research. 
Journal of Marketing Research 14(5):649-656. 
JANDA, LH. 1998. Psychological testing: theory and applica-
tions. Boston. Allyn & Bacon. 
KASSARJIAN, HH. 1974. Projective methods. In Ferber, R. 
1974. Handbook of marketing research. New York. McGraw-
Hill. 
KLINE, P. 1983. Personality: measurement and theory. London. 
Hutchinson. 
LEVY, SJ. 1981. Interpreting consumer mythology: a structural 
approach to consumer behaviour. Journal of Marketing 45:49-
61. 
LOUDON, DL & DELLA BITTA, AJ. 1993. Consumer behaviour: 
concepts and application. 4th ed. New York. McGraw-Hill. 
MACFARLANE, JW & TUDDENHAM, RR. 1951. Problems in 
the validation of projective techniques. In Anderson, HH & 
Anderson, GL. 1951. An introduction to projective techniques. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ. Prentice-Hall. 
PIOTROWSKI, C, KELLER, JW & OGWA, T. 1993. Projective 
techniques: an international perspective. Psychological Reports 
72:179-182. 
SAMPSON, P. 1986. Qualitative research and motivation re-
search. In Worcester, RM & Downham, J. 1986. Consumer mar-
ket research handbook. 3rd ed. Amsterdam.  Elsevier. 
SOLOMON, MR. 1994. Consumer behaviour. Buying, having 
and being. 2nd ed. Boston. Allyn & Bacon. 
WAGNER, EE. 1995. A logical analysis of projective techniques 
based on independence of items and latitude of response. Per-
ceptual and Motor Skills 81:868-870. 
WEBB, JR. 1992. Understanding and designing marketing re-
search. London. Academic Press. 
WILL, V, EADIE, D & MACASKILL, S. 1996. Projective and 
enabling techniques explored. Marketing Intelligence and Plan-
ning 14(6):38-44. (Special Issue: Qualitative Market Research.) 
 
