In South Africa, testing was for a long time viewed as
discriminatory and unjust, but this perception is slowly
changing (Foxcroft, 1997). Practitioners are becoming aware of
the advantages of sound assessment, and improvements in test
development have lead to the implementation of cross-culturally
fair tests. In the workplace tests, as part of assessment, are used
to measure the performance and potential of current and future
employees through selection and performance management
respectively (Bartram, 2004). To arrive at an equitable and fair
decision, psychological tests are usually not used in isolation,
but as part of an extensive assessment battery (Fernandez-
Ballesteros, 1999).
It should be noted that for the purposes of this paper, the use of
psychological tests is described in relation to psychological
assessment in its broader definition. Fernandez-Ballesteros
(2002) states that the most important difference between
assessment and testing concerns the simplicity or complexity of
assessment methods used. Assessment includes, but is not
limited to testing. The distinction between ‘testing’ and
‘assessment’ can also be viewed in terms of the attributes
required of the person applying the tests. Psychological
assessment requires an extended set of skills and expertise from
the assessor. The assessor should know which tests to select and
how to integrate information derived from tests with other
sources / types of information to attain a holistic assessment.
This leads the discussion towards understanding the individual
as a whole, and implies that decision-making should be based on
more than test scores. In assessment, the practitioner uses
information obtained through a variety of assessment methods,
including a range of tests. Test use should thus inform this
decision-making process.
Now, in 2005, the South African business sector faces challenges
in terms of psychological test use, adaptation and development.
Practitioners are faced with a range of ethical and legal issues in
psychological assessment (Bartram, 2004). Changes in
legislation, i.e. South African employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act
No. 55 of 1998), and a transforming labour market after 1994,
emphasise the significance of appropriate psychometric
properties for psychological tests, and the importance of
ensuring validity and equity in assessment. 
A comprehensive overview of the tests currently in use in South
Africa, as well as the needs of practitioners for future
development in psychological assessment, is not available at
present. Van der Merwe (2002) published a summative report on
the findings of various exploratory studies that were conducted
with regard to the practice of psychometric testing in the Eastern
Cape. In the report he provides findings in terms of tests
currently in use, information on test users and the level of
satisfaction with regard to available tests as expressed by the
participants. Culture-fairness of tests and applicability across
different groups of people emerged as important themes from
the findings (van der Merwe, 2002). Although this study has
value, the scope is limited, and a national perspective on the use
of tests is lacking. Consequently, a detailed comparison of
testing practices between South Africa and other countries
becomes problematic because of this lack of information.
However, Oakland (2004) reported on an international survey of
29 countries (in which South Africa was included) that countries
have different views in terms of their approach to testing, use of
tests and attitudes towards test user qualifications.
This paper aims to address the assessment concerns and issues
relevant to South African psychological practitioners in the
workplace. Oakland (2004) identified external and internal
conditions which could influence test development and use.
Some of these external conditions or critical issues include: a
country’s social, political and economic conditions, attitudes
and values towards science as well as prevailing social
problems that could be addressed by test use. Examples of
internal conditions are: availability of suitable measures to
assess a broad range of qualities, a positive attitude towards
HEIDI PATERSON
hpaterson@hsrc.ac.za
Human Sciences Research Council
Assessment Technology and Education Evaluation
KOOS UYS
Dept of Human Resource Management
University of Johannesburg
ABSTRACT
Various factors in South African workplaces, ranging from unemployment and equity considerations to rapid
occupational change driven by technological inputs, have placed greater emphasis on effective selection and
development of human resources. This leads to greater demands on psychological assessment in the organisational
setting with respect to ensuring responsible, ethical and equitable assessment. The study aims to investigate the
extent and purposes of psychological test usage, the influence of the changing world of work on assessment, equity
and cross-cultural applicability of tests and competence of test users in South Africa. The results are based on twenty
two structured individual interviews, which were conducted with purposively sampled stakeholders from various
economic sectors. 
OPSOMIING
Verskeie faktore in Suid-Afrikaanse werkomgewing, wat wissel van werkloosheid en billikheidsoorwegings tot by
vinnig veranderende beroepsomstandighede as gevolg van tegnologiese ontwikkeling, plaas toenemende druk op die
doeltreffende keuring en ontwikkeling van menslike hulpbronne. Dit lei tot toenemende eise wat in die organisasie
konteks aan sielkundige meting gestel word om verantwoordelike, etiese en billike assessering te verseker. Hierdie
studie was daarop gerig om die doel met en omvang van die gebruik van sielkundige toetse, die invloed van die
veranderende wêreld van werk op die assessering, billike en kruiskulturele toepaslikheid van toetse, asook die
bevoegdheid van toetsgebruikers in Suid-Afrika te ondersoek. Die resultate is gebaseer op ’n doelgerigte steekproef van
twee-en-twintig gestruktureerde onderhoude wat met belanghebbers uit verskillende ekonomiese sektore, gevoer is.
CRITICAL ISSUES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST USE IN 
THE SOUTH AFRICAN WORKPLACE
Requests for copies should be addressed to: JS Uys, jsu@rau.ac.za
12
SA Journal of Industrial Psychology, 2005, 31 (3), 12-22
SA Tydskrif vir Bedryfsielkunde, 2005, 31 (3), 12-22

testing and adequate standards for appropriate test use. It was
endeavoured during this study do identify and describe
critical issues that are relevant to the unique South African
context that has an influence on psychological testing.
As an external issue, the changing world of work has an impact
on assessment practices. Bartram (2004) notes that international
and local organisations are adopting common selection and
recruitment practices to stay competitive in securing optimal
human resources. In the “new” organisation the focus is on
recruiting and developing employees with the ability to work
flexibly and adaptively, due to rapid change inside and outside
the organisation. Assessment can contribute to the identification
of these employees. Furthermore, responsible assessment can
benefit selection and development of candidates from previously
disadvantaged backgrounds as part of a drive towards equity and
representivity in the workplace (van der Merwe, 2002). 
Equitable and fair test usage requires a keen focus on cross-
cultural applicability of tests. Cross-cultural use of tests can be
discriminatory if the construct measured differs across cultures,
especially if the tests are not standardised for use across all
cultural groups through a representative sample (van de Vijver
and Rothmann, 2004). Foxcroft (2004) further argues that very
few tests have been developed that can be used across the diverse
cultural and language groups in South Africa. Bartam (2004)
calls for more cross-cultural studies to be undertaken, as the
assumption cannot be made that all tests can be used with
minority groups (van de Vijver, 2004). This will be extremely
important in South Africa, since the possibility that a test does
not measure what it claims to measure, calls into question all
inferences drawn from the test results (Wallis, 2004).
Extending fairness and equity to the assessment procedure as a
whole can further enhance the perception of testing (Skarlicki,
2003). The test or method can be scientifically proven as fair,
valid and reliable, but the perception of the method of
assessment can still be perceived as negative by the testee. If the
procedure is viewed as fair, and the practitioner effectively
handled interpersonal relationships, there is a bigger chance that
the employee/candidate will support assessment-based decisions
(Skarlicki, 2003).
The availability of suitable measures is one of the internal issues
that practitioners and test developers have to address. In this
regard, Oakland (2004, p. 168) states that “test adaptation is needed
when tests are used in countries other than those in which they were
developed, when tests are designed for use in two or more countries in
which cross-cultural practices occur and when they are adapted for
use with persons who differ in language, culture and other important
qualities.” Local test developers are faced with the dilemma of
either adapting international tests for use in South Africa, or
developing new tests specifically designed with the unique
societal composition in mind. Regardless of the chosen approach,
test development, translation and adaptation should be governed
by guidelines such as those published by the International Test
Commission (Fernandez-Ballesteros, 1999), as this will ensure the
use of high-quality, internationally comparable tests.
Lastly, responsible test use requires sufficient training of users as
part of initial qualification and continuous development.
Practitioners should be sensitized to demands placed on
assessment by the multicultural South African society though
training in cross-cultural test use (Fernandez-Ballesteros, 1999).
Training should further address access to tests, rights of
practitioners and testees and the need for qualifications for the
application of tests.
This article does not engage specifically with hypothesis testing.
Rather, it describes current assessment practices and
circumstances as experienced by a selected group of
participants. Consequently, this project was undertaken to
address the following question:
What critical issues are psychological assessment practitioners
facing in the South African workplace?
The aim was to uncover the issues impacting on appropriate,
responsible and ethical assessment practices and test use.
The article will proceed as follows. Firstly the methodology of
the study will be described This will be followed by discussion
of the findings from the study with reference to: the application
of tests in the workplace; the effect of the changing world of
work on the development and application of psychological tests;
cross-cultural application of psychological tests which touches
on aspects such as linguistic and cultural differences, norming
and equity; the adaptation of existing tests versus developing
indigenous instruments and lastly, the impact of training in
ensuring competence in test use. 
RESEARCH DESIGN
This study is part of a larger project: the Psychological
Assessment Needs Analysis, conducted by the Human Sciences
Research Council (HSRC), which took place in 2004 over a 5-
month period. The overall project followed a multi-pronged
approach to collecting data and included a national survey,
focus group interviews and the series of interviews reported here.
Although the main study addressed patterns in use and future
trends across the entire scope of practitioners, the focus of this
paper will only be on psychological assessment from the
perspective of the industrial psychologist.
Research approach
The study was conducted from an interpretive paradigm in 
an attempt to understand lived, subjective experiences 
(Davis, Nakayama and Martin 2000). The interview can be
described as topical, as the researcher and participant
interacted on a defined issue, that is, psychological assessment
(Tobin and Begley, 2004). The interview was structured and
followed a standardised format, but it is important to note that
the data gathered was qualitative in nature. The interview did
not probe all issues in-depth, but provided the researcher with
an overview of relevant issues pertaining to psychological
assessment.
The study meets the criteria for qualitative research, as the
goal of this research by means of individual interviews was to
develop an understanding of psychological assessment
according to the meanings given by the participants
(Stromquist, 2000). The methodology allowed the researcher
to interpret participants’ social reality, attach meaning and
then diagnose, rather than predict. An inductive process was
followed, where the starting point was individual cases,
incidents and experiences. This made it possible to
progressively develop more abstract, conceptual categories to
synthesise, explain and understand the data and the patterned
relationships within (Riley and Love, 2000).
Participants
Participants were purposively sampled to obtain views from
experts and practitioners, knowledgeable in the current trends in
psychological testing. The participants practice different
occupations, as well as in different institutional contexts. The
sampling was not designed to achieve representivity, or to
transfer the findings to a broader population, but to explore the
perceptions and opinions of the particular participants across
economic sectors and activities. 
It should be noted that the participants included only test users,
and non-users were not approached. The views and experiences
of non-users were thus not probed and the reasons why some
people choose not to use tests, were not explored in detail. This
is an area to be investigated by further research.
ISSUES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST USE
13

The participants included stakeholders working with people in
the critical life phases of youth and adulthood. This reflects
the broad areas of use of psychological tests, as summarized
by Oakland (2004), namely: describing and predicting
behavior, evaluating and diagnosing, screening and placement
as well as assisting with guidance and counseling services. The
focus was thus on gaining a perspective from practitioners
involved in critical life events such as career guidance,
selection 
and 
placement, 
development, 
etc 
through
assessment. Certain crosscutting instances of test use were
also addressed, for example: identification of psycho-
pathology through the use of psychological instruments and
the use of assessment tools for forensic purposes. These
examples demonstrate that some psychological instruments
can be used across different life phases. 
The Sector Education and Training Authorities (SETAs) served as
an additional selection criterion. Because there are a large
number of SETAs, a decision was made to group them together
to cover broad areas of economic activity. At least one
representative from each category was interviewed. 
The categorisation of the SETAs into sectoral groups is depicted
below:
TABLE 1
CATEGORISATION OF SETAS INTO SECTORAL GROUPS
Category
SETA
Services
FASSET (Financial and Accounting Services)
BankSETA (Banking Sector)
INSETA (Insurance Sector)
SERVICES (Services Sector)
TETA (Transport)
THETA (Tourism and Hospitality)
W&RSETA (Wholesale and Retail Sector)
Public
DIDTETA (Diplomacy, Intelligence, Defense and Trade 
and Industry Sector)
LGWSETA (Local Government, Water and Related 
Services)
PSETA (Public Services)
Social Services
ETDP SETA (Education, Training and Development 
Practices Sector)
HWSETA (Health and Welfare Sector)
POSLECSETA (Police, Private Security, Legal and 
Correctional Services)
Manufacturing
TEXTILES (Clothing, Textiles, Footwear and Leather 
Sector)
CETA (Construction)
FOODBEV (Food and Beverages Manufacturing Industry 
Sector)
MERSETA (Manufacturing, Engineering and Related 
Services) 
CHIETA (Chemical Industries)
Communication 
ISETT (Information Systems, Electronics and 
and Technology
Telecommunications Sector)
MAPP (Media, Advertising, Publishing, Printing, 
Packaging Sector)
Resource-based
ESETA (Energy Sector)
FIETA(Forest Industries Sector)
MQA (Mining)PAETA (Primary Agriculture)
SETASA (Secondary Agriculture Sector)
An additional consideration was to include large-scale users of
psychological testing. Although the Department of Labour and
Department of Education are classified as administering agents
from the social services cluster, these departments influence
training and development for employment throughout the
individual’s life in terms of primary, secondary and tertiary
education and training and lifelong learning. Other participants
included Psychometrics lecturers from universities, as these
stakeholders influence the training of future test users, i.e.
Psychology students.
Twenty-two interviews were conducted with 31 senior
decision-makers and stakeholders. In some cases more than
one person participated in a particular interview. All the
interviews were conducted with registered psychologists across
the registration categories (clinical, industrial, counseling,
educational, and research), with the exception of two, where
union representatives and decision-makers in the Department
of Education were interviewed. Half of the participants were
female, and the majority was white. The low representivity of
black people in decision-making positions in the field of
industrial psychological assessment is of concern. It should 
be noted that this report might not adequately reflect the 
voice of black people with regard to psychological testing.
Table 2 provides information on the demographic distribution
of the participants.
TABLE 2
DEMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION OF PARTICPANTS
Demographic information of participants
Gender
Ethnicity
Area of work
Male Female Black White Serv- Public
Social Manu- Commu-
Re-
ices
Serv-
fact-
nication source-
ices
uring
and Tech- based
nology
16
15
5
26
9
3
13
2
2
2
Data gathering instrument
An interview schedule, which served as a guideline for the
interviews, was developed and refined from the following pre-
defined indicators:
 Psychological tests currently in use.
 Strengths and limitations of psychological tests currently 
in use 
 Suggestions and requirements for the development of new
tests.
 Importance of psychometric properties such as reliability,
validity and norming.
 Monitoring and management of the quality of psychological
services and tests.
The instrument was piloted and additional questions were
added. Although a standard format was followed, the schedule
wasn’t followed rigidly. 
Reliability
As this is a qualitative study, the term dependability is better
suited. The aim was not to ensure that the study could be
replicated in another study, but whether the findings are
reasonably based on the data (Pitney, 2004). A comprehensive
register of data was kept and both theoretical and
methodological memoranda were compiled. This took the
form of an audit trail where all decision regarding the sources
of data, collection techniques, and meanings interpreted, as
well as assumptions and influences on the researcher are noted
(Long & Johnson, 2000). The interviewer was assisted by other
researchers in validating these notes and memoranda through
cross-checks. 
Validity
The term credibility should replace validity, as in qualitative
research this element of rigour demands that the researcher
ensures that she adequately captures what she learnt in the
research context (Pitney, 2004). Credibility as a criterion was
imposed on the research procedure and findings. The
procedures followed were credible in that the techniques and
data-gathering 
instrument 
(interview 
schedule 
and
framework) were designed to facilitate an analysis of the
experiences in terms of the use of psychological tests and the
PATERSON, UYS
14

quality of psychological testing in general. Peer review 
was used to enhance credibility in that other researchers
provided critical input during the design, execution and
interpretation phases of the study. (Pitney, 2004) It was
endeavored to maximize credibility in the findings in that
only one interviewer conducted the interviews, with
assistance from other researchers. The assisting researcher 
sat in on the interviews and read the transcription to 
confirm its accuracy. Peer debriefing entailed discussion the
findings at intervals with knowledgeable colleagues (Long
and Johnson, 2000). The interviews were conducted over a
four-month time span. Data analysis and report writing
occurred concurrently. 
Data Analysis Procedure
Data analysis went through the following stages:
i. Defining analysis in terms of research goals: The aim of the
research was kept in mind and it was ensured that appropriate
and sufficient data were collected. 
ii. Familiarisation and immersion: The researcher became
familiar with the data by reading the material thoroughly.
iii.Annotating: Themes were induced from the data and research
memos were written.
iv. Tagging data: Baptiste (2001) refers to tagging as the
process of selecting from an amorphous body of 
materials, bits and pieces that satisfy the researcher’s
curiosity, and help support the purpose of the study. 
For the purpose of this study, tagging was also employed 
as a means of crosschecking and corroborating 
evidence. Tagging takes the form of open coding, 
where the focus is on potential meaning, and pre-existing
codes are not used.
v. Grouping tagged data into categories: The themes were
elaborated by grouping the data together according to certain
criteria. These categories were guided by the research
question. The categories were mutually exclusive as far as
possible.
vi. Making connections: The data were interpreted through
defining and redefining the themes. Certain patterns of
relationships and concepts were identified.
RESULTS
Firstly, information gathered around the contextual back-
ground of test use will be reported on. This provides a
backdrop against which the purposes for which tests are used
as well as the impact of tests on assessment will be discussed.
Table 3 provides a summary of themes identified through
data analysis. 
TABLE 3
THEMES IDENTIFIED THROUGH DATA ANALYSIS
Key Theme
Sub theme
Contextual background of test use 
 Advantages of using psychological 
in the workplace
tests·
 Psychological test use in combination
with other methods as part of 
assessment
 Purposes of test use
The influence of changes in 
legislation
The influence of the changing 
 Changes in the labour market
world of work
 Use of international tests
Cross-cultural use of tests
 Influence of language and culture
Norming/renorming of tests
Adaptation of existing tests
Development of new tests
Training and competence of 
 Role of the Health Professions 
test users
Council of South Africa (HPCSA)
Contextual background of test usage
Findings from the study suggest that psychological tests are
commonly used in the workplace as a tool in decision-making
in matters such as selection, job assignment, promotion,
training and termination of employment. Participants stressed
the advantages of using psychometric tests as part of an
assessment battery:
“Standardised tests act as equaliser, regardless of colour and
background”.
Participants reported that in most cases psychological tests are
not used in isolation, but form part of an extensive assessment
battery. 
“Such a combination of tests, simulations, interviews, and you
name it, always work the best, but you obviously have to look at
time and money.”
Participants argue that the approach to selecting an
assessment battery should be guided by the rationale of the
assessment, and not according to the tests the organisation
have in stock. There is no standardised assessment process 
that all the participants follow, but in general the 
procedure consists of the candidate being taken though
various forms of assessment. 
The table below identifies the purposes of test use, ranging from
most to least frequently cited in the interviews. 
TABLE 4
PURPOSES FOR WHICH PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS ARE USED
Most frequently cited
Cited to an extent
Least frequently cited
 Selection and 
 Identification of 
 Optimal fit and 
recruitment
potential
placement
 Training and 
 Research·
 Retention·
development·
 Screening of large 
 Determining 
 Team development·
numbers of people
literacy levels
 Interpersonal skills 
 Accreditation of 
and self-improve-
qualifications·
ment
 Promotion
 Career counselling
 Identifying beha-
and development
viour problems
 Succession planning
 Job analysis
 Development of 
leadership
 Bursaries and 
evaluation
 Training of users
The participants were probed on the reasons why they cease to
use a particular test, and why this test is then in some cases
replaced with another instrument. The reasons provided by the
participants include: (i) the test has become outdated, (ii) the
test is not culture friendly which hampers cross-cultural
application, (iii) there is poor or no research on the application
of the test, (iv) the user receives insufficient support from the
distributor (v) perceived exorbitant prices of the instrument,
and (vi) the test is no longer applicable in a changing
population.
Participants noted that the external environment, in the form 
of the world of work, has an impact on ethical and responsible
test usage.
The impact of changes in legislation on ethical application
of tests
Changes to legislation place new demands on psychological tests
and practitioners.
“… you must assess what you are supposed to be assessing, you
are not allowed to discriminate [unfairly], you’ve got to be fair in
your processes and ethical.” 
ISSUES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST USE
15

Participants reported that in the past testing was seen in a
negative light due to unfair and discriminatory application. This
attitude is changing:
“I think 10 years ago there was a very negative sentiment
regarding testing, (and) I think that people started seeing that
even an interview can be unfair. They saw that there are
alternatives, which also have inherent problems, and I think
people started appreciating the objectivity of the kind of
information you get [from tests]”.
Participants argued that criticism should be levelled against
practitioners instead of tests themselves.
“The question mark drawn over psychometric testing was 5%
about the content of the test. Ninety five percent was about the
people that used it. People used it to keep the system in place. I
think that still happens in some environments where people use
the test or test material to keep their agendas in place. That can
be political or financial agendas.”
The influence of the changing world of work
Some tests currently in the market were developed during 
the previous decade and cannot be applied without reserve 
in the new organisation, as the labour market has changed
significantly. Participants state that applying outdated tests
can lead to misuse and drawing incorrect conclusions. This
has not only detrimental consequences for the individual, 
but also cost implications for the organisation. Although 
the participants cited some examples of inappropriate test 
use, in general they strive towards applying updated, 
relevant tests.
“  [I think those things have to be updated every 5 years] in this
fast changing world in which we live. Because at present you are
only making inferences. You carry certain information over to
other fields, because these fields are not being measured. And
your population is changing.”
The need to compete globally, had lead to practitioners using
international tests imported to South Africa. These tests can be
unsuitable in the South African context. 
“… you cannot always import things from other countries into
your country. You must look at whether that system will be
suitable for your environment as a developing country.” 
Cross-cultural use of tests
When addressing the use of tests in a cross-cultural setting, the
participants raised the issue of the influence of language and
culture on test performance. The participants pointed out the
need to overcome the language issue in assessment:
“… where language and educational difficulties are a problem,
we have to be creative in terms of how to measure it in a more
tangible, concrete way.” 
Participants raised two very different arguments in proposals
to overcome linguistic disadvantage in the workplace. Some
participants felt that the test users should be able to respond
to psychological tests written in English, regardless of the
testee’s home language, as an inability to deal with language
barriers will negatively influence their performance at work.
They argue that the major global business language is English
and the participant should be able to converse fluently in 
this language. 
Other participants argued that test users who for whatever
reason are not fluent in the language of the test might perform
badly on, for example a cognitive test as a result of poor
language skills rather than cognitive ability. If the test taker does
not understand the words and prompts of the test, the
instrument is incapable of delivering reliable information.
Participants strongly argued that language differences should
not prevent people from benefiting from psychological testing,
as summarised by a participant:
“But the most important thing is not to use it [test scores] as
a barrier. Not to say that it keeps the person away from
training, but that it is an indication to him or the
organisation that he first improves his language ability,
because if he improves his language ability, he will perform
better work-wise. Because if the language is bad, language
itself becomes your barrier.”
This group of participants argue for the translation of existing
instruments, the use of projective measures and/or non-verbal
instruments or screening for language proficiency before
psychological testing to avoid potential discrimination.
Norming
The participants stated that one way of addressing inequities in
cross-cultural application of tests, is to ensure appropriate
norming.
“I don’t think you can go without norms. How will you compare?
Our job in industry is to compare, not discriminate, but
differentiate. Better, worse – that is our job. And you have to
compare people to do this.” 
Moreover, participants are aware of the complexities of
norming/renorming tests for use in the South African context.
The consensus among participants was that the norming process
should be scientifically approached with a representative,
stratified and appropriately sized sample. This necessarily
involves continuous research on all tests, local and
international. A participant emphasised the role of research in
test development and adaptation:
“ … with all tests you have to do continuous research, the
same for local and international tests. But to develop a test is
a long process. Our dilemma is that our cross-cultural
situation is so different from other countries, that basic
matters such as language cannot be addressed easily. So the
changes required will be radical and you will have to
standardise the things again to ensure that it still does what
it is supposed to.” 
All the participants stressed the importance of developing
appropriate norms, but presented different suggestions for
making the process equitable and fair. Some argued for the use
of different categories as reference groups, believing that it can
be unfair to compare people from different educational
backgrounds on the same norm. They felt that norms must be
developed based on age, race, educational background and
language because of past disparities in opportunities and
access to education. Others felt that the development of
different norms for different groups can be construed as
discriminatory, paternalistic or can even be perceived as
analogous to apartheid practices. Furthermore it was observed
that using race and language as reference criteria in norming
may also not be relevant any more on account of urbanisation,
acculturation and social class mobility among previously
disadvantage groups.
“I think it will be unfair to have a disadvantaged norm. I also
don’t think it will have practical value. I think you have to make
distinctions based on more than language and race, because
there is a lot of mixing. The groups are not as purely advantaged
or disadvantaged as 10 years ago.” 
Other participants argued for a more qualitative, content-driven
interpretation of tests results, or the comparative use of
alternative norm groups where the test taker is compared to
both the typical Western norm and a general mixed norm. Again
it becomes clear that a normed result should not be taken on
face value, but contextual factors should be considered.
PATERSON, UYS
16

“You should not develop a norm on those people for whom the
test does not work. That is a prerequisite: you can only norm on
groups where your test is reliable enough to use.” 
Furthermore, participants debated the issue between adapting
existing tests versus developing new instruments.
Adaptation of existing tests
Participants stated that test use could be improved by adapting
tests for the organisational setting.
“ Testing should be adapted to be more focused on employers, and
not only for a clinical set-up. We have to make these things
practical. We say all this wonderful things: that testing is an aid
for decision-making, but if you can’t use it, it can’t be an aid.
And if you use it wrongly, it won’t be an aid.”
Furthermore, participants indicated that for tests to add value
to the decision-making process, test information should be
triangulated against other forms of information (i.e.
interviews and other forms of non-psychological assessment).
In some cases other methods of assessment may be more
effective, and testing is not the preferred recourse in all
situations. Participants therefore observed that testing should
only take place if this practice can add value to the decision-
making process.
“I think you can support testing if testing is one of the elements
that is considered, … if it is adaptable and if it can’t be
manipulated, if I have a clear indication of what is measured for
which category of people.” 
The participants’ views on existing tests cover two broad areas:
underlying principles of test usage (cross-cultural validity and
reliability) and practical limitations (time and constraints and
limited funding). This has to be taken into consideration when
adapting existing tests in future. Their suggestions regarding the
adaptation of existing test material included: 
 Test manuals should be explicit in defining the context,
rationale, target group and applicability of the particular test. 
 Psychological tests should be adapted to integrate with
National Qualification Framework (NQF) levels and should
take into account qualifications not formally obtained.
 Although there is still a need for paper and pencil tests,
computer-based testing has many advantages. Participants
expressed a need for existing tests to be computerised. 
Development of new tests
Participants identified the following areas in which new tests can
be developed: (i) identification of potential and developmental
areas in people with lower educational qualifications, (ii)
measuring cognitive potential with non-verbal instruments, (iii)
leadership in the South African context, (iv) emotional
intelligence, (v) integrity, (vi) language skills assessment, (vii)
pre-selection screening test to indicate whether further in-depth
testing is required, (viii) team performance, (ix) personality
assessment for people with low literacy, (x) addressing the needs
of illiterate adults and unemployed youth and (xi) meeting the
assessment needs of people with disabilities. 
Participants felt that existing measures do not address these
areas adequately. In terms of the development of new
instruments, the participants emphasised that all instruments
need to meet the following criteria: proven predictive validity,
cross-cultural fairness, relevance and reliability.
Use of unregistered tests
Practitioners felt that one way of protecting the organisation
against litigation and unethical practices is to only use
instruments registered with the Health Professions Council of
South Africa (HPCSA) and avoid instruments that any
unqualified person can use. In addition, they feel that sensitive
information generated by psychological tests should not be for
public consumption, and advise against line managers and
clients having direct access to it. The sensitivity towards the
ethical use of tests is echoed by the labour union:
“As a trade union we say it must be fair with reference to our
members and equal. It has to be transparent. And the moment
we see it is not equal, transparent and fair, we have a problem.”
Sometimes the practitioner will need a type of test that is not
included in the HPCSA list. The user is then forced to use
available measures, which might not be registered by the HPCSA
to assess these areas. In some cases, the users develop tests
themselves to suit their unique needs and circumstances, and
these tests are not tabled for registration. Some tests are in the
process of being registered, e.g. a list of Neuropsychological tests
covering a broad range of instruments, have been sent for
registration, but a final decision is still pending.
The majority of unregistered tests are international in origin.
Practitioners sometimes utilise well-known international tests,
which may have a solid base of research, without taking
cognisance of the fact that the test is not standardised for use in
South Africa. Practitioners are sometimes compelled to use
international tests with international norms when a candidate
has to be compared against a global standard, such as in the case
of international appointments.
The use of an international test is justified, according to the
participants, if it has been standardised for use in South Africa.
Situation-specific norms in the South African context are also
meaningful and this is one of the reasons practitioners insist on
South African standardisation. All tests have to be supported by
local, empirical information. 
“The weaknesses here are not bad tests, but bad psychologists
that use things incorrectly, or that use it exclusively, as if tests
always give the complete picture. That is not true – it is only 
a tool.”
The participants pointed out some difficulties with the
registration process of psychological tests with HPCSA, which
contributes to substantial use of non-registered tests. The
registration process with the Psychometrics committee is viewed
by the participants as very stringent, bureaucratic and in many
ways confusing. 
“I can’t see that I’m getting any value from the HPCSA in terms
of assessment… That they address the matter, have debates about
it, do training, have workshops or develop guidelines [and]
regulations...” 
Furthermore, it is expensive to submit tests for registration and
the thoroughness of the process is questioned. Practitioners feel
that there should be independent studies to validate results
submitted by test developers as part of the registration process.
In their view, the decision about which tests to table for
registration should not be left to the test developer. Participants
are also unclear about certain definitions in the classification of
tests. There is no provision in the guidelines of psychological
assessment for testing in a human resources (HR) capacity.
“it is difficult to even find a person responsible in setting out the
guidelines, but there is no active energy in the ball game. It is
like: if they do or don’t, who cares? South Africa has the most
regulated test environment in the world, but in practice it is
difficult to implement.” 
Training and competence of test users
Practitioners felt that all test users are not properly trained in the
application and administration of psychological tests. 
“…they use it simplistically, mechanistically, without
understanding the full context. It is irresponsibly used – it’s like
using a medicine that you are not trained to use.” 
ISSUES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST USE
17

Irresponsible test usage has detrimental effects for both the
practitioner and organisation, especially in terms of South
African legislation.
“I think it is about the person’s integrity and training. If you work
in court you expose yourself, and if you don’t use the stuff
ethically and professionally, you would have exposed yourself.”
Participants 
suggested 
that 
test-users 
should 
receive
comprehensive training as part of their graduate work, and that
further training should form part of continuous professional
development. 
“… it must be a responsible test and it should be responsibly used.
It must be relevant firstly and interpretation must be done
responsibly by suitably trained people.”
Currently, training at tertiary level includes areas such as test
construction and psychometrics, as well as a course in test usage.
It was observed that the training is not standardised across
universities and there are some gaps in the training of
psychologists and future test users. In this respect, the
responsibility lies with universities and the HPCSA in terms of
setting the accreditation examination, and regulating further
training, to ensure that users are informed and skilled in the
ethical use of tests.
DISCUSSION
In the discussion of the results of this study, information
regarding the use of tests for a broad range of purposes and the
use of psychological tests in combination with other assessment
methods provides the contextual background to test use.
Against this background, practitioners face many critical
issues in ensuring appropriate and ethical test use, i.e. changes
to legislation, the changing world of work and the use of
international tests. Test use is also influenced by social and
cultural factors such as the cross-cultural use of tests, and the
influence of language and culture on ethical test use.
Practitioners respond to these challenges by the appropriate
norming/renorming, adaptation of existing tests, development of
new tests and the use of unregistered tests. In general, ethical
and responsible test use requires adequate training and
competence of test users, and the active involvement of
professional bodies. The above-mentioned critical issues are
schematically depicted below in Table 5, which represents an
illustration of the themes uncovered in the research as well as
the relationship between the themes.
TABLE 5
CRITICAL ISSUES AFFECTING PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST USE IN THE
SOUTH AFRICAN ORGANISATIONAL CONTEXT
Context of test use in 
Critical issiues and
Responses to challenges
the workplace
challenges in terms 
posed to test usage
of test usage
 Advantages of using 
Environmental
 Norming/renorming
psychological tests
variables:
of tests
 Purposes of test use
 Changes in 
 Development of new
 Psychological test  
legislation
tests
use in combination 
 The influence of
with other methods 
the changing world
as part of assessment
of work
 Training and competence of test users
 Role of professional bodies
Context of test use in the workplace
Globally there has been a move towards a more positive
perception of psychological tests and testing as an acceptable
practice. Oakland (2004) reports that there are an estimated
5000 standardised tests in English, constructed mostly in the
Western Europe and the USA. This shows that there are many
tests available for a range if purposes. Psychological tests provide
an indication of complex constructs such as knowledge, skills
and psychological attributes which are difficult to measure with
other methods. Existing tests cover a broad spectrum of
measurable areas, and the users can choose between different
instruments to meet specified needs. The findings of this study
thus agree with Owen and Taljaard’s (1996) statement as cited in
van der Merwe (2002) that psychological tests can contribute to
the efficacy of selection and placement in industry, if applied
appropriately in consideration of the context, testee
characteristics and reason for assessment. 
Literature supports the advantages of test use as reported 
by the participants in this study. Appropriate testing can
decrease the probability of employing and training the 
wrong person. The organisation can thus strategically 
increase their effectiveness by recruiting and developing 
their human resources (Bartram, 2004). This is extremely
important in an organisational setting, as inappropriate
appointments and consequent training can lead to huge
financial losses in the long term.
Practitioners see psychological tests as a more ‘objective’
measure when compared to other methods such as interviews.
Test results provide a wealth of information in a short time
(Bredell, Van Eeden and Van Staden, 1999). This information
forms a basis for comparison and the testee can be evaluated
against his/her peers. The testee also benefits in that he/she is
given the opportunity to increase his/her self-awareness and
focus on his/her strengths. This can only be achieved when the
testee is provided with extensive feedback.
The finding that practitioners use psychological tests in
combination with other methods like simulations, interviews
and in-basket exercises corresponds with the findings from van
der Merwe’s study (van der Merwe, 2002). Bartram (2004) found
that the most effective test battery for selection purposes
includes measures of ability and personality traits such as
conscientiousness and integrity. Many factors are taken into
consideration when deciding on an assessment battery, as the
assessment procedure is seen as a reflection of an organisation’s
values and culture (Bartram, 2004).
From the above, it can be concluded that psychological 
tests are important tools, used frequently in the assessment
decision-making process in both South Africa and inter-
nationally. When applying psychological tests in the workplace
practitioners face many critical issues and challenges, which
will be discussed next.
Critical issues and challenges in test use
Psychological practitioners have to meet the demands of a
changing workplace. South African legislation has shaped the
practice of practitioners. The draft policy of the Professional
Board of Psychology on the Classification of Psychometric
Measuring Devices, Instruments, Methods and Techniques
demands that scientific proof is provided of an instrument’s
psychometric properties such as validity, reliability and
absence of bias, to ensure that the instrument can be used
equitably in the workplace. Practitioners therefore have to be
more cautious and informed about the instruments they apply,
and should take the responsibility to ensure that a test can be
fairly applied.
The letter and spirit of the Employment Equity Act, 1998 (Act
No. 55 of 1998) prescribe the equitable use of psychological
tests. Psychological tests can act as a disabling factor, if the
test is inappropriately applied, or used in isolation without
verifying the results against other measures. The Skills
Development Act (Republic of South Africa, 1998) through the
Levy Grant Scheme (Republic of south Africa, 1999) aims to
improve human resources and promote equity in the
PATERSON, UYS
18

workplace. Assessment can ensure appropriate targeting for
training by identifying candidates who might benefit most
from further training and development.
The workplace itself is changing. The new world of work
requires speed, flexibility and an empowered work-force. Due
to globalisation and rapid change, the workplace looks
different than what it did a few decades ago. Work now
requires a different set of skills and traits from the successful
candidate, and psychological tests should be designed to
measure this. Emerging technology and economic changes
such as a greater reliance on outsourcing certain functions,
have changed the organisational structure, as well as the kind
of work that the employee is expected to perform. There is an
increase in the demand for specialists, whereas the need for low
level manual workers has decreased. The worker, in partnership
with the organisation, has become an equal partner in
determining and managing his/her career path. This requires
resilience on the part of the worker and highlights the
importance of life-long learning. From an international
perspective, Fernandez-Ballesteros (1999) also note the
following challenges that Industrial/Organisational psycho-
logists have to face: a multi-ethnic, multiracial, multinational
community, an aging society and a renewed interest in 
quality of life.
Oakland (2004) found that in most countries foreign developed
tests are used more frequently than nationally developed tests.
From the responses of the participants it is clear that the use of
tests not registered with the HPCSA is not simply a matter of
wilful malpractice, but is symptomatic of a wider problem. This
practice has its roots in a number of factors.
In many cases there is a lack of awareness and knowledge among
practitioners about which tests are registered and which are not.
Organisations are sometimes not aware of the registration status
of the tests they use. In some cases instruments are selected
because it is familiar, well advertised or offer the “latest”
technology. Organisations are constantly searching for cutting
edge tools to enhance their competitive advantage. Many tests
are new on the market and have not been through the
registration process. Although there are many locally developed
tests available in South Africa, many practitioners choose to use
international instruments. 
Many test-users utilise tests not registered with HPCSA because
these tests are more easily accessible. Furthermore they are not
restricted by the requirement that a psychologist has to
administer the test. Small organisations in general, do not have
the specialist skills and resources to invest in assessment
(Bartram, 2004). A wider range of people can thus administer
these tests and the organisation can save money by not
employing a psychologist. Practitioners without formal
training in psychology are increasingly doing assessment, and
personnel officers are expected to carry out assessment with
psychological instruments in the course of their day-to-day
work. Highhouse (2002) also identified this trend in an
international study.
Furthermore, practitioners have to keep social and cultural
factors in mind of tests are to be used ethically. This will be
addressed next.
The impact of social and cultural factors on test usage: Cross-
cultural use of tests
From an international perspective, Bredell, et al. (1999) state
that a recognition of cultural differences has lead to the
development of instruments to measure potential, as well as a
sensitivity towards the contexts in which the individual
functions. Not all instruments used in South Africa have been
thoroughly researched in terms of their cross-cultural
applicability. Nevertheless, practitioners still engage in
assessment practices using tests not standardised for South
Africa. The difficulty of choosing between instruments is
further exacerbated by the fact that information regarding the
classification of tests according to performance-driven criteria
is unavailable. 
When investigating the cross-cultural application of tests,
attention should be given to factors such as language, race,
gender, socio-economic status, educational background, etc.
(Bedell, et al.1999 ). Specifically the impact of language and
cultural differences on testing will be discussed in more detail. 
The most frequently cited hindrance to the administration 
of psychological tests as reported by interview participants 
is language. Language can be problematic on three levels: 
(i) the language in which the test is constructed, (ii) the
difficulty level of the test language, especially if the test is
administered in the testee’s second or third language, (van de
Vijver and Rothmann, 2004) and (iii) the language
competence of the testee. 
Language is closely tied to culture. Cultural context
particularly becomes a problem when doing personality
assessment, as constructs have different meanings and are
experienced differently across cultures. In general personality
tests require a high level of language proficiency (van de Vijver
and Rothmann, 2004). Bredell, et al. (1999) state that culture is
an important moderator in test performance because it affects
behaviour and consequently the psychological construct being
measured. Other factors that can influence test performance
include: cultural and/or environmental factors, language, 
level of familiarity with tests, rural or urban residence,
acculturation, age, gender, etc.
It is important to determine whether the performance on the
test reflects the testee’s ability, and not her level of competence
in the test language (Foxcroft, 2004). The test developer has to
ensure that the same construct is measured across different
groups when using different languages. This is in line with the
stipulations of the International Guidelines for Test Use
(Foxcroft, 2004). It is therefore necessary to examine the bias
of the items as well as the validity of the test across cultures. It
is important to recognise that translation is not a quick-fix
solution to cross-cultural use of tests. Even changing some
wording in an item can draw a question mark over the
construct, score and predictive comparability (Bredell, et al.,
1999). For these reasons some participants objected to the idea
of translation, as this process might change the constructs
being measured and will require additional expense for
restandardisation.
Another solution could be to eliminate language from testing by
using 
non-verbal 
instruments. 
From 
an 
international
perspective, Highhouse (2002) observes that a negative attitude
towards psychometric tests and a lack of trust in judgmental
prediction methods which characterises psychometrics, has lead
to an increase in the use of projective techniques. In a multi-
cultural context such as South Africa, this method presents
problems because when using projective techniques the test
taker’s response has to be translated and much of the nuances of
the language can be lost through this process. Moreover,
existing projective techniques are culture-bound and will be
interpreted differently across cultures, which will not
automatically solve the cross-cultural applicability debate. Thus
in the case of projective techniques, the issue of language may
be addressed, but cultural differences are not adequately
accounted for.
Van de Vijver and Rothmann (2004) suggests various approaches
to eliminating discriminatory use of tests in cross-cultural
application, i.e. the development of culture-specific norms (van
de Vijver, 2004), introducing score adjustment procedures and
the development of new instruments. The participants in the
ISSUES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST USE
19

current study echoed these sentiments. Norming/renorming
new or existing tests, adapting existing tests using unregistered
tests and lastly developing new tests will be discussed as
responses to challenges posed to test usage
Responses to challenges posed to test usage
Norming/renorming
Norming is a form of benchmarking where the performance of
the individual is compared to a relevant reference group. The
issue of norming or renorming psychological tests is a
controversial issue, which requires careful consideration of all
related factors i.e. age, education, gender and race. Norming is
thus seen in conjunction with standardisation. 
Participants in the South African business world have followed
the route of developing situation-specific norms, where
candidates are benchmarked against specific job requirements.
Factors such as age, gender and race are not taken into
consideration and all candidates have to meet a uniform
standard. The assumption is that predictive validity is facilitated
through situation specific norming. This enables the
psychologist to justify decisions based on job requirements – all
successful applicants have to meet particular requirements,
regardless of demographic differences. The aim of the test is to
reliably measure constructs present in the work situation with a
proven link to job success. Although there is one norm group for
each job, every different job will have a different norm group
e.g. different norm groups for executive management and
clerical staff.
Some larger institutions and enterprises have the resources and
data available to develop situation-specific norms and to do
statistical analysis themselves. Private practitioners do not
have such a facility or expertise at their disposal, and will
clearly experience difficulty in generating norms tailored to
their unique needs. This suggests that the clients of private
practitioners are even less likely to be assessed with
appropriate norms. To compensate for the problem, a facility
could be created where private practitioners can contribute to
a database and also have access to this source of information
for norming purposes.
Furthermore, it is imperative that tests meet the requirements of
validity, reliability and cross-cultural applicability. Information
on the aspects should be included in the test manual (van de
Vijver and Rothmann, 2004). There are many different
arguments about whether (i) new tests have to be developed
from scratch, (ii) whether international tests can be adapted for
use in South Africa and (iii) whether a strategic approach should
be followed where certain tests are selected to be adapted while
new local tests are also developed. This will be discussed in the
next section.
Adapting and developing tests
Evaluating the adaptation of existing tests with the development
of new tests calls for a decision-making process that compares
advantages and disadvantages against cost implications. Foxcroft
(1997) supports the adaptation of existing tests and the
development of culturally appropriate tests and norms, but
cautions that when developing tests, the practical limitations of
the South African context should be taken into consideration.
Cultural and linguistic differences can hamper the development
and norming of tests and South African test developers and
distributors 
are 
faced 
with 
an 
enormous 
challenge.
Shuttleworth-Jordan (1996) argues in favour of adapting and
standardising existing international measures, as increasing
urbanisation, acculturation and literacy might hamper the
development of culturally appropriate measures. The debate
around adapting or developing thus needs to be addressed.
Adapting existing tests
A test can either be updated, or adapted or both. Updating refers
to making a test more relevant and changing outmoded aspects
of the tests, whereas adaptation can include this, but mainly
refers to changing the test in terms of restandardisation and
renorming.
Participants did not refer to limitations of existing tests that
could be addressed by adapting them. It is possible that the
participants don’t give the adaptation of existing tests enough
thought in their ordinary day-to-day functioning. Users might
not be aware of how the limitations of existing tests can be
addressed, or they might be content with the tests they are using.
This corresponds with the findings from van der Merwe’s study,
which showed that users in general are satisfied with the tests
they use, although they do mention that some instruments and
material are outdated (van der Merwe, 2002). Skarlicki (2003)
mentions an interesting paradox in reviewing the literature on
the effectiveness of HR practices: test takers tend to deem invalid
tests (i.e. low predictive validity) as more fair, which stresses the
point that the perception of fairness is as important as
psychometric information. 
Developing new tests 
There is a view among the participants that in some instances
existing tests should not be adapted, but new tests should be
developed from scratch. This is especially the case in
personality measures. When developing a new test, attention
should be given to item format, construct validity, relevance of
content and appropriate use of language within the South
African context (Foxcroft, 1997). Van der Merwe in his study
also found that the market would welcome tests developed in
South Africa, where participants expressed a need for the
development of culture-fair instruments. This approach could
be enhanced by implementing competency-based assessment,
which is job related rather than norm based (van der Merwe,
2002). Bartram (2004) states that competency-based
assessment focuses on the essential behaviours required to
perform a job though focussing on individual differences in
terms of work-related constructs relevant to job performance.
There is thus a move away from traits to potential in relation
to work behaviour.
Training and competence of test users and the responsibility
of professional bodies
Oakland (2004, p. 162) remarks that: “sound testing practice
require suitable educated professionals to correctly select,
administer, score and wisely interpret tests and other measures.”
Adequate and continuous training thus enhance appropriate
and ethical test use. 
Currently there is no standardised training programme for
psychological 
assessment 
available 
across 
all 
training
institutions in South Africa, and the ethical standards governing
test development and use are embedded within the broader
ethics code (Oakland, 2004). Bartram (2004) summarises many
authors’ concerns about the indiscriminate use of tests without
adequate training of practitioners. 
Current guidelines in terms of classification and application of
psychological tests are not very clear. According to these
guidelines some tests can be administered by “suitably trained”
people, which do not necessarily entail a qualified psychologist
or psychometrist. The question arises: What does “suitably
trained” really mean? These and other specifications and
guidelines require clarification. A policy document stating
when, where and how psychological tests can be used should be
available and easily accessible. 
The participants in this study observe that they urgently need to
get more support from the HPCSA and other professional bodies
with regard to assessment practices. Institutions like the HPCSA,
Psychological Association of South Africa (PsySSA) and test
developers could contribute toward standardising and providing
training. PsySSA has a particularly important role to play in this
regard. Oakland (2004) argues that conditions of test use are
PATERSON, UYS
20

more favourable if the professional association takes a positive
attitude towards assessment, is involved in training and
preparation and takes the initiative in setting out standards for
test use and development.
From the information received from the participants, it can 
be argued that the HPCSA is currently not in a position 
to efficiently regulate access to and use of tests. A 
possible strategy is to strive towards self-regulation, 
where practitioners are empowered to make informed
decisions through access to information and adequate
training. Participants felt that if test users were adequately
trained they would choose not to use unregistered tests,
without being regulated into this decision. This argument 
is supported by comments from practitioners that the
negative connotations around psychometric testing could 
be ascribed to unqualified, incompetent administrators, and
not the tests themselves.
Concluding remarks
In the era after 1994, with changes in legislation and 
the structure of the work-force, psychological assessment 
has an important role to play in developing and maintaining
an organisation’s competitive advantage, but also needs to 
be responsive to the demands and requirements of the
organisation and worker. The study showed that although
practitioners are faced with many critical issues, psychological
tests are used in industry on a large scale and for a variety 
of purposes.
The current study highlighted the tension in South Africa
between achieving equity in the workplace and increasing
productivity. This debate has relevance when it comes to 
the application of psychological tests and selection of 
norms. The argument is raised that standards should not be
lowered and all population groups should meet the 
same criteria, especially when competing in a global
economy. The counter argument is that psychological 
tests should take into consideration the inequality of the 
past and different norms and standards should be set for
different population groups. 
Practitioners further remarked that the tests available in the
market are mostly developed from a clinical model, where the
focus is on deficiency and pathology. Practitioners have to adjust
these measures to answer human resource related questions, as
assessment in industry requires a focus on strengths and
potential. A need for the development of tests that are
specifically geared at industry and practical in nature was
identified in the study.
The cross-cultural applicability of tests is an important issue,
which should receive attention through continuous research.
Participants accept that language and culture influence test
performance, and strategies should be put in place to ensure that
tests are used equitably. 
Divergent arguments support the notions of developing 
local instruments, as well as adapting and standardising existing
tests for use in South Africa. It is important that test developers
and distributors, together with test users, take an active part in
the governing and quality assurance of psychological tests.
Industry should be made aware of the importance of using
sound instruments applied by suitably trained and qualified
administrators.
Training is highlighted as a strategy to improve the quality of
tests and testing practices in South Africa. Students in
industrial/organisational psychology as well as practising
psychologists have to receive relevant and applicable training.
Established psychologists have to be retrained and updated in
new developments and practices in psychological assessment.
The relevance and quality of current training of Industrial
Psychologists was questioned, especially as there is not a
standardised training programme in place. Are Industrial
Psychologists adequately trained and prepared for assessment 
in 2005?
It is not proposed that this study provide an adequate overview
of all tests currently in use in South Africa. It is suggested that a
database of all tests classified according to purpose
(psychological and non-psychological) should be compiled. This
requires focussed research on tests used in South Africa, which
should not be limited to the tests registered with the HPCSA.
Having access to this data will make it possible to study trends
in current tests use as well as infer future needs. The
information should be made available to all practitioners in an
electronic format, i.e. Internet and should be easily accessible
and updated regularly.
A first step in addressing the confusion amongst practitioners
around psychological assessment could be drafting a
framework for guidelines and regulations addressing issues
such as access to psychological tests, fairness in testing, 
ethics and professional qualification standards. Inter-
nationally, the International Test Commission has been
instrumental in providing a template on which such
guidelines can be based (International Test Commission,
2000) – although the unique South African context should 
be taken into consideration. To ensure equitable, responsible
and transparent assessment practice, all stakeholders should
be involved in drawing up assessment guidelines. These
include practitioners, test developers and distributors,
universities and legislative bodies such as the HPCSA, as well
as professional associations such as PsySSA and SIOPSA
(Society of Industrial Psychology in South Africa). It would be
wise to include representatives from all cultural and language
groups in this stakeholder group. This will prove to be a
challenging but rewarding endeavour.
REFERENCES
Baptiste, I. (2001). Qualitative data analysis: Common phases,
strategic differences. FQS, 2 (3). 114 – 140.
Bartram, D. (2004). Assessment in organisations. Applied
Psychology: An International Review, 53 (2), 237 – 259.
Bredell, B., Van Eeden, R. & Van Staden, F. (1999). Culture as a
moderator variable in psychological test performance: Issues
and trends in South Africa. Perspectives in Industrial
Psychology, 25 (3), 1 – 7.
Davis, O.I., Nakayama, T.K. & Martin, J.N. (2000). Current and
future 
directions 
in 
ethnicity 
and 
methodology.
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 24, 525 – 539.
Employment Equity Act, 1998. (Act No. 55 of 1998). Pretoria
Fernandez-Ballesteros, R. (1999). Psychological assessment:
Future challenges and progress. European Psychologist, 4 (4),
248 – 262.
Fernandez-Ballesteros, R. (2002). How should psychological
assessment be considered? American Psychologist, February,
138 – 139.
Foxcroft, C. (1997). Psychological testing in South Africa:
Perspectives regarding ethical and fair practices. European
Journal of Psychological Assessment, 13, 229 – 235.
Foxcroft, C. (2004). Planning a psychological test in the
multicultural South African context. SA Journal of Industrial
Psychology, 30 (4), 8 – 15.
Highhouse, S. (2002). Assessing the candidate as a whole: 
A historical and critical analysis of individual assessment 
for personnel decision making. Personnel Psychology, 55, 
363 – 396.
International Test Commission, (2000). International guidelines
for test use. Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium: Author.
Long, T. & Johnson, M. (2000). Rigour, reliability and validity 
in qualitative research. Clinical Effectiveness in Nursing, 4, 
30 – 37.
ISSUES IN PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST USE
21

Oakland, T. (2004). Use of Educational and Psychological Tests
Internationally. Applied Psychology: In International Review,
53 (2), 157 – 172.
Pitney, W.A. (2004). Strategies for establishing trustworthiness
in qualitative research. Human Kinetics, 9 (1), 26 – 28.
Republic of South Africa. (1998). Skills Development Act.
Pretoria.
Republic of South Africa. (1999). Skills Development Levy’s Act.
Pretoria.
Riley, R.W. & Love, L.L. (2000). The state of qualitative tourism
research. Annals of Tourism Research, 27 (1), 164 – 187.
Shuttleworth-Jordan, A.B. (1996). On not reinventing the
wheel: A clinical perspective on culturally relevant test
usage in South Africa. South African Journal of Psychology,
26, 96 – 102.
Skarlicki, D.P. (2003). HRM Special issue: Fairness and human
resources management. Human Resources Review, 13, 1 – 5.
Stromquist, N.P. (2000). On truth, voice and qualitative
research. Qualitative Studies in Education, 13 (2), 139 – 152.
Tobin, G.A. & Begley, C.M. (2004). Methodological rigour within
a qualitative framework. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 48 (4),
338 – 396
Van de Vijver, A.J.R. (2004). Assessment in Multicultural groups:
The role of acculturation. Applied Psychology: An
International Review, 53 (2), 215 – 236.
Van de Vijver, A.J.R. & Rothmann, S. (2004). Assessment in
multicultural groups: The South African case. SA Journal of
Industrial Psychology, 30 (4), 1 – 7.
Van der Merwe, R.P. (2002). Psychometric testing and human
resource management. SA Journal of Industrial Psychology, 28
(2), 77 – 86.
Wallis, T. (2004). Psychological tests do not measure what they
claim to measure: A re-evaluation of the concept of construct
validity. South African Journal of Psychology, 34 (1), 101 – 121.
PATERSON, UYS
22
