                                                                                                                                                                                          Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2016;7(3):470–475 
doi: 10.15452/CEJNM.2016.07.0017 
 
 
 
© 2016 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
470
ORIGINAL PAPER 
FACTORS 
INFLUENCING 
THE 
EFFECTIVENESS 
OF 
CLINICAL 
LEARNING 
ENVIRONMENT IN NURSING EDUCATION 
Elena Gurková1, Katarína Žiaková2, Silvia Cibríková1, Dagmar Magurová1, Anna Hudáková1, 
Slávka Mrosková1 
1Department of Nursing, Faculty of Health Care, University of Prešov in Prešov, Slovakia 
2Department of Nursing, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Comenius University in Bratislava, Slovakia 
Received April 4, 2016; Accepted May 2, 2016. Copyright: This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution International License (CC BY). http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
Abstract 
Aim: The purpose of the cross-sectional descriptive study was to investigate how nursing students evaluate particular factors of 
clinical learning environment during their professional placement in hospitals. We explored which factors of clinical 
environment contribute significantly to students’ evaluation of it. Design: A descriptive cross-sectional study. Methods: The 
sample included 503 nursing students in their second or third year of study at six Slovak universities. A valid and reliable 
questionnaire, the Clinical Learning Environment, Supervision and Nurse Teacher evaluation scale (CLES+T), was used to 
evaluate the student nurses’ experiences and clinical placement. The data were analysed using descriptive statistics, Pearson’s 
chi-square test, multifactorial ANOVA procedure and Pearsons’ correlations, and p-value < 0.05 was taken to indicate 
statistical significance for all comparisons. Results: A significant proportion of students experienced a traditional model of 
group supervision. Supervision method, supervisory session frequency, and duration of clinical placement had a significant 
impact on their evaluation of clinical environments. Conclusion: Supervision methods are a significant factor influencing 
student evaluation of their clinical placement environment. Compared to other European studies, we found a less frequent 
application of individual supervision and that the Slovak university setting is dominated by a traditional group model of 
supervision. The study offers a valuable insight into the analysis of factors contributing to improvements in clinical learning 
environment and models of clinical or workplace training. 
Keywords: clinical learning, clinical learning environment, supervision, mentorship, CLES+T evaluation scale. 
 
 
Introduction 
Research focusing on clinical setting in the 
professional preparation of nurses in a European 
environment has primarily been influenced by the 
transformation of pre-service training of nurses in the 
European Union (EU) since the 1960s (Saarikoski et 
al., 2013). There is a broad range of international 
studies (Saarikoski et al., 2007; Warne et al., 2010; 
Antohe et al., 2015; Dobrowolska et al., 2016) 
developed and published as part of  multiple 
European projects comparing clinical learning 
environment in relation to organizational aspects 
of clinical learning or clinical supervision. Early 
comparative studies were mainly carried out 
in Western European countries. Warne et al. (2010) 
justify the exclusion of Central and Eastern Europe  
 
 
Corresponding author: Elena Gurková, Department of Nursing, 
Faculty of Health Care, University of Presov in Presov, 
Partizánska 
1, 
Prešov, 
Slovak 
Republic; 
e-mail: 
elena.gurkova@unipo.sk 
 
on grounds of cultural differences, as well as 
differences in education and organization of clinical 
instruction. Following research in Western European 
countries, a comparative study was carried out within 
the EmpNURS (Empowering the Professionalization 
of Nurses through Mentorship) project to explore the 
existing situation of clinical education and student 
satisfaction with learning environments in four 
relatively new member states of the EU – the Czech 
Republic, Hungary, Lithuania and Romania. In 
Slovakia, clinical environment was mainly assessed 
in relation to the specific training of mentors in 
partial cross-sectional studies (Zanovitová et al., 
2014), which involved students from only one 
institution. 
This study was designed to compare results from 
Central/Eastern EU countries with previous studies 
from Western European societies. Evidence from 
Slovakia suggests Clinical practice and student 
supervision issues have not received sufficient 
attention. Following previous European studies 
(Saarikoski, Leino-Kilpi, 2002; Saarikoski et al., 

Gurková E et al.                                                                                                                                           Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2016;7(3):470–475 
 
 
© 2016 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
471
2008; Warne et al., 2010; Saarikoski et al., 2013; 
Antohe et al., 2015) and partial local studies 
(Zanovitová et al., 2014), the construct of clinical 
learning environment was operationalized by the 
Clinical Learning Environment, Supervision and 
Nurse 
Teacher 
evaluation 
scale 
(CLES+T, 
Saarikoski et al., 2009). This instrument is one of the 
most commonly used tools to measure students’ 
perceptions 
of 
clinical 
learning 
environment 
in European countries and has been validated 
in different empirical studies for clinical and research 
purposes. The CLES+T scale has commonly been 
used as an audit instrument for measuring the quality 
of clinical education in higher nursing education 
(Sirkka et al., 2015). The instrument was developed 
on content analysis of the results arising from 
a number of empirical studies, audit instruments and 
systematic literature reviews, and is primarily used to 
evaluate nursing teachers’ pedagogical and social 
role-dimensions in the clinical practice of student 
nurses and the impact of different supervision models 
(Saarikoski et al., 2009) on students’ perceptions 
of clinical learning enviroment. The CLES+T scale is 
a modified and improved version of the Clinical 
Learning Environment and Supervision (CLES) scale 
(Saarikoski, Leino-Kilpi, 2002). The CLES has been 
used more often in Sloviakia than the recent version – 
the CLES+T scale. The psychometric properties of 
this widely used instrument are well established 
(Saarikoski et al., 2009; Papastavrou et al., 2016).  
The study was supported by Grant KEGA: Evaluation 
of clinical learning enviroment in nursing pre-
gradual education (016PU-4/2015). Within this 
project we focused on a more representative sample 
of nursing students from several higher education 
institutions in Slovakia to describe the situation 
of clinical placements for student nurses and compare 
students’ perceptions of learning environments with 
the results of other European studies. 
Aim  
The study objective was to determine how nursing 
students evaluate selected clinical factors during their 
placement in healthcare facilities. We examined the 
relationship between the factors of clinical instruction 
(supervision methods, frequency of supervision 
sessions, supervisors’ job title and the length 
of placement) and students’ evaluation of  clinical 
learning environment. 
Methods 
Design 
A descriptive cross-sectional study. 
Sample 
The research sample consisted of 503 nursing 
students in the second or third year of a Bachelor 
degree from six universities in Slovakia. The students 
were selected on the basis of predetermined criteria 
and were guaranteed anonymity. In order to obtain 
a homogeneous sample of respondents in terms 
of type of workplace and study class, the sample 
included only students in the second and third year 
of a Bachelor degree in nursing who have carried out 
continuous 
clinical 
practice 
within 
inpatient 
healthcare facilities. Participants were recruited 
between March and November 2015. Researchers 
contacted selected universities, the study was 
explained, 
and 
permission 
for 
the 
purpose 
of gathering data was sought. The CLES+T scale was 
individually administered in the last week of each 
student’s clinical placement or one week after 
students’ clinical placement. A total of 600 
questionnaires 
were 
distributed 
to 
eligible 
respondents at the six participating universities, 
of which 503 were returned. The overall response 
rate was 83.8%. 
Data collection 
The domains of clinical learning environment were 
measured with the CLES+T scale. The CLES+T 
scale (Saarikoski et al., 2009) consists of 34 items 
grouped into five domains: pedagogical atmosphere 
on the ward (nine items); supervisory relationships 
(eight items); leadership style of ward managers (four 
items); healthcare on the ward (four items); and the 
role of the teacher (nine items). Students evaluated 
each item on the questionnaire using the five-point 
Likert scale (1 = “strongly disagree”, 5 = “strongly 
agree”). The CLES+T scale is a modified and 
improved 
version 
of 
the 
Clinical 
Learning 
Environment 
and 
Supervision 
(CLES) 
scale 
(Saarikoski, Leino-Kilpi, 2002). Cronbach alphas for 
each of the five subscales in the original instrument 
ranged from 0.77 to 0.96. Cronbach alphas for each 
of the five subscales in our study ranged from 0.80 to 
0.97, confirming good internal consistency of the 
scale in the current study. Permission to use the 
CLES+T scale in this study was obtained. The 
CLES+T scale was then translated into Slovak. The 
translation process consisted of three steps: forward 
translation; 
back 
translation 
into 
English 
by 
a qualified translator; comparison of the back 
translation with the original version and panel 
discussion (cognitive debriefing), with pilot testing 
on a small sample of nursing students (Gurková et al., 
2015). 
 

Gurková E et al.                                                                                                                                           Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2016;7(3):470–475 
 
 
© 2016 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
472
Data analysis 
Statistical analysis was performed with the Statistical 
Package for Social Sciences 20.0. Results concerning 
evaluation of clinical learning environment were 
calculated in the context of descriptive statistical 
analysis (means, standard deviation, absolute and 
relative 
frequencies) 
For 
group 
comparisons, 
multifactorial ANOVA and Fisher’s least significant 
difference (LSD) procedure were performed where 
appropriate. To determine the associations and 
correlations between variables, parametric Pearson 
correlations were used. Proportion comparisons were 
carried out with the chi-square test. P-value < 0.05 
was taken to indicate statistical significance for all 
comparisons. 
Results 
Students’ experiences of clinical environments and 
supervision  
The majority of supervisors in our sample were ward 
nurses (70.4%). The remainder of the supervisor 
sample was made up of ward managers or assistant 
ward managers (29.6%). 53.7% of students did not 
have scheduled sessions with their supervisor at all. 
Only 20.3% of students had scheduled sessions with 
their supervisor about once a week or more. 
Significant differences were found in frequency 
of supervision sessions in relation to the job title 
of supervisors (Pearson’s chi-square test = 52.7; p = 
0.001). Higher frequency of supervision sessions was 
indicated by students working under mentorship 
of managers or divisional nurses. Within the 
CLES+T tool, the individual methods of supervisory 
relationship could be identified and the students 
could choose from six alternatives (Table 1). Based 
on a multinational European study (Warne et al., 
2010), we combined these items into three groups: 
unsatisfactory 
supervisory 
experience, 
group 
supervision, and satisfactory supervisory experience. 
Only 15.9% of the sample students indicated 
satisfactory 
supervisory 
experiences. 
24.8% 
of students 
indicated 
unsatisfactory 
individual 
supervisory experiences (no named supervisor, 
unplanned 
change 
of 
supervisor, 
a 
personal 
supervisor was named, but the relationship with them 
did not function). 57.9% of students indicated that 
group 
supervision 
was 
the 
method 
used.
 
 
Table 1 Students’ experience of clinical environments and supervision (n = 492; 11 students had missing data on 
items of measures) 
Method of supervision 
n 
% 
the student did not have a named supervisor 
95 
18.9 
a personal supervisor was named, but the relationship with this person did not work 
20 
4.1 
the named supervisor changed during the training course, even though no change had been planned 
7 
1.4 
the supervisor varied according to shift or place of work 
130 
26.4 
the supervisor had several students and was a group supervisor rather than an individual supervisor 
155 
31.5 
a personal supervisor was named and the relationship worked during the placement 
78 
15.9 
other (not specified) 
7 
1.4 
 
 
Students’ evaluation of clinical learning environment 
The mean values between sub-dimensions varied 
between 2.93 (± 1.34) and 3.61 (± 0.87). The highest 
mean value was in the sub-dimension premises of 
nursing on the ward (3.61) and on the sub-dimension 
leadership style of ward managers (3.52 ± 0.89). The 
midpoint of the Likert-type scale (3.00–3.49) 
represents balanced agreement. Students in our 
sample were more satisfied with external aspects/sub-
dimensions of clinical learning environment such as 
(Table 2) – leadership style of ward managers (3.52 
± 0.89); premises of nursing on the ward (3.61 ± 
0.87) and pedagogical atmosphere on the ward (3.20 
± 0.77). The sub-dimension supervisory relationships 
achieved the lowest scores (2.93 ± 1.34). Students 
reported higher satisfaction with leadership style 
of ward managers, premises of nursing on the ward, 
and pedagogical atmosphere on the ward than with 
the supervisory relationship with their mentor. 
 
Table 2 Mean scores of sub-dimensions of the 
Slovak version of the CLES+T (n = 503) 
 
mean 
SD 
pedagogical atmosphere on the ward 
3.20 
0.77 
leadership style of the ward manager 
3.52 
0.89 
premises of nursing on the ward 
3.61 
0.87 
mentorship relationship 
2.93 
1.34 
role of nurse teacher 
3.27 
0.86 
SD – standard deviation 
 
 
 

Gurková E et al.                                                                                                                                           Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2016;7(3):470–475 
 
 
© 2016 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
473
Factors influencing clinical learning environment  
Multifactor ANOVA was used to investigate 
significant differences in overall mean score 
of CLES+T scale according to selected variables 
such as – duration of the placement, occupational title 
of supervisor, and students’ previous experience on 
the ward or methods of supervision (Table 3). 
Significant differences in mean overall score were 
found only in methods of supervision. Results of post 
hoc tests (the Fisher’s LSD procedure) revealed that 
students with satisfactory individual mentorship (3.89 
± 0.89) reported better clinical learning environment 
than students who indicated group supervision (3.28 
± 0.71) or a variation of an unsatisfactory supervisory 
experience (2.88 ± 0.84). 
 
 
 
Table 3 Factors of clinical learning environment supervision (n = 492, 11 students had missing data on items 
of measures), results of multifactor ANOVA 
Variable 
type III 
sum of 
squares 
df 
mean 
square 
F 
 
 
p 
 
 
students’ perceptions of the clinical learning environment  
(overall mean CLES+T score) 
 
 
 
 
 
duration of the placement  
(1–2 weeks/ 3–4weeks/more than 4 weeks) 
0.27 
3 
0.09 
0.25 
0.86 
occupational title of supervisor  
(nurse, nurse specialist/ward manager, assistant ward manager) 
1.48 
4 
0.59 
1.61 
0.17 
students’ perceptions of supervision  
(unsuccessful supervisory experience/group supervision/successful 
supervisory experience) 
20.01 
3 
6.16 
16.76 
0.000 
df – degrees of freedom; F – ratio; p 0.01; ***p 0.001 
 
A negative (although not statistically significant) 
correlation was found between duration of the 
placement and student perceptions of clinical 
learning environment. Positive low correlations were 
noted between frequency of supervision sessions and 
student perceptions of clinical learning environment. 
Higher frequency of supervision sessions of students 
with mentors was associated with better overall 
student evaluation of clinical learning environment 
(Table 4).  
 
 
Table 4 Correlations between overall mean CLES+T score and duration of the placement and frequency 
of supervisory sessions 
 
Duration of the placement  
Frequency of supervision 
meetings  
students’ perceptions of the clinical learning environment 
(overall mean CLES+T score) 
-0.04 
0.31** 
*p 0.05; **p 0.01; ***p 0.001 
 
Discussion 
The evaluation of effectivness of selected factors 
influencing student perceptions of clinical learning 
environment 
has 
been 
of 
interest 
to 
many 
investigators in a number of quantitative and 
qualitative studies. Papastavrou et al. (2010) provided 
a chronological review of studies focusing on the 
evaluation of clinical environment. The primary 
focus of early studies was aimed at clinicial 
environment as a source of stress in relation to signs 
of stress and anxiety during clinical placement and 
coping strategies (Sheu et al., 2002; Melo et al., 
2010; Melincavage, 2013).  
In more recent studies, clinical learning environment 
has 
been 
investigated 
from 
the 
psychosocial/educational perspective, 
particularly 
student perceptions of personalisation, involvement, 
task orientation, innovation, and individualisation 
(Chan, 2001; Chan, 2002; Midgley 2006). Other 
studies have questioned the effectiveness of cultural 
and organizational factors in the ward, supervision 
strategies, supervisory relationships or staff-student 

Gurková E et al.                                                                                                                                           Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2016;7(3):470–475 
 
 
© 2016 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
474
relationships on students’ learning experiences 
(Saarikoski, Leino-Kilpi, 2002; Saarikoski et al., 
2008; Warne et al., 2010; Antohe et al., 2015). The 
results of the later group of studies confirmed that 
supervisory relationship is the strongest factor 
influencing organization of workplace training. 
An individualised supervisory approach is of prime 
importance to the students’ learning and professional 
development in clinical practice (Warne et al., 2010). 
One of the most important and interesting findings 
of our study came from descriptive statistics. It was 
suprising that 24.8% of students in our study had had 
some type of unsatisfactory supervisory experience 
(no 
named 
supervisor, 
unplanned 
change 
of supervisor, a personal supervisor was named, but 
the relationship with them did not function). 
Students’ experiences of clinical environments and 
supervision was reflected in their evaluation 
of clinical learning environment sub-dimensions. 
Students 
were 
more 
satisfied 
with 
external 
aspects/sub-dimensions (leadership style of ward 
managers; premises of nursing on the ward and 
pedagogical atmosphere on the ward) of clinical 
learning environment than with their supervisory 
relationship with a mentor. However, these findings 
are consistent with results of our pilot study focusing 
on testing the CLES+T scale (Gurková et al., 2015) 
on a more homogeneous sample of student nurses. 
The results of both of our studies suggest 
a correlation 
between 
student 
perceptions 
of individual areas of clinical learning environment 
and the type of supervisory relationship or their 
methods. A functioning individualised, supervisory 
relationship between student and mentor has 
an impact on student perceptions of all domains or 
sub-dimensions of clinical learning environment 
(Zanovitová et al., 2014). A partial cross-sectional 
study of Slovak authors (Zanovitová et al., 2014) 
investigated the effectiveness of clinical supervision 
depending on the number of trained mentors and 
confirmed increased student satisfaction with clinical 
environment being directly proportional to the 
specific training and availability of trained mentors. 
A significant number of Slovak students in our 
sample had experienced a traditional model of group 
supervision associated with lower overall CLES+T 
score in contrast to individualised supervisory 
relationships. These results are consistent with the 
results of a European study by Antohe et al. (2015), 
confirming that group supervision was the most 
typical supervision model in Central/Eastern EU 
countries. Consistent with this study (Antohe et al., 
2015), our study concludes that an individualised 
supervisory relationship was associated with higher 
satisfaction 
in 
students. 
European 
researchers 
investigating student perceptions and experience 
of clinical placements in a Western European context 
(Saarikoski, Leino-Kilpi, 2002; Saarikoski et al., 
2008; Warne et al., 2010; Saarikoski et al., 2013) 
unanimously 
reported 
that 
the 
individualized 
supervisory model was predominant. Warne et al. 
(2010) unambiguously confirmed a move from 
a group supervision approach to a one-to-one 
supervision 
orientation 
in 
Western 
European 
countries. A considerable amount of empirical 
evidence 
indicates 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
the 
individualized supervisory model on student learning 
experiences 
(Saarikoski, 
Leino-Kilpi, 
2002; 
Saarikoski et al., 2008; Warne et al., 2010; Saarikoski 
et al., 2013).  
The second factor influencing students evaluation 
and assessment of clinical placements investigated in 
this study was the duration of the clinical training 
placement. In other European studies, the duration 
of the clinical training placement was identified as 
the determining factor of higher student satisfaction 
with the supervisory relationship and the pedagogical 
atmosphere on the ward. Warne et al. (2010) in their 
study performed in nine EU countries, confirmed that 
the students with longer placements (seven weeks or 
more) were more satisfied with clinical learning 
environment 
than 
the 
students 
with 
shorter 
placements 
(under 
seven 
weeks). 
However, 
in comparison with previous influential European 
studies (Warne et al., 2010) we did not confirm 
a significant relationship between the duration of the 
clinical training placement and student evaluation 
and 
assessment 
of 
clinical 
placements. 
One 
explanation for these findings might be the fact that 
only 34% of students in our sample were enrolled on 
placements of more than four weeks. Conditions such 
as a traditional schedule of clinical training divided 
into two semesters, as well as planning of clinical 
training in all basic departments, do not allow the 
students to remain at one workplace for more than 
four weeks. Higher frequency of supervisory sessions 
was associated with better overall student evaluation 
of 
clinical 
learning 
environment. 
Significant 
differences were found in frequency of supervisory 
sessions in relation to the position (job title) 
of supervisors. Clinical supervisors who worked as 
ward managers or assistant ward managers had lower 
frequency of supervisory sessions with students than 
clinical supervisors who worked as nurses or nurse 
specialists, most probably caused by the workload 
and time constraints. 
 

Gurková E et al.                                                                                                                                           Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2016;7(3):470–475 
 
 
© 2016 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
475
Conclusion  
Student evaluation of clinical environment and 
supervision were reflected in their assessment of the 
sub-dimensions of clinical learning. Supervision 
method was confirmed as a significant determinant 
influencing student perceptions of clinical learning 
environment. In contrast to previous influential 
European studies, we did not confirm the dominance 
of individualized supervisory models in clinical 
training. Group supervision was the most common 
supervision model at Slovak universities providing 
nursing education. The study provides an insight into 
the factors important for ensuring the quality 
of clinical nursing education. 
Ethical aspects and conflict of interest 
All respondents were fully informed of the research 
objectives, and agreed to participate in the research 
process. The authors declare that they had no conflict 
of interest and followed ethical guidelines when 
conducting the research. 
Acknowledgements 
The study was supported by Grant KEGA: 
Evaluation of clinical learning enviroment in nursing 
pre-gradual education (016PU-4/2015). 
Author contribution 
Conception and design (EG, KZ), data collection, 
data analysis and interpretation (EG, KZ, SC, DM, 
AH), manuscript draft (EG, KZ), critical revision of 
the manuscript (EG, KZ, SM, SC), final approval of 
the manuscript (EG, KZ, SM). 
References 
Antohe I, Riklikiene O, Tichelaar E, Saarikoski M. Clinical 
education and training of student nurses in four moderately 
new European Union countries: Assessment of students’ 
satisfaction with the learning environment. Nurse Education 
in Practice. 2016;17:139–144.  
Dobrowolska B, McGonagle I, Kane R, Jackson CS, Kegl B, 
Bergin M, Cabrera E, Cooney-Miner D, Di Cara V, Dimoski 
Z, Kekus D, Pajnkihar M, Prlić  N, Sigurdardottir AK, Wells 
J, Palese A. Patterns of clinical mentorship in undergraduate 
nurse education: A comparative case analysis of eleven EU 
and non-EU countries. Nurse Education Today. 2016;36:44–
52.  
Gurková E, Žiaková K, Cibríková S, Magurová D. 
Hodnotenie faktorov klinického prostredia v pregraduálnom 
vzdelávaní sestier. In: Mikšová Z, editor. Profesionalita 
v ošetřovatelství 
II. 
Olomouc: 
Univerzita 
Palackého 
v Olomouci; 2015. p. 46–55. (in Slovak) 
Melincavage SM. Student nurses’ experiences of anxiety in 
the clinical setting. Nurse Education Today. 2011;31(8):785–
789.  
Melo K, Williams B, Ross C. The impact of nursing curricula 
on clinical practice anxiety. Nurse Education Today. 
2010;30(8):773–778.  
Midgley K. Pre-registration student nurses perception of the 
hospital-learning environment during clinical placements. 
Nurse Education Today. 2006;26(4):338–345.  
Papastavrou E, Dimitriadou M, Tsangari H. Psychometric 
Testing of the Greek Version of the Clinical Learning 
Environment-Teacher (CLES+T). Global Journal of Health 
Science. 2015;8(5):59–71.  
Papastavrou E, Lambrinou E, Tsangari H, Saarikoski M, 
Leino-Kilpi H. Student nurses experience of learning in the 
clinical 
environment. 
Nurse 
Education 
in 
Practice. 
2010;10(3):176–182.  
Saarikoski M, Isoaho H, Warne T, Leino-Kilpi H. The nurse 
teacher in clinical practice: developing the new sub-
dimension to Clinical Learning Environment and Supervision 
(CLES) Scale. International Journal of Nursing Studies. 
2008;45(8):1233–1237.  
Saarikoski M, Kaila P, Lambrinou E, Pérez Cañaveras RM, 
Tichelaar E, Tomietto M, Warne T. Students’ experiences of 
cooperation with nurse teacher during their clinical 
placements: an empirical study in a Western European 
context. Nurse Education in Practice. 2013;13(2):78–82.  
Saarikoski M, Leino-Kilpi H. The clinical learning 
environment and supervision by staff nurses: developing the 
instrument. International Journal of Nursing Studies. 
2002;39(3):259–267.  
Saarikoski M, Marrow C, Abreu W, Riklikiene O, Ozbicakçi 
S. Student nurses’ experience of supervision and mentorship 
in clinical practice: a cross cultural perspective. Nursing 
Education in Practice. 2007;7(6):407–415.  
Saarikoski M, Warne T, Kaila P, Leino-Kilpi H. The role of 
the nurse teacher in clinical practice: an empirical study of 
Finnish student nurse experiences. Nurse Education Today. 
2009;29(6):595–600.  
Sheu S, Lin HS, Hwang SL. Perceived stress and physio-
psycho-social status of nursing students during their initial 
period of clinical practice: the effect of coping behaviors. 
International Journal of Nursing Studies. 2002;39(2):165–
175.  
Sirkka A, Olli S, Kanerva AM. Clinical placement audit as 
quality assurance measure in nursing education. In: Mikšová 
Z, editor. Profesionalita v ošetřovatelství II. Olomouc: 
Univerzita Palackého v Olomouci; 2015. p. 110-117.  
Warne T, Johansson UB, Papastavrou E, Tichelaar E, 
Tomietto M, Van den Bossche K, Moreno MF, Saarikoski M. 
An exploration of the clinical learning experience of nursing 
students in nine European countries. Nurse Education Today. 
2010;30(8):809–815. 
Zanovitová M, Lepiešová M, Kurucová R, Žiaková K, Farský 
I. Hodnotenie výučby a supervízie v klinickej ošetrovateľskej 
praxi. In: Bóriková I, Farský I, Žiaková K, editors. Teória, 
výskum a vzdelávanie v ošetrovateľstve. Martin: Univerzita 
Komenského v Bratislave, Jesseniova lekárska fakulta 
v Martine; 2014. p. 343–353. (in Slovak) 
 
 
