http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
HTS Teologiese Studies/Theological Studies
ISSN: (Online) 2072-8050, (Print) 0259-9422
Page 1 of 12
Original Research
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Author:
Graham A. Duncan1
Affiliation:
1Department of Church 
History and Church Polity, 
University of Pretoria, 
South Africa
Project Leader: G.A. Duncan
Project Number: 02618958
Description:
This research is part of the 
research project, ‘History of 
Theological Education in 
Africa’ directed by Prof. 
Dr Graham Duncan of the 
Department of Church 
History and Church Polity at 
the Faculty of Theology, 
University of Pretoria, 
South Africa
Corresponding author:
Graham Alexander Duncan, 
graham.duncan@up.ac.za
Dates:
Received: 11 Apr. 2016
Accepted: 26 May 2016
Published: 28 Oct. 2016
How to cite this article:
Duncan, G.A., 2016, ‘Gateway 
to the future … oopmaak van 
die hekke … Transformation 
in the Faculty of Theology, 
University of Pretoria’, HTS 
Teologiese Studies/
Theological Studies 72(4), 
a3424. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4102/hts.v72i4.3424
Copyright:
© 2016. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS. This work 
is licensed under the 
Creative Commons 
Attribution License.
Introduction
It took studying at the University of Pretoria (UP) for me to appreciate my Blackness and the history it 
comes from. It was through being challenged by Prof. _____ and Prof. _____ that I began to ask myself 
‘what does it mean to be black in a world that is defined through biases and subjective thoughts?’ And so 
I submit that this journey is one of self-discovery, painful, full of struggle but mostly about the restoration 
of human dignity and the realisation that the Gospel is not exclusive but is for the masses, bringing all to 
the core of God’s love … No sermon in Africa can ever be given if it does not reflect its context. #proudtukkie 
#theologian #black african. (Kabelo Motlhakane, 15 February 2016)
These words speak more eloquently of the achievement of the Faculty of Theology (FT) than the 
many documents produced at the UP regarding the essence and nature of the educational 
enterprise we are involved in – not that they do not communicate, but they do not take account of 
the singular effect on individual and group achievement. This is about transformation – an 
incomplete task – radical change from the roots. It is the equivalent of reconciliation:
a gift from God which Christians have the responsibility to share with the world … the vertical dimension 
of reconciliation is defined by our relationship to God. The horizontal dimension is reflected in the social 
rapport amongst peoples, making reconciliation the cornerstone for all societies seeking a peaceful co-
existence. (Atzvi 2013:30)
It involves the totality of human existence – God, oneself, others and the environment. It involves 
all faiths. It is ‘an imperative for conscious social intervention in order to promote processes of 
restoring justice and renewed relationships’ (Nordstekke 2013:117). It is totally inclusive and 
involves the social, economic and political realms of life in order that liberation and justice 
become the preconditions for transformation. Hence, it offers the promise of a ‘reconciled 
diversity’ (Atzvi 2013:34) as an enhancing dimension of life achieved through ‘processes of 
dialogue, mutual learning and understanding which cultivate a spirit of respect and inclusiveness, 
with the ultimate wish to ensure a peaceful and reconciled co-existence’. In sum, this encapsulates 
the aim and purpose of theological education. The future of theological education in faculties of 
theology in South Africa is uncertain to say the least. The FT at the UP focusses annually on its 
purpose, aims and objectives. This is discussed at the annual faculty lekgotla and thereafter is the 
responsibility of the dean and his executive (heads of departments and directors of centres).
Prof. Johan Buitendag
Prof. Johan Buitendag has been dean of the FT since 2010 and is in his second term of office. Prior 
to that, he was head of the Department of Dogmatics and Christian Ethics. His views on the role 
of theology in a university are expressed in the keynote address he presented on 8 November 2014 
at the 69th Graduation Ceremony of the Trinity Theological Seminary in Legon (Ghana). There he 
committed to a multi- and transdisciplinary approach within the context of a university in which 
The only constant in theological education is change, despite brave attempts to hold the tide 
back in some quarters. Yet, Western-based theological education remains the norm globally. 
The Faculty of Theology at the University of Pretoria exemplifies this norm despite its 
commitment to Africanisation. This article will consider transformation through the lens of the 
leadership of Prof. Johan Buitendag, who has led the transformation initiative from his own 
shared leadership perspective as dean since 2010. Change in the faculty will be analysed 
through analysis of the faculty plans, with particular reference to teaching, learning and 
research. Consideration will be given to a more radical proposal for future transformation 
under the initiative of Africanisation.
Gateway to the future … oopmaak van die hekke … 
Transformation in the Faculty of Theology, 
University of Pretoria
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.

Page 2 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
theology has a unique contribution to offer. He acknowledges 
that for a long time South Africa was isolated as a civilised 
and civilising European enclave in Africa, with little positive 
or constructive contact with our African neighbours. He 
focusses on the individual within a community:
The human person is to be understood in terms of an eco-cultural 
environment which can neither be pure subjective nor pure 
objective. God is to be discerned in creation and revelation, as 
around, above, within and even beyond us. (Buitendag 2014:2)
This demonstrates the need for a theological approach 
integrated within an interdependent holistic approach to life:
that theology is in her deepest sense an endeavour to understand 
reality and that theology not only can, but must collaborate with 
other sciences to this end. Theology can indeed contribute to come 
to grips with reality. Ecclesial and scientific accountability is a sine 
qua non for responsible theological education. (Buitendag 2014:2)
Buitendag draws on Newman, who posited that a university 
is not an institution, but an idea. Knowledge is there for its 
own sake and purpose and the ideal of universal knowledge 
is its driving force (Newman 1982:74−92). This is consonant 
with Torrance’s view that:
the role of the university as the pursuit of truth should not be 
compromised. A university should be a universitas, a community 
of disciplined research pursuing an open universal aim through 
a multiplicity of interests, theology included. (Torrance 1985:52)
And this requires a unitary view of the universe (Torrance 
1985:59) where the:
pursuit of truth … enables qualitative and rigorous enquiry … is 
free from extraneous control and able to function within an 
atmosphere of stability and serenity. Above all, the university must 
pursue research in all areas of human knowledge in such a way 
that they open the way for interconnectedness. (Seed 2015:195)
Theology is an integral branch of this universal knowledge, 
because all knowledge forms one whole or ‘circle’, from 
which the various branches of learning stem. Religious truth 
is not only an aspect but a condition of general knowledge 
(Buitendag 2014:3). Hence, theology could play a valuable 
role in contributing to the ‘interrelatedness of creation, 
enabling the idea of a universitas to be realised in a spiritual 
cultural unity that is open to the intelligibility and integrity 
of the universe (Seed 2015:196, referring to Torrance 1985:62).
Since Newman’s time, the idea of a university has moved 
from the interpretation of reality to the transformation of 
reality. Buitendag insists that such an approach must be 
grounded in pragmatic research, economic demands, health 
sciences and ecological crisis. However, the driving forces of 
universities today are reputation, impact, success and funding.
Buitendag supports Andrew Louth, who says that this 
undermines the idea of the university as a place of intellectual 
virtue and contemplation, as universities are being converted 
into educational businesses where academics must deliver 
and their produce must be marketable and subject to quality 
control:
This is the rationale of quality assurance assessments and 
research assessment exercises: we produce education, which is 
consumed by students, and research, consumed by our peers 
and these things can be quantified and assessed. (Louth 2004:75)
Buitendag (2014:5) favours the idea of a multiversity for:
There are multiple perspectives and all understanding could 
contribute to comprehend reality. Not one science alone is 
capable to provide a whole picture of reality. Cooperation and 
consultation should be 360° in the round … Theology should be 
in critical dialogue with different sciences, interacting with other 
disciplines on its own terms.
The report on the Quality Assurance of Netherlands 
Universities (QANU 2012) stated the following important 
perspective on the place of theology at a university:
It is important for theology to be present in secular universities. 
It has a very positive role to play in providing reflective enquiry 
into fundamental questions of human nature and existence, 
and in exploring the approaches to those questions with in [sic] 
one or more major and historically crucial religious traditions. 
Theology has therefore to be conserved as an autonomous 
discipline with its own theory-building and methodology, 
independently of the external approach of religion by religious 
studies and of its more instrumental use for ministerial 
training, and also irrespective of the commitment to church 
policies. (p. 9)
This means that theology within the university has to be 
open to ecclesial partnerships and that the church, in turn, 
has to be receptive to scientific inquiry and subject of course 
to ongoing revision and reflection.
However, Buitendag is clearly aware that:
[s]ome African scholars are very convinced that Western 
theology has ‘lost the plot’ when it comes to authentically 
articulating the Christian faith as seen in the ‘centre of gravity’ 
that has shifted from the North to the South. (Balcomb 2013:580)
This is the weakest point of his argument, because it is 
probably the majority of African scholars who subscribe to 
Balcomb’s view and verification can be sought. However, 
Buitendag (2014) is confident that:
The spirit of Africa and the worldview of the people of this great 
continent are so much more holistic and faith-based that I really 
believe that scientific theology will survive the dangerous route 
between the Scylla and the Charybdis (of fideism and secularism). 
(p. 12)
This is the approach he has encouraged in the FT as a way 
forward.
More recently, Buitendag (2017 forthcoming) has turned his 
thinking to the future, based on a solid evaluation of the past, 
and concludes that in the:
classical paradigm the Faculty finds its identity and relevance. 
It is a recognition of its diachronically rootedness in the 
Western tradition of scholarly education … the world ranking 
of universities has opened up a new challenge and even a 
niche for a new approach to Theology in the 21st century. I will 

Page 3 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
do it in such a way that the ‘Pretoria Model’ is given a new 
dimension and perhaps defines the nature of theology at UP 
for the time to come.
In pursuing this model, Buitendag will have to be clear about 
what is specifically unique regarding the ‘Pretoria model’, 
which has hitherto based its excellence in competing with the 
rest of Africa and with its own high standards. To enter the 
global market despite its already high rankings may not be in 
the best interests of its African context.
Buitendag follows in and epitomises a long hallowed 
tradition of a Western grounded approach to theological 
education. His prime markers are inclusivity and diversity, 
which are key values of the South African Constitution, the 
UP and its FT. Strategic alliances are key to the future of his 
vision, focussed on internationalisation and Africanisation. 
With regard to Africanisation, which is the responsibility of 
the dean, it is not clear exactly what is meant by this contested 
term and what it encompasses within the FT. This is 
considered in depth below.
Faculty of Theology, University of 
Pretoria
The FT at UP is ‘engaged in an evolutionary process … It 
has developed into a mutli-ecclesial faculty … Typical of a 
21st century paradigm, the Faculty finds its identity in 
diversity and close partnerships and ecumenism becomes 
the nature of the Faculty’ (FP 2013:194). It has made a 
distinctive move from ‘exclusivism to greater inclusivism’ 
(FP 2013:198).
The mission and vision statements of UP are as follows:
Vision: To be a leading research-intensive university in Africa, 
recognised internationally for its quality, relevance and impact, 
as also for developing people, creating knowledge and making a 
difference locally and globally.
Mission: In pursuing recognition and excellence in its core 
functions of research, teaching and learning, and integrating 
engagement with society and communities into these, the 
University of Pretoria will use quality, relevance, diversity and 
sustainability as its navigational markers.
Values:
The members of the University of Pretoria believe that:
our community of scholars must be founded on the pursuit of 
knowledge through
research, teaching and learning, with membership acquired on 
the basis of
intellectual merit, ability and the potential for excellence; and that
differing perspectives, arising from diverse backgrounds and 
histories that define our
identities, deepen scholarly inquiry and enrich academic debate.
We cherish:
academic freedom, creative and innovative thought, ethical 
standards and integrity,
accountability and social justice; and
our staff and students as the University’s core asset.
We foster:
an inquiry-led and evidence-based approach to creating 
knowledge; and
academic citizenship, whereby we commit ourselves to 
harnessing our intellectual
abilities in the interest of our nation and humanity.
We recognise that:
in a resource-constrained world where vast disparities remain, 
the University must
endeavour to produce graduates who appreciate the importance 
of community
service, entrepreneurial endeavours and innovative actions in 
generating
employment and development in our local communities. (UP 
2011b:5)
The mission and vision statements of the FT state:
Vision: To be a faculty recognised for its creative engagement 
with life-giving theology and religious insight, of service to 
academia, church and community.
Mission: To achieve this, we commit ourselves to –
• Providing relevant theological and religious education;
• Nurturing transformative leaders;
• Quality research;
• Promoting justice, peace, the integrity of creation and a 
reconciling diversity;
• Engaging people on the margins of society. (FP 2011:4)
FT values are critical thinking, intellectual excellence, 
transformational praxis and inclusivity.
These two statements demonstrate the alignment between 
faculty and university. From this, the FT assumes, but does 
not claim, its African context. Within the FT, each department’s 
mission and vision statements align with the faculty and 
university statements. These statements inform and guide 
the development of the faculty plans (FP). Key success factors 
were identified:
• aligning the composition of the Faculty with the vision of 
the University and our values
• forging broad-based relationships and alliances that 
create a sense of cooperation and co-ownership and are 
conducive to life-giving theology
• an integrated student body
• environmental engagement
• overarching Faculty management. (FP 2011:4)
The profile of the nature and composition of the FT is seen as 
the most significant issue requiring attention in terms of the 
relationship between FT and church and attention to its client 
base (FP 2011:4–5).
The FT is unique in having a majority of postgraduate students, 
emphasising its commitment to teaching and learning and 
research. During the 2010 FT lekgotla, a number of issues were 
noted. Firstly, the FT had achieved a surplus of R20, 614, 981 
(cf. the 2010 figure of R14  782 866). Secondly, there was a 
dramatic decrease in international students. The average for 
2006–2009 was 111. In 2010 this dropped to 87. Thirdly, with 
regard to student demographic trends, the FT was clearly a 

Page 4 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
research-based institution, with double the number of 
postgraduate students compared with undergraduates. Male 
students formed a substantial majority (average for 2007–2010, 
3:1). The same period witnessed an 11% rise in black student 
numbers (269–303), with a 17% rise in student registrations. 
During this period the numbers of students coming from 
partner churches remained stable, while the number coming 
from non-affiliated churches rose. Fourthly, staff demographic 
trends indicate an academic staff totally comprised of doctors, 
three having a National Research Foundation (NRF) rating. 
There is a disproportionate partner church staff compared 
with the total student population.
Two main risks were identified. One was the risk of losing a 
church partner if such a partner were no longer able to 
identify with the nature and/or composition of the faculty. 
The other was the strong possibility of staff burnout through 
lack of adequate support. This provides the context for what 
follows.
The core business of the faculty
Teaching and learning
From 2008 it was envisaged that curriculum change would 
accommodate the changing environment, the needs of first-
year students and the requirements of the Higher Education 
Qualification Framework. The process was managed in 
accordance with the Teaching and Learning priorities for 2011: 
Advancing Excellence in undergraduate Education at UP. The 
existing programmes underwent revision with the change 
from modular to semester courses, by combination and new 
design with addition of two new year-long courses, 
Theological Orientation (TEO 101, TEO 102) and Biblical 
Background (BYA 101, BYA 102). Six interdisciplinary 
modules were introduced and modules were (re)designed, 
taking account of the (South) African context and African and 
black theology to an extent. Advice would be taken from 
appropriate lecturers on advancing this process (FP 2011:16), 
particularly from 2013 when the first cohort of students 
completed their degrees. The progress of these modules was 
monitored by the Faculty Teaching and Learning Committee. 
This oversight facilitated the withdrawal of uneconomic 
modules. In addition, the identification of students with 
potential to undertake postgraduate studies was identified as 
an important task.
The ClickUP system had been adopted in some modules as 
part of the inquiry-led, blended and e-learning system. The 
large number of inter-university agreements makes for 
frequent use of postgraduate opportunities. An Ecumenical 
Advisory Board, made up of representatives from partner 
churches, advises on ‘the content and quality of theological 
training’ (FP 2011:15). Major priorities are monitoring the 
quality of new modules, enhancing the first-year experience 
and introducing a blended model for teaching and learning 
(T&L). A significant aim was to introduce translation 
services ‘to promote the greater integration of students of 
different races and cultures in the classroom’ (FP 2011:15) 
during their first year. By the end of 2011 it was reported that: 
‘These services are currently experienced positively by the 
first-year students, especially because of the diversity it 
creates in the classroom context’ (FP 2013:206). Prior to this, 
close cooperation took place between the FT and the 
Department of Education Innovation (EI), and the provision 
of study guides for each module became a requirement. 
Cooperation agreements with African and other universities 
were to be developed. Pass rates had deteriorated somewhat 
but were still higher (86.4%) than the UP average (80.1%). By 
2011, it had increased to 88.8%. At-risk students were to be 
identified. The Centre for Contextual Ministry (CCM) was 
identified for incorporation into the faculty. During 2010, 
four new C1 positions were allocated to the FT, which 
altered both the racial mix and church partner proportion of 
the teaching staff.
An issue that had not received sufficient attention was the 
improvement of the teaching abilities of lecturers (FP 2011:18). 
At the time of writing (2016), this is only now being taken 
into account with the requirement to produce a teaching 
portfolio for promotion applications (UP, 2010a:7).
The new Bachelor of Theology (BTh) programme was 
introduced in 2010 and the Bachelor of Arts (BA Theol) and 
diploma in Theology in 2011 to allow for close monitoring 
of the modules, especially in the first year. The target for 
the use of ClickUP was set at 70%. (it was not met – 68.45%; 
FP 2013:201). The use of blended learning was intensified, 
as was the use of study guides. Academic literacy tests 
were introduced for the first year and formal modules were 
to be introduced in 2013 (ALL 110, 120, 114, 124). Support 
from EI was intensified between 2009 and 2012. The existing 
orientation programme was extended to 2 weeks to offer 
more support to new students, and student assessment of 
lecturers was used to assist lecturers. Dropout rates in the 
first year at this time were higher than the UP average as a 
result of students who could not access their faculty of 
choice registering for the Diploma in Theology (which is 
the only undergraduate diploma qualification [with lower 
entrance requirements] offered by UP – 8.8% (UP) cf. 19.2% 
(FT); FP 2012:88).
The FT introduced the UP Student Academic Development 
and Excellence Model from 2012 to 2016 in order to track the 
performance of students undertaking high impact modules, 
with which students often struggle (i.e. TEO 110, 120, BYA 
110, 120). This was an integral part of the drive to improve 
the first-year experience – ‘First-years matter’ – along with 
the introduction of tutor support, while first-year lecturers 
were required to use the Grade Centre on ClickUP and the 
Early Alert System. For this EI support was provided.
From 2012, the evaluation of progress was based on the UP 
Core Performance Indicators. For the most part, the FT 
excelled in its achievement. However, the attrition rate of 
first-year students continued to be a matter of concern, and 
steps were taken through the use of UP CARES (continuous 
alert, referral and engagement system) to reduce this to 

Page 5 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
8%  by 2013 (FP 2012:164–165). By 2011 it had dropped to 
7.6%. Alongside this the implementation of the new curricula 
continued. The use of translation services was continued to 
promote ‘greater integration of students of different races 
and cultures in the classroom’ (FP 2012:167).
The year 2012 also saw the introduction of two community 
engagement modules (PFN 310/CYE 210/214 and PFN 
410/CYE 310/314) that contribute to the embedding of 
community engagement in the T&L programmes. Another 
helpful innovation introduced during 2012 was the Senate 
approval of the Graduate Attributes document to assist 
faculties in planning and assessing their T&L and assessment 
practice. These included the ability:
to function autonomously and confidently, have intellectual 
curiosity and an enquiry led approach to knowledge, be 
emerging or established leaders in their professions, be emerging 
or established leaders in their respective professions who are 
team players able to conceptualise and synthesise knowledge 
creatively so as to find solutions to challenges, have a sense of 
responsibility and to be able to communicate constructively in all 
possible situations. (FP 2013:203)
From 2013, the FT embarked on a project to ‘green’ the faculty 
as part of its commitment to the emerging Faculty Research 
Theme (FRT). During the year the faculty T&L Committee 
undertook to revise the BTH and BA curricula. Only minor 
changes were proposed or adopted, while the study material 
was formalised and the programmes continued. This could 
be considered as a year of consolidation.
The idea of a Faculty of Religion and Theology was first 
mooted in 2014 with an additional Department of Biblical 
and Religion Studies. The aim was to promote diversity, 
inter-religious dialogue, tolerance and mutual respect 
(FP  2014:296–297). The faculty identifies with the QANU 
report (2013):
Theology has, therefore, to be conserved as an autonomous 
discipline with its own theory – building and methodology, 
independently of the external approach of religion by religious 
studies and of its more instrumental used for ministerial training, 
and also irrespective of the commitment to church policies. (p. 8)
Work began on an internal reorganisation of the theological 
disciplines into clusters – foundations (Old Testament and 
New Testament), beliefs (Dogmatics and Church History and/
or Polity) and practices (Practical Theology and Missiology). 
Advances were made by the requirement of modules on 
ClickUP to progressively incorporate elements of a blended 
T&L model employing face-to-face teaching, multimedia, 
continuous assessment, e-learning and community engagement 
with the ultimate aim of producing the established graduate 
attributes. The aim was to engage students in their learning 
process and encourage deep learning. This was supported by 
an intensified first-year orientation programme, ‘First-years 
matter’. Postgraduate programmes were aligned with the new 
requirements of the national Higher Education Qualifications 
Framework (HEQF) levels.
Research
Research has always occupied an exemplary place in the field 
of Theology in South Africa (see FP 2014:313–315, 326). The FT 
at UP leads the field in this regard, and the faculty is clearly a 
research-intensive unit. The FT, with 100% research-active 
researchers (in 2011 the UP average was 86.2% active 
researchers), consistently maintains a place where its research 
output is greater than the combined output of all the other 
faculties: ‘The weighted average article output per capita of 
an academic of the FT is 5.55 units compared with 0.67 units 
for the rest of the University’ (FP 2011:23); it was 6.4 in 2010 
(FP 2012:169). Research units credited for several years attest 
to the increasing performance. (this has been linked to its 
commitment to develop and foster a research-based approach 
[inquiry-based] from the first year of undergraduate studies 
[2007 – 134.17; 2008 – 117.08; 2009 – 119.17; 2010 – 108.8; 
FP 2011:23, 168]). This is monitored and supported by research 
methodology courses offered at the appropriate levels. The 
FT committed itself to work alongside the UP research 
themes where possible, with ‘a unique theme, maximum 
international/international impact, interdisciplinary nature, 
part of the university’s transformation agenda, local relevance, 
and international participation’ (FP 2011:21). To this is added 
Africanisation, a contested term, with varying interpretations 
and implications (Horsthemke 2004, 2009; Maile 2011:111; 
Maluleke 2010:371). While there has been a marked decrease 
in postgraduate registrations, there has been a growing 
increase in research outputs. The work of the Centre for 
Contextual Theology was integrated into the faculty and its 
work was aligned with the Department of Practical Theology. 
The Centre for Public Theology is also involved in pursuing 
the research focus of the faculty. The FT is well placed in this 
regard, having two internationally recognised journals, 
Hervormde Teologiese Studies (HTS) [ISI rated] and Verbum et 
Ecclesia (VE). In addition, from 2011, the FT has steadily 
increased its numbers of NRF-rated scholars. By 2013, the FT 
‘had exceeded the expectation of NRF researchers. A target 
was set for 2013 and a figure of nine was realised. The 
percentage of 37.5% not only exceeds the faculty target of 
30.4% for 2013, but it is far better than the 19.28% average for 
the university’ (FP 2014:316). FT’s commitment to community 
engagement was recognised in the award of THRIP and 
Sanpad grants for Dr. A.S. van Niekerk’s Centre for Sustainable 
Communities on healthcare and energy use in townships 
(FP 2012:104). The 2013 FP (212) notes a significant turnover 
of senior staff members through retirement with no significant 
drop in research output. The faculty monitors quality and 
impact as a priority. By 2010, the faculty had published more 
than 50% of its outputs in ISI-rated journals. This increased to 
almost 64% in 2011. The next advance was in the publication 
of more articles in international journals. HTS is the most 
prominent journal in South Africa, with an H index impact 
factor of 3 for 2011 (FP 2013:213). The income from competitive 
research grants and contracts increased accordingly; thus, 
with the additional income from research publications and 
the churches, the FT financial position was further 
consolidated. In 2012, there was a surplus of R43 100 000 prior 
to contribution to overheads (FP 2014:360). In 2014, the FRT 

Page 6 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
was designated as Ecodomy – life in its fullness. This would link 
with several of the institutional research themes and would 
be promoted through an international conference in 2014.
Africanisation
Throughout this period, the FT has been conscious of being a 
theological centre in Africa, with a somewhat different 
history from the rest of Africa, yet no less affected by the twin 
hegemonic pillars of colonialism and imperialism. This is 
inevitably linked with transformation. Naidoo (2016) makes 
it clear that:
The debate on Africanisation has developed because of the larger 
discourse on the transformation of higher education; to undo 
decades of injustice caused by apartheid. The transformation 
of  universities involves major academic, intellectual and 
philosophical arguments about whose knowledge to teach, learn 
and research. These discourses are made up of issues around 
curriculum reform, internationalisation, the role of higher 
education in a newly democratic country and the issue of 
Africanisation (Letsekha 2013:1). With regard to the local 
curriculum, there is a renewed focus on indigenous knowledge 
and an African community competing in a global society. 
(Williams & Gardner 2012:215)
The faculty has been responding to this in various ways. At 
the UP level, the first of 10 Strategies Performance Indicators 
state clearly: ‘To be a leading research intensive university 
in  Africa’ (UP Academic Plan, Appendix 1: Academic 
vision|goals, targets and performance indicators 2012:26). 
At the ‘local’ level, the UP Strategic Plan notes: ‘Persisting 
social and economic inequalities South Africa as gateway 
into Africa and partner in global South (e.g. BRICS)’ (UP 
Strategic Plan, Local – particular challenges and imperatives 
2011a:4).
Within the FT, an important aspect of the forward planning of 
the faculty is related to strategic alliances and internationalisation. 
These are separate issues, although Africanisation is considered 
a  sub-interest of internationalisation: ‘Africanisation is an 
important part of the faculty’s vision for internationalisation’ 
(FP 2013:216). Internationalisation relates to networking 
outside Africa. Africanisation is specific in its delimitation as 
a contributor to the educational arena. Antonio states (2006) 
that Africanisation suggests:
… why education was such a critical site of contestation during 
and after colonial rule: it is within education that categories of 
thought were formally defined and the conditions for the 
articulation of colonised subjects were laid down and strategies 
for colonised minds were deployed. (p. 19)
Botha (2010:201) suggests that ‘internationalisation … states 
the more a university chooses to Africanise the less it can 
internationalise, and vice versa’. What does this mean within 
the FT? Although it is ‘deemed as a priority’, only R50 000 was 
allocated in 2012. Active collaboration exists with seminaries 
in Zambia, Cameroon (where it was hoped to establish an 
annual exchange programme with Kumba University, though 
this has not yet borne fruit) and Congo, and contacts with 
African academics extend over a much broader front. It is also 
the intention to liaise with and accredit African seminaries 
and their programmes. Since 2012, the Department of Practical 
Theology has been cooperating on a research project, and a 
course on leadership capacity development has been co-
presented with the Institut Superieur de Pedagogie Religieuse in 
Kinshasa, DRC (FP 2014:328). The commitment to establish a 
faculty residence for postgraduate African theologians 
(RESPAT) has not yet materialised (it is now projected for 
2017) despite the projection that the availability of such a 
facility could deliver three PhD graduates per annum. In 2014, 
a plan was developed to establish a centre for African 
spirituality with an international scholar as director. This is 
still in process at the time of writing.
However, there are several inter-university initiatives afoot 
in the field of Continentalisation, that is Africanisation. An 
academic and ecclesiastic network (NetAct) of theologians in 
South Africa and academics in Angola, Nigeria, Uganda, 
Kenya, Tanzania, Cameroon, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Ghana and 
Rwanda grows year by year. The publication of academic 
articles in African languages such as Sepedi contributes to 
the values of diversity and inclusivity adopted by the faculty 
(FP 2016:12). This is linked to the wider vision of the FT:
This faculty – to be renamed into Faculty of Theology and Religion – 
together with this new department may take the initiative to 
provide the foundation for a UP Centre on Religion and Society in 
which other faculties will be able to participate. Co-operation is 
envisaged with Faculties such as Law, Education, Economics and 
Management Sciences, and Humanities. The strategic importance 
of establishing this new department and may be in forming not 
only the UP centre but in drafting an African Academy on Religion 
and Society in co-operation with other Universities such as 
University of Cape Town, University of the Free State, University 
of Kwa-Zulu Natal, and other African institutions. (UP, External 
Review 2015a:5)[emphasis in original]
There is a certain awareness within the FT that we live in a 
complex and troubled context:
‘We have a challenged society,’ to quote one of the Heads of 
Department: That is Africa’s biggest problem and we must help 
to solve this.’ In this respect, the faculty’s management and 
several Heads of Department are eager to broaden the focus 
from Christianity to a wider range of world religions, in South 
Africa especially represented by Islam and Hinduism, and to 
engage open learning. (UP External Review 2015a:9)
With regard to transformation, a Transformation Committee 
was established in the faculty, which is representative of all 
stakeholders. In a traditionally Reformed faculty this, of 
course, would be expected as a result of its commitment to 
the semper reformanda (‘constantly in the process of reforming’) 
principle. The future agenda for transformation consists of:
Creating a common understanding of the UP 2025 vision and the 
Journey for Change imperative
Sharing perceptions of barriers and enablers to diversity at UP
Understanding the benefits of lived diversity (academic and social)
Creating a climate of improved race relations and understanding 
the negative impact of prejudice. (FP 2016:21)
The … Faculty has been transformed to an entity, which has 
adapted to the global, national and local environments that it 

Page 7 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
renders service to. Without doubt it is sustainable for the 
foreseeable future, primarily because of its recognition as a 
Faculty of academic excellence. (FP 2016:25)
This appears more like an improvement plan than a 
transformation plan. Despite all that has been initiated and 
achieved in Africanisation, there is a clear lack of coherence, 
which opens up a significant vista for future development.
Gateway to the future … oopmaak van die hekke …
The major issue facing theology at the UP as it works towards 
the future is the transformation of the faculty from a 
Eurocentric entity into an African faculty. This is controversial 
because FT prestige depends to a great degree on how we 
fare in the various world ranking systems rather than seeking 
to realise our full potential in Africa, our natural habitat. 
However, further than that, we operate with the false 
assumption that the Western context is static. Yet, it inhabits 
a post-Christendom society that ‘calls for a reconfiguration of 
Western theological discourse’ (Nikolajsen 2015:196) and 
needs to develop appropriate theological discourse in 
support of such a church. UP retains the traditional Western 
reality of a theology faculty with a veneer of Africanisation. 
The metaphor of two trees may be helpful here. One tree is an 
oak tree seasoned by centuries of nutrients provided by its 
natural English habitat and well adapted to the South African 
context. For example, at Lovedale Missionary Institution 
oaks were planted to commemorate the visit of Queen 
Victoria’s son, Prince Arthur, during the 1850s. James Stewart 
(1894:100), principal of Lovedale, wrote: ‘These and many 
other English trees … thrive well. The English oak has found 
a new home in South Africa’. The oak yields little apart from 
acorns and its material self, which occasions its self-
destruction. It is well and deeply rooted and no storm or 
natural disaster can uproot it. It has transported well globally 
and has adapted well in its host habitats. It will endure for 
centuries to come unless it is chopped down, dies of 
millennial old age or is attacked by postcolonial ‘foreign 
bodies’ within its African colonised context. It has undergone 
many threats in the context of empire and renewed empire, 
yet it still reigns supreme confident of the righteousness of its 
cause. It is surrounded by the exotica of the host and other 
countries – beautiful fynbos, aloes and proteas – which aid its 
stability and endurance. In theological terms these are the 
exotica of theology – liberation, feminist, public, contextual, 
African, womanist, water buffalo, minyung, political, black 
and a host of other theologies, all of which are critiqued for 
not being authentic theology. Yet, there was a time when 
Western theology was itself a form of exotica.
Now let us consider the other tree, the baobab, the ‘upside-
down tree’, birthed and nourished in Africa. Baobabs store 
water in the trunk to endure the harsh drought conditions 
particular to each region in which they are found. They are 
well adapted to their environment. They provide food, fibre, 
dye, crafts and homes for birds. There are no clearly 
demarcated annual growth rings compared with the oak tree, 
for the essence of the baobab is deep penetration. Yet, even in 
Africa it is considered an exotic tree by many indigenous 
people, partly because the oak tree has been promoted as the 
universal symbol of permanence. A comparison of these two 
representative entities is related to how we approach 
transformation. We do not import water from England to 
water our tree of English derivation. It has long ago adapted 
to accepting African water, and yet it remains an oak tree. So 
it is with theological education in Africa – Western in esse yet 
fed by indigenous sources, as is African religion.
The study of African theology that was ecologically based 
was the initiative of the Universities’ Mission to Central 
Africa missionary Rev. Henry Rowley, who in 1867 argued 
that African traditional religion (ATR) could be a bridge for 
the conversion of Africans to Christianity (cf. Schoffeleers 
1987). For Rowley, ATR could provide the basis on ‘which to 
build the Christian common faith, a sure and better way of 
making them Christians than totally ignoring all they know 
as useless, superstitious and everlastingly preaching to them’ 
(Rowley 1867:222). The study of religion in Africa is not new, 
since it has been provided in African tertiary education since 
1947 and included the biblical subjects and ATR (Walls 
2014:12). Parrinder (2000:5) defined ATR at that time. It was 
not ‘taken as isolated from the rest of the world or scorned as 
mere fetishism or superstition, but as having its own 
traditions and history, even where unwritten, and with its 
social and personal characteristics’. It is important to note 
that there is not one definition of African, and it needs to be 
defined by Africans themselves within their own context 
taking account of ‘the massive diversity in Africa and the 
multiplicity of ways of being African’ (Duncan 2000:29) and 
being religiously African:
Africanisation is not merely a form of cultural romanticism or a 
form of cultural nationalism but will need to involve a critical 
appraisal of African traditions and cultures against the criteria of 
their liberational import. (Maluleke 2006:73)
In spatial perspective, as the subject developed within the 
academy, it became clear that ‘many of the ideas, beliefs, 
institutions, assumptions and practices’ of primal religion 
(Walls 2014:15) are common in America, South-East Asia, 
China, and the Pacific. Its religious systems are not uniquely 
African but are to a large degree universal, meaning that 
African religious and cultural insights may have a relevance 
far wider than the African continent. This is available through 
the designation of ‘primal religions’, which are historically 
prior to historical religions and contain the basic elements of 
religion in the relationship between peoples and the 
transcendent world (Fotland 2014:105; cf. Taylor 1963, 26, 27). 
Bediako had already claimed that ‘Europe shares with Africa 
a pre-Christian primal religious heritage’ (1994:248; cf. 
Fotland 2014:107,108). Taylor (1963:33) claims that ‘the world 
church is impoverished and incomplete without the insights 
that the Logos has been preparing for it in Africa’. The role of 
primal religion that Paas (2016:26) misunderstands and 
misrepresents is sometimes challenged, but even Paas himself 
(2016:84) admits that Greek philosophy was a preparation for 
European Christianity, so why should global primal religion 
not be accepted as a preparation for African Christianity?

Page 8 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
In historical perspective, it is now apparent that God 
revealed Godself to Africans prior to their exposure to 
Jesus Christ. This has challenged those who believe that no 
good can emerge from Africa. Tshehla (2014:61) urges 
‘African thought leaders to soberly present appropriate 
evidence and interpretation … which cannot be justifiably 
ignored’, while Bediako (1990:5–7) asserts that: ‘the form 
of religion once held to be the furthest removed from the 
Christian faith has had a closer relationship with it than 
any other’. Bediako himself made ‘fresh and original 
contributions, to risk dislodgement from benefactors who 
have prescribed the perimeters of acceptable African 
thought, and speak primarily within the terms of reference 
prescribed by one’s indigenous philosophy and worldview, 
even as these frankly engage Jesus Christ’ (Tshehla 
2014:62). Commenting on Bediako’s work, Walls (2008) 
claims that:
The second-century question was the possibility of being both 
Christian and Greek, the twentieth-century question was the 
possibility of being both Christian and African. We are made by 
our past; it is our past that creates our identity and shows us who 
we are. We cannot abandon or suppress our past or substitute 
something else instead, nor can our past be left as it is, untouched 
by Christ. … Today’s quest is the conversion of African culture, 
and perhaps thereby its renewal. (p. 189)
He agrees with Bediako that ‘the needs of the African world 
require a view of Christ that meets those needs’ (Bediako 
1990:10) and affirms that ‘African theology was not an 
exotic minority specialisation but an essential component 
in a developing global discourse’ (Walls 2008:193). Walls 
(2014) takes this notion of a significant reorientation even 
further:
It is becoming increasingly evident that the theology that 
emanates from the learned institutions of the West is simply not 
big enough for Africa and Asia; it does not interact with issues of 
fundamental importance there; it has nothing to say on many 
matters that are critically important to African and Asian 
Christian believers. The universe that it addresses is the small 
scale universe of the Enlightenment. (p. 16)
Kaoma (2015a:9) observes from an African perspective on 
ecotheology:
The failure to acknowledge the manifestation of high gods and 
ancestors in nature can be blamed on African theology, which is 
hooked to Western theology. Apart from expecting African 
theology to reflect Western theology and language, the global 
North remains the centre of Christian theology, missiology and 
ethics. One can safely argue that the centre of gravity of 
Christianity has shifted to the global South, but theology has not. 
To be a theologian, one is expected to study Western theology 
and ethics. Subsequently, theologies from the non-Western 
worlds are qualified (Asian moral theology, Latin America moral 
theology, African moral theology etc.), while Western theologies 
enjoy normative positions in global Christianity. For instance, 
American, British German and other global North scholars do 
Christian theology, while non-Western and non-white scholars are 
qualified – Asian, African theologians etc. No wonder themes 
and symbols that do not reflect Western theological promises are 
understudied. (p. 9)
This is not merely an intellectual exercise, for within the field 
of ecodomy, failure to reflect and act ‘will lead to extreme 
poverty, further conflicts and political instability’ (Kaoma 
2015a:19) that result from the conviction that ‘capitalism 
deceives us into believing that we are the only players in the 
cosmic race. However, we are part of creation and not creation 
per se’ (Kaoma 2015a:18–19). This clearly means that African 
theology itself is ‘infected’ by Western theology; further, 
transformation will involve a deep-seated inner revolution 
when all the externals are already available.
Transformation is about radical change, not a tinkering with 
adiaphora: ‘Conform no longer to the pattern of this present 
world, but be transformed by the renewal of your minds. 
Then you will be able to discern the will of God, and to know 
what is good, acceptable and perfect’ (Rom 12:2). Lesslie 
Newbigin (1968:8) made the Christian position very clearly: 
‘Christians … are revolutionaries. They believe that structures 
can be and have to be changed, and that no structure, however 
venerable … has absolute authority’. What is required is that 
we make the cognitive, intellectual, cultural and spiritual 
transition from the oak tree of England to the baobab tree of 
Africa in theological terms; this means ‘upside-downing’ our 
theology. The new curricula for the BDiv and BTh degrees 
were introduced in 2010 and 2011. Phase one introduced the 
veneer of Africanisation, but the European-based philosophical 
underpinning remains intact. Naidoo (2016) asserts that the 
‘dominant curriculum continues to be a source of alienation’ 
within Africa. Any change built on this base simply maintains 
the status quo. In terms of theological education Africa needs 
to ‘get in step with Christianity as an African religion at an 
epistemological level’ (Balcomb 2014:72; cf. 74–75). A clear and 
distinctive shift needs to be made toward a philosophy 
grounded in African wisdom for ‘forced confrontations as 
between the traditional African religio-cultural heritage and 
contemporary Christianity and/or Islam are untenable’ 
(Tshehla 2014:63). Curriculum development has to deal with 
the hegemony and normativity of Western-birthed theology 
despite our reiterations that all theology is contextual. Even in 
the west and north, Western theology has lost its edge. With 
regard to the impact of globalisation, Gillian Bediako (2014), 
reflecting Kwame Bediako’s thinking, comments:
this is not translating into an acceptance of Western value-setting 
for the Christian religion in the rest of the world … not only is the 
[W]estern theological academy unable to commend the Christian 
faith to its own Western context, but it also has increasing 
difficulty in understanding the world [of] Christianity beyond 
the West. (p. 362)
This appears as a global crisis of confidence in the normativity 
of Western Christianity.
The starting point for transformation should be the (South) 
African and similar contexts. For instance, some years ago 
Hans Kung (1980) posed the question ‘Does God exist?’ 
(Kung 1980). Why is our theology beset by this question? Is 
this an issue in the African context compared with famine, 
drought, poverty, militarisation, war, internecine conflict, 

Page 9 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
corruption, HIV and AIDS? For Africans the question is 
rhetorical. Other questions predominate. Now is the time for 
a deeper penetration of Africa into Africa if the Africanisation 
and/or transformation process is to be marked by authenticity 
and integrity. Guiding principles in such a paradigm change 
are suggested by Carpenter (2014:125–129): the reintegration 
of theological disciplines, reconstructing of systematic 
theology, re-grounding theological discourse, re-engaging 
other ideologies and traditions and renewing the theological 
mind. To these might be added recognising ‘primal 
spirituality’ (Fotland 2014:116) as a universal spirituality and 
the prioritising of eco-justice. After 40 years of experience in 
the Ghanaian Akrofi-Christaller Centre for postgraduate 
studies, Bediako (2014:363) proposes the need for a novel 
integrated intellectual framework with a communally based 
epistemology and ontology that is premised on an 
understanding that Christianity is a ‘non-Western religion’. 
She cautions, however, that this can only be achieved where 
‘the Christian faith lives as a vital presence, informing human 
experience – individually and collectively – and so is capable 
of shaping all of life’. She has an extremely positive yet 
realistic view of the present and future – ‘that the vocation of 
Christian institutions in Africa, Asia and Latin America could 
now include the rescue of the Christian academy!’ (Bediako 
2014:362–363). Then we might be surprised by joy as we re-
encounter the awe and wonder and love of creation, which 
can give us hope for the future. Similar thoughts were 
expressed more than 50 years ago by John V. Taylor (1963) 
regarding the imperfections of African Christianity:
Nor should Christian leaders be too anxious about the residuum 
of paganism within the Church. If … an honest meeting between 
Christianity and the African world-view may be creative on the 
frontiers of the Church, it may be even more creative within the 
body of the Church itself. For de facto it is precisely at that point 
of encounter and contrast and choice that the Church will get its 
own authentic insights into the Word. It is at the danger point 
[krisis], the point of interchange and temptation, that a true 
African theology will be born, not out of syncretism but out of 
understanding. (p. 42)
This requires a strong commitment to see it through and 
significant changes in the staffing of African theological 
institutions. With regard to black economic empowerment, 
Maluleke puts it quite honestly and bluntly:
We can mobilise as many broad-based black economic 
empowerment deals as possible, count the transformation beans 
in as many ways as we want, sing the praises of our few globally 
ranked universities as loudly as we wish, dangle a carrot here 
and there for white male researchers and a few white female 
researchers to fight over, and show off the impressive numbers of 
black students but, unless we can produce an education system 
that casts a wider and deeper net, a system that enables black 
students and researchers to succeed, we can forget about national 
redress, give up on real global competitiveness in the long run, 
and we can kiss national reconciliation goodbye. (Maluleke 2015)
Maluleke’s statement was aimed at the broader academic 
community, yet is relevant to UP, which has made progress 
in this area. Nevertheless, it has been slowed down, largely 
due to the ending in 2014 of a spate of retirements and of 
diversity appointments. However, without such continuing 
developments it may be difficult to maintain the 
momentum. World rankings detract from a focus on self-
improvement, as they focus on the competitiveness of the 
business rather than the academic model. They dominate 
and control policymaking in an almost idolatrous manner. 
An example of this relates to pass rates, a matter with 
which we are inordinately preoccupied. So what, if pass 
rates and throughput are negatively affected in the process 
of and after the implementation of Africanisation? These 
are affected by many variables, not least lecturers’ teaching 
and assessment abilities, not to mention student capacity 
and commitment. How is this viewed and interpreted 
when our assessment criteria are monolithic for the most 
part – either oral or written examinations? Sadly, this 
becomes mere number crunching, not education. It is 
difficult to transform a developing educational system 
when uniform norms of ‘success’ and ‘leadership’ being 
strived for are set by highly developed world-class 
universities and prestigious newspapers who take no 
account of contextual distinctiveness. It is not possible to 
engage in holistic transformation while the agenda is set in 
Beijing, Sao Paulo, Edinburgh and Oxford. Transformation 
is time-, space- and community-specific:
it is the African who is and must be the primary and principle 
[sic] communicator of the African experience. Africanisation is a 
conscious and deliberate assertion of nothing more or less than 
the right to be African. (Naidoo 2016)
Key success factors and the post-
2014 period
The significant success factors are determined on a broad 
university level at UP and largely relate to business and 
managerial performance:
• aligning the composition of the faculty with the vision of 
the university and our values. 
	
Diversity is a key ‘navigational marker’ of UP. In the FT 
change was evident in the growth of the number of non-
partner church students, leading to a realignment of the 
faculty structure with a core and satellite church partners. 
It emphasises a positive environment and diversity.
• forging broad-based relationships and alliances that 
create a sense of cooperation and co-ownership and are 
conducive to life-giving theology;
• an integrated student body;
• environmental engagement;
• overarching faculty management
The principle that structure follows strategy is applied in the 
service of excellence and equity (FP 2011:112–13). However, 
the endurance of the current theological discourse is assumed.
With regard to the core academic indicators, by 2013 the FT 
was performing well in every indicator despite deficits in 
infrastructural support. These are academic staff, teaching, 
research diversity planning and financial sustainability 
(FP  2013:271–273). The dean was able to assert with some 

Page 10 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
confidence: ‘The Faculty will be able to reach its own targets 
for 2016’ (FP 2016:9). In 2015, the faculty had 20 students 
from Africa (excluding South Africa). Sixteen academics were 
NRF rated (64% of theology staff). The pass rate was 83% and 
the faculty had a surplus of R27 000 000. In 2014, 177 articles 
were published in accredited journals and this number is 
expected to exceed 200 in 2015. Thus, the ‘Faculty performs 
well above targets’ (FP 2016:6).
Restructuring the faculty
The basic question raised in this regard is why is this 
considered to be necessary? Although the FT had embarked 
on a preparatory mode of restructuring through the adoption 
of the concept of three clusters, basics, beliefs and practices, 
this has been grossly accelerated by the UP executives with 
no clearly expressed aim and purpose. The entire provenance 
of the issue apart from the faculty’s tentative moves in this 
direction is dubious. The external review of 2015 made the 
matter clear:
We therefore see no need to change any of the current structures 
to achieve greater levels of productivity. It is our conviction that 
in terms of structure of the faculty there will be no gain with 
respect to efficiency, research productivity, or finance. (UP, 
External Review 2015a:4)
The obvious question here is how, in light of the faculty’s 
commitment to structure following strategy, does strategy 
come to follow structure?
Problem statement:
The size and number of some of the departments in the Faculty 
of Theology has been indicated as a possible matter of concern. 
The Vice-Principal: Institutional Planning therefore formally 
requested the Dean on 9 March 2015 to conduct an investigation 
into the possibility of transforming certain research clusters into 
managerial units, i.e. departments, with the potential implication 
of reducing the number of departments in the Faculty (UP 
Restructuring 2016:2).
The use of ‘transformation’ is misplaced. This is a structural 
change, not a transformation. It is strange that the terms 
‘possibility’, ‘possible’ and ‘potential implication’ are used 
as a basis for a restructuring process. Could this be 
interpreted as a matter of executive interference, lack of 
vision on the part of the academic staff (internal difference 
or strife) or impotence (‘we cannot do anything about it 
anyway’)? And will that operational efficiency result on the 
basis of reducing the number of heads of department by one 
when the issue has always been the lack of a faculty manager 
and the heavy administrative load borne by Heads of 
Departments? The issue of adherence to Black Employment 
Equity policy is raised in the appointment of heads of 
departments, but not in the appointment of the head of a 
combined Centre for Religion and Society. The aim is to 
maintain ‘the six classical disciplines of Theology’ (UP 2016:1), 
and there is no mention of Africanisation in the restructuring 
proposal, although this is an important strategic matter. 
One example will suffice.
5.1 The Department of Church History and Church Polity and 
the Department of Dogmatics and Christian Ethics will merge.
and become: …
5.5.3 Department of Systematic and Historical Theology 
(Sistematiese en Historiese Teologie). (UP 2016)
Church History (which is not historical theology), Church 
Polity and Ethics disappear. ‘History’ is replaced with 
‘Theology’, which is the only determinant in the name of the 
department. The name of this proposed new department 
does not at all reflect its future function. A more generic name 
would be far more appropriate and could reflect the desire to 
Africanise, such as ‘African Christianity’ or ‘Ecumenical and 
African Christianity’. A further issue remains unanswered: 
how will tinkering with the faculty structure contribute to an 
improvement of UP’s rising in world rankings?
As noted already, no account is taken of the Africanisation of 
theology. Nor is mention made of the critical FT research 
theme on Ecodomy, which could provide a fruitful basis for 
Africanisation as in the work of Kaoma (2015a, 2015b).
A Pan-African Conference of Third World Theologians was 
held in 1977. The final communique advocated that theology 
in Africa take account of context and culture and that Africa: 
‘requires a new theological methodology that is different 
from the dominant theologies of the West’ (Appiah-Kubi & 
Torres 1979:192–193). Kaoma (2015a:26–27) himself does not 
spare Western sensitivities. In agreement with other African 
theologians, he states: ‘Sadly, these Western polluted 
ontological definitions are enforced and presented as African 
theology, thereby missing the fundamental point that God, 
ancestors and spirits are concerned with the fertility of Earth’. 
Kaoma (2015a:53) believes that African theology missed a 
great opportunity to demonstrate the interconnectedness of 
spirituality and theological responsibility.
There is an urgent need for a clear sense of common purpose 
(determined by the stakeholders – university, churches, 
students and academic staff), courage, fortitude and a 
determination to see the matter through to a clearly defined 
conclusion with a minimum of interference and undermining, 
delaying tactics and obstruction. The time for minor 
narratives is past. That is the history of the past. This is 
a  kairos opportunity to promote and commit to the 
metanarrative of the kingdom of God.
Conclusion
Prof. Johan Buitendag, the first post-denominational dean of 
the FT of UP, has provided outstanding leadership in the 
faculty since he took office in 2010. He has presided over a 
strong team of academics and practitioners during a period 
of change that is unparalleled in the tenure of any of his 
predecessors. This change is still in process and is far from 
complete midterm through his second term of office. He 
leads a faculty that has a proud and distinguished place in 
the field of theological research, both in Africa and in the 
global arena. Since the coming of democracy it has made 
considerable advances in transformation.

Page 11 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
It is the leading faculty in South Africa and in Africa. Its 
teaching and learning processes are successful in terms of 
throughput and output. Its research productivity is 
excellent. In many ways it is deeply involved in community 
engagement through teaching and research. It has remained 
true to the mission and vision of both the faculty and UP. 
With regard to transformation there is still a stony road to 
travel. The veneer stage of Africanisation now needs to be 
consolidated by a deeper penetration beyond the veneer to 
the core wood of the African baobab tree, which has many 
fruits to yield. Its roots are reaching into Africa but have not 
yet become deeply rooted. They are still looking for life-
giving African streams and lakes of water. There is an 
urgent need for an in-depth discussion about meaning and 
implications of further steps towards the implementation of 
Africanisation.
The FT has now reached the stage of liminality, a very 
uncomfortable place to be. Going backwards in such a 
situation is never a clever option. The only options are 
standing still, remaining with a commitment to what we 
know and are comfortable with or taking Kierkegaard’s 
‘leap of faith’ where the ‘leap is the decision’ (Kierkegaard 
1847 in Hong 1993:102) into an uncertain and risky future 
and grasping all the opportunities that present themselves. 
That is no choice at all in facing the ‘courage to be[come]’ 
(Tillich 1952).
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationships that may have inappropriately influenced him 
in writing this article.
References
Antonio, E.P., 2006, Inculturation and postcolonial discourse in African theology, Peter 
Lang, New York, NY.
Appiah-Kubi, K. & Torres, S. (ed.), 1979, African theology en route: Papers from the 
Pan-African conference of third world theologies, Orbis, Accra, Ghana, December 
17–23, 1977.
Atzvi, K., 2013, ‘Ecumenism as reconciliation’, in R. Schreiter & K. Jorgensen (eds.), 
Mission as ministry of reconciliation, pp. 30–36, Regnum, Oxford.
Balcomb, A.O., 2014, ‘Shifting the theological paradigm in Africa – building on the 
legacy of Kwame Bediako’, in G.M. Bediako, B.Y. Quarshie & J.K. Asamoah-Gyadu 
(eds.), Seeing new facets of the diamond: Christianity as a universal faith, pp. 
67–80, Regnum, Oxford.
Balcomb, T., 2013, ‘Theological education and the relevance of African worldviews: 
Shifting the paradigm’, in I.A. Phiri & D. Werner (eds.), Handbook of theological 
education in Africa, pp. 576–588, Regnum Books International, Dorpspruit.
Bediako, G.M., 2014, ‘Christian universality, Christian scholarship and institution 
building – Kwame Bediako on a vision in process’, in G.M. Bediako, B.Y. Quarshie & 
J.K. Asamoah-Gyadu (eds.), Seeing new facets of the diamond: Christianity as a 
universal faith, pp. 361–369, Regnum, Oxford.
Bediako, G.M., Quarshie, B.Y. & Asamoah-Gyadu, J.K. (ed.), 2014, Seeing new facets of 
the diamond: Christianity as a universal faith, Regnum, Oxford.
Bediako, K., 1990, Jesus in African culture: A Ghanaian perspective, pp. 5–20, Asempa 
Publishers, Accra.
Bediako, K., 1994, ‘The impact of the Bible in Africa’, in Y. Schaaf (ed.), On their way 
rejoicing: The history and role of the Bible in Africa, pp. 241–252, Paternoster, 
Carlisle.
Botha, M.M., 2010, ‘Compatibility between internationalizing and Africanizing higher 
education in South Africa’, Journal of Studies in International Education 14(2), 
200–213. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1028315309357943
Buitendag, J., 2014, ‘Between the Scylla and the Charybdis: Theological education in 
the 21st century in Africa’, HTS Teologiese Studies 70(1), Art. #2855, 5 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/hts.v70i1.2855
Buitendag, J., 2017, ‘The idea of the university and the “Pretoria Model”: Apologia pro 
statu Facultatis Theologia Universitas Pretoriensis ad secundum saeculum’, 
Verbum et Ecclesia forthcoming.
Carpenter, J.A., 2014, ‘Christian thinking in an age of Christianity, fresh opportunities 
for theology in the west’, in G.M. Bediako, B.Y. Quarshie & J.K. Asamoah-Gyadu 
(eds.), 2014, Seeing new facets of the diamond: Christianity as a universal faith, 
pp. 118–131, Regnum, Oxford.
Duncan, G.A., 2000, ‘Theological education: mission birth – African renaissance’, 
Missionalia 28(1), 23–40.
Faculty of Theology, 2010–2014, Faculty plans and agreements of the first tenure of 
Dean Johan Buitendag (2010–2014), Faculty of Theology, University of Pretoria, 
Pretoria.
Fotland, R.G., 2014, ‘Double religiosity in Norway: The persisting presence of primal 
religiosity’, in G.M. Bediako, B.Y. Quarshie & J.K. Asamoah-Gyadu (eds.), 2014, 
Seeing new facets of the diamond: Christianity as a universal faith, pp. 105–117, 
Regnum, Oxford.
Horsthemke, K., 2004, ‘Knowledge, education and the limits of Africanisation’, Journal 
of Philosophy of Education 38(4). http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0309-8249.2004.​
00405.x
Horsthemke, K., 2009, ‘The South African higher education transformation debate: 
Culture, identity and “African ways of knowing”’, London Review of Education 7(1), 
3–15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14748460802700512
Kaoma, K.J., 2015a, ‘Introduction’, in K.J. Kaoma (ed.), Creation care in Christian 
mission, Regnum, Oxford.
Kaoma, K.J., 2015b, The creator’s symphony: African Christianity, the plight of the 
earth and the poor, Cluster, Pietermaritzburg.
Kierkegaard, S., [March 13, 1847], in Hong, H.V. (ed.), 1993, Upbuilding discourses in 
various spirits, concluding unscientific postscript to philosophical fragments, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Kung, H., 1980, Does God exist? Doubleday and Co, New York.
Letsekha, T., 2013, ‘Revisiting the debate on the Africanisation of higher education: 
an appeal for a conceptual shift’, The Independent Journal of Teaching and 
Learning 8, 5–7.
Louth, A., 2004, ‘Theology, contemplation and the university’, Studies in Christian 
Ethics 17(1), 69–79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/095394680401700105
Maile, S., 2011, ‘The absence of a home curriculum in post-apartheid education in 
South Africa’, International Journal of African Renaissance Studies 6(2), 100–117. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/18186874.2011.650852
Maluleke, T.S., 2006, ‘The Africanisation of theological education: Does theological 
education equip you to help your sister?’, in E.P. Antonio (ed.), Inculturation and 
postcolonial discourse in African Theology, pp. 46–55, Peter Laing Publishing, New 
York, NY.
Maluleke, T.S., 2010, ‘Of Africanised bees and Africanised churches: Ten theses on 
African Christianity’, Missionalia, November, 38(3), 369–379.
Maluleke, T.S., 2015, ‘All tertiary education hurdles must fall’, Mail & Guardian, 6 
November, viewed 22 March 2016, from http://mg.co.za/article/2015-11-07-all-
tertiary-education-hurdles-must-fall
Motlhakane, K., 2016, #proudtukkie #theologian #black African (Kabelo Motlhakane, 
Facebook, 15 February 2016).
Naidoo, M., 2016, ‘Overcoming alienation in Africanising theological education’, HTS 
Teologiese Studies 72(1), Art. #3062, 8 pages. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/hts.
v72i1.3062
Newbigin, L., 1968, ‘Bible studies given at National Christian Council Triennial National 
Assembly Shillong’, National Christian Council Review, 88, 9–14, 73–78, 125–131, 
177–185.
Newman, J.H., 1982, The idea of a university, University of Notre Dame Press, Notre 
Dame, IN.
Nikolajsen, J.B., 2015, The distinctive identity of the church: A constructive study of the 
post-Christendom theologies of Lesslie Newbigin and John Howard Yoder, 
Pickwick, Eugene, OR.
Nordstekke, K., 2013, ‘Diakonia in context: Transformation, reconciliation and 
empowerment’, in R. Schreiter & K. Jorgensen (eds.), Mission as ministry of 
reconciliation, pp. 112–125, Regnum, Oxford.
Paas, S., 2016, Christianity in Eurafrica: A history of the church in Europe and Africa, 
Christian Literature Fund, Wellington.
Parrinder, G., 2000, In the belly of the snake: West Africa over sixty years ago, Epworth, 
Peterborough, ON.
Quality Assurance Netherlands Universities (QANU) Report, 2012, Research self 
evaluation of the Faculty of Theology (2005−2011), VU University, Amsterdam.
Rowley, H., 1867, The story of the Universities’ Missions to Central Africa: From its 
commencement, under Bishop Mackenzie, to its withdrawal form Zambesi, 
Saunders, London.
Schoffeleers, M., 1987, Guardians of the land, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Seed, C.G., 2015, ‘The missional nature of divine-human communion: Thomas F 
Torrance and the Chinese church’, PhD thesis, Northwest University, 
Potchefstroom.
Stewart, J., 1894, Lovedale South Africa, Andrew Elliot, Edinburgh.
Taylor, J.V., 1963, The primal vision: Christian presence amid African religion, SCM, 
London.
Tillich, P., 1952, The courage to be, Yale Nota Bene, New Haven, CT.

Page 12 of 12
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
Open Access
Torrance, T.F., 1985, The Christian frame of mind, Handsel, Edinburgh.
Tshehla, S., 2014, ‘To the Akan first, and also to the Sotho: Kwame Bediako and the 
measure of Christianity’, in G.M. Bediako, B.Y. Quarshie & J.K. Asamoah-Gyadu 
(eds.), Seeing new facets of the diamond: Christianity as a universal faith, pp. 56–66, 
Regnum, Oxford.
University of Pretoria, 2010a, Teaching and learning priorities for 2011: Advancing 
excellence in undergraduate education at UP, University of Pretoria, Pretoria.
University of Pretoria, 2010b, ‘Institutional policy on promotion [IPR](Rt115/04 as 
revised in 2010) in Department of Education Innovation 2014’. Quality 
enhancement project Institutional Submissions: Phase 1, Department of 
Education Innovation, University of Pretoria, Pretoria.
University of Pretoria, 2011a, Strategic plan: The vision, mission and plan of the 
University for 2025, University of Pretoria, Pretoria.
University of Pretoria, 2011b, UP values, viewed 20 February 2016, from https://
www1.up.ac.za/webcenter/faces/oracle/webcenter/page/scopedMD/s1f55bf6
1_6783_4a32_8d28_606162a68f88/Page2.jspx?contentID=UPPR007937&_
afrLoop=8753197649148741#%40%3F_afrLoop%3D8753197649148741%26c
ontentID%3DUPPR007937%26_adf.ctrl-state%3Dz19olfjne_327
University of Pretoria, 2012, Academic plan. Appendix 1: Academic vision|goals, 
targets and performance indicators, Pretoria, University of Pretoria.
University of Pretoria, 2015a, ‘External review of the Faculty of Theology’, 28–30th 
September 2015, Final Report.
University of Pretoria, 2015b, Faculty plans and agreements of the first tenure of Dean 
Johan Buitendag (2010–2014), 2016, University of Pretoria, Pretoria.
University of Pretoria, 2015c, Faculty plan, 2016, University of Pretoria, Pretoria.
University of Pretoria, 2016, Restructuring the Faculty of Theology, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria.
Walls, A.F., 2008, ‘Kwame Bediako and Christian scholarship in Africa’, International 
Bulletin of Missionary Research, October, 32(4), 188–193.
Walls, A.F., 2014, ‘The discovery of ‘African Traditional /Religion’ and its impact on 
religious studies’, in G.M. Bediako, B.Y. Quarshie & J.K. Asamoah-Gyadu (eds.), 
Seeing new facets of the diamond: Christianity as a universal faith, pp. 1–17, 
Regnum, Oxford, 1-20.
Williams, C. & Gardner, J.C., 2012, ‘Servant leadership, Africanization and disruptive 
innovation as conditions for effective leadership at UNISA’, The Quarterly Review 
of Distance Education 13(4), 213–217.
