University of Groningen
Symptom network models in depression research
van Borkulo, Claudia Debora
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Publication date:
2018
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database
Citation for published version (APA):
van Borkulo, C. D. (2018). Symptom network models in depression research: From methodological
exploration to clinical application. [Thesis fully internal (DIV), University of Groningen]. University of
Groningen.
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum.
Download date: 05-01-2026

C H A P T E R 10
MENTAL DISORDERS AS NETWORKS OF PROBLEMS:
A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
Adapted from:
Fried, E. I., Van Borkulo, C. D.*, Cramer, A. O. J., Boschloo, L., Schoever, R. A., Borsboom, D.
(2016). Mental disorders as symptom networks of problems: A review of recent insights. Social Psychiatry
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, DOI 10.1007/s00127-016-1319-z.
* shared ﬁrst authorship in alphabetical order
169

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
T
he network perspective on psychopathology understands mental disorders
as complex networks of interacting symptoms. Despite its recent debut,
with conceptual foundations in 2008 and empirical foundations in 2010,
the framework has received considerable attention and recognition in the last
years. This paper provides a review of all empirical network studies published
between 2010 and 2016 and discusses them according to three main themes:
comorbidity, prediction, and clinical intervention. Pertaining to comorbidity, the
network approach provides a powerful new framework to explain why certain
disorders may co-occur more often than others. For prediction, studies have con-
sistently found that symptom networks of people with mental disorders show
different characteristics than that of healthy individuals, and preliminary evidence
suggests that networks of healthy people show early warning signals before shift-
ing into disordered states. For intervention, centrality — a metric that measures
how connected and clinically relevant a symptom is in a network — is the most
commonly studied topic, and numerous studies have suggested that targeting the
most central symptoms may offer novel therapeutic strategies. We sketch future di-
rections for the network approach pertaining to both clinical and methodological
research, and conclude that network analysis has yielded important insights and
may provide an important inroad towards personalized medicine by investigating
the network structures of individual patients.
10.1
Introduction
In the last years, a growing number of publications have studied mental disor-
ders, such as Major Depressive Disorder (MDD), Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD), and psychosis as networks of interacting symptoms. Although this sci-
entiﬁc discipline is young, with its conceptual roots in 2008 (Borsboom, 2008)
and its empirical foundations in 2010 (Cramer et al., 2010), it is fast-moving and
has gained considerable recognition. The big step forward within the last years
has been the development of statistical models that allow for the estimation of
empirical psychopathology networks. The present paper aims to provide a re-
view of the contemporary empirical literature on this network conceptualization
of psychopathology. For more information on the methodology behind these
empirical papers — network psychometrics — we refer the interested reader
elsewhere (Bringmann, Hamaker, et al., 2016; Bringmann et al., 2013; Epskamp,
170

10.1. INTRODUCTION
FIGURE 10.1. Examples of a directed and undirected network. Network based on time-
series data, which thus leads to a directed network (A); pairwise associations among eight
symptoms of a hypothetical patient Susan. Network based on cross-sectional data, which
thus leads to an undirected network (B); pairwise associations among eight symptoms in
a hypothetical group of patients.
Kruis, & Marsman, 2016; Epskamp, Maris, et al., 2016; Haslbeck & Waldorp, 2015;
Schuurman, Ferrer, de Boer-Sonnenschein, & Hamaker, 2016; Van Borkulo et al.,
2014).
According to the network perspective on psychopathology, a mental disorder
can be viewed as a system of interacting symptoms. From this perspective, the
causal interplay between symptoms constitutes mental disorders (Borsboom &
Cramer, 2013; Cramer et al., 2010; Kendler et al., 2011). Taking Major Depressive
Disorder (MDD) as an example, depressed patients often experience symptoms,
such as sadness, anhedonia, fatigue, insomnia, concentration problems, and sui-
cidal ideation (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), and it is easy to envision
causal relationships among these problems, for instance, fatigue →insomnia →
concentration problems, or sadness →anhedonia →suicidal ideation. Figure
10.1a shows an example of such a directed network for a hypothetical depressed
patient Susan. Figure 10.1b, on the other hand, depicts an undirected network
estimated in a group of people in cross-sectional data.
The remainder of the paper is organized into four sections. First, we review
publications that aim to explain the comorbidity rates among mental disorders
using the network approach. Second, we summarize network studies that have
been conducted with the aim of predicting the course of disorders, and to identify
171

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
indicators of a worse prognosis. Third, we discuss what insights network studies
have yielded for clinical intervention. Finally, we discuss implications for future
clinical practice and how the network perspective can move forward.
10.2
Comorbidity
The presence of multiple disorders at the same time is extremely common in
the realm of psychopathology (Kessler et al., 2005). Comorbidity has received
considerable attention in the clinical literature, because patients diagnosed with
multiple disorders have poorer prognosis, worse treatment outcomes, and higher
suicide rates (Nock et al., 2010; Schoevers et al., 2005).
10.2.1
Comorbidity from a network perspective
Traditionally, comorbid mental disorders are understood as different disorders,
while the network approach hypothesizes that they may co-occur due to mutual
interactions among symptoms (Cramer et al., 2010). Comorbidity, in that view,
arises when there are symptoms that bridge two disorders. These so-called bridge
symptoms can spread activation from one disorder to the other. Figure 10.2 rep-
resents such a case where a person ﬁrst develops disorder X (in response to an
environmental stressor E), then the bridge symptoms B, and ﬁnally disorder Y. X
could be MDD, Y could be Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) that often occurs
together with MDD, and the bridge symptoms B could be sleep problems, fatigue,
concentration problems, or psychomotor agitation that are part of both MDD and
GAD DSM-5 criteria (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).
Note that there are numerous other possibilities from a network perspective to
explain the comorbidity between X and Y: activation may go the other way around
(Y →B →X), or a person could also develop the bridge symptoms B ﬁrst, and then
at the same time both X and Y.
10.2.2
Comorbidity in empirical data
Several cross-sectional studies have investigated how symptoms are related across
disorders. In the ﬁrst empirical network study on the subject, Cramer et al. (2010)
found that the empirical network structure of MDD and GAD symptoms in a
general population sample was entangled. A recent paper replicated these ﬁndings
172

10.2. COMORBIDITY
FIGURE 10.2. How comorbidity can arise according to the network approach. Disorder
X consists of the eight symptoms X1-X5 and B1-B3, and disorder Y consists of the eight
symptoms Y1-Y5 and B1-B3. B1-B3 are bridge symptoms that feature in both diagnoses.
In this case, a person ﬁrst develops X3 in response to an environmental stressor E, then
symptoms of disorder X, then bridge symptoms B, and ﬁnally symptoms of disorder Y.
in a large clinical sample, also concluding that MDD and GAD symptoms are
strongly interconnected (Beard et al., 2016). Another team of researchers studied
the comorbidity of MDD and complicated grief (Robinaugh et al., 2014), and
showed that symptoms form two distinct clusters that are connected through
the symptoms loneliness, emotional pain, and emotional numbing. The authors
suggested that emotional pain may be a promising target for psychotherapeutic
interventions.
Boschloo et al. (2015) used a network analysis in a data set with over 34,000
patients interviewed on 120 symptoms of 12 major DSM-IV disorders. In the
resulting network, no sharp boundaries were found between the 12 disorders (i.e.,
symptoms of different diagnoses were related to each other across diagnoses), and
there was substantial symptom overlap across diagnoses. The authors repeated
173

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
this analysis in a community sample of 2175 preadolescents with 95 emotional
and behavioral problems, with similar results (Boschloo, Van Borkulo, et al., 2016).
Comorbidity research from a network perspective has also generated new
hypotheses for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and Obsessive-Compulsive Dis-
order (OCD), both of which share repetitive behaviors. A study in a clinical sample
of 213 children revealed that repetitive behaviors seem to connect ASD and OCD
symptom clusters, and the authors also found evidence that repetitive behaviors
may differ somewhat in people with ASD and people with OCD (Ruzzano et al.,
2014).
One implication of the network view on comorbidity is that diagnoses may
co-occur as a function of their number of shared symptoms. As described above,
MDD and GAD should have relatively high comorbidities, whereas disorders that
share no symptoms, such as schizophrenia and speciﬁc phobias, should rarely
co-occur because of the lack of bridge symptoms that can transport information.
Interestingly, this implication does not derive from the traditional conceptual-
ization of mental disorders as medical conditions, where disorders cause their
symptoms (Fried, 2015; Schmittmann et al., 2013). The fact that diagnoses for HIV,
cancer, and tuberculosis may share more or less symptoms should not impact
strongly on their rates of comorbidity, seeing that they have independent common
causes. One study tested that prediction and measured how related the networks
of different mental disorders are. They found that empirical comorbidity rates
were related to distances between disorders in an analysis of symptom overlap
in the DSM (Borsboom et al., 2011).1 This means that when two disorders, such
as MDD and Dysthymia, share multiple symptoms, the distance between these
disorders in the DSM network is small and one can easily travel from one disorder
to the other.2
To conclude, zooming in on disorders at symptom level (Fried, Boschloo, et al.,
2015; Persons, 1986), as the network perspective does, reveals how comorbidity
might come about. Currently, this issue is empirically unresolved, and the way
comorbidity arises may very well be different for different people with the same
comorbid diagnoses and different for different types of comorbid diagnoses.
1Note that this DSM network is not based on empirical data, but each node in the network is a
symptom as listed in the DSM. Overlapping symptoms are depicted as one and the same node.
2The network distance between symptoms of different disorders is based on the average shortest
path length. This measure is calculated by averaging the number of steps (i.e., the number of connections)
to travel from each symptom of one disorder to each symptom of the other disorder (Opsahl et al., 2010).
174

10.3. PREDICTION
10.3
Prediction
While many people experience single symptoms, only part of them develop a
mental disorder. One of the most important areas of clinical research is thus
the prediction of psychopathology onset, which would allow clinicians earlier
interventions. The network literature on prediction has, thus far, focused on two
aspects: (1) so-called early warning signals that may indicate the upcoming onset
of psychopathology for a speciﬁc patient and (2) characteristics of group-level
networks that may help predict the future course of psychopathology. It is of note
that the work on prediction has mostly investigated emotion dynamics (Kuppens
et al., 2010) — the temporal associations between emotions, such as sadness,
anger, fear, or being content — while little research has been conducted on the
dynamics among a broader set of problems or symptoms like insomnia, fatigue,
and concentration problems. Such investigations are a topic of future research
(Cramer et al., 2016).
10.3.1
Early warning signals
The conceptualization of mental disorders as networks of interacting symptoms
allows utilizing insights from scientiﬁc ﬁelds in which complex systems are well
known. One of the most important features of complex systems in this regard
is that they can display phase transitions (Scheffer et al., 2009) which mark the
transitions between healthy and “disordered” states (Leemput et al., 2014). Iden-
tifying early warnings of such transitions is a promising line of research known
from other ﬁelds, such as ecology or ﬁnancial markets, where systems can reach a
tipping point (Dakos et al., 2012; Leemput et al., 2014; Scheffer et al., 2009). Lakes,
for example, can shift from a clear state to a turbid state, and it is an important
question how to best predict such tipping points. Interestingly, right before such
phase transitions from one state to another, a system displays early warning sig-
nals. Speciﬁcally, transitions are preceded by a phenomenon referred to as critical
slowing down (Scheffer et al., 2009; Strogatz, 2014; Van Nes & Scheffer, 2005),
which means that it takes longer for a system to recover from perturbations. This
is reﬂected by the fact that the system becomes more predictable by its previous
states: when close to a transition, the dynamics slow down.
175

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
We can use the network of Susan (Figure 10.1a) as an example of a bi-stable
system with two attractor states: a healthy and a sick state. Assume Susan is
now in a healthy state, and an early warning signal would indicate an upcoming
tipping point, where her system may suddenly move from healthy to sick. Before a
transition occurs, the system slows down, which implies that we can more reliably
predict the state of the system at the next time point. In statistical terms, one such
sign is increasing autoregressive coefﬁcients (i.e., the self-predictive pathways
from a symptom or emotion to itself across time).
Leemput et al. (2014) estimated emotion dynamics during critical transitions
from healthy to depressed states to see whether these are preceded by early warn-
ing signals. Analyzing a large time-series data set, the authors showed that systems
exhibited signs of critical slowing down before critical transitions (Leemput et
al., 2014). A second study on early warning signals was published recently on one
depressed patient that was measured over 239 days (1474 measurements). This
intensive idiographic study, in which the patient decreased his antidepressant
intake, also shows evidence for early warning signals before he transitioned into a
depressive episode (Wichers et al., 2016). There is also some work showing that
individuals with higher levels of inertia in their emotion dynamics are more likely
to develop depression 2.5 years later (Kuppens et al., 2012). Inertia also refers to
autocorrelations and implies that emotion networks of individuals at higher risk
to develop depression on the long term are characterized by a slower recovery
from a given perturbation (i.e., the emotion networks of people at higher risk
might recover more slowly from the effect of external inﬂuences than those at
lower risk). While further investigations are required to understand the nature
of emotional inertia, it has been considered “a hallmark of maladaptive emotion
dynamics” (Kuppens et al., 2010, p. 984).
An interesting topic in this context is the observation that phase transitions
may be more pronounced with increasing levels of connectivity. That is, for weakly
connected symptom networks, negative external conditions (i.e., stressful events)
lead to a gradual increase in symptoms, whereas for strongly connected networks,
external stress leads to a sudden shift from a healthy to depressed state (Leemput
et al., 2014); simulation studies with depression networks support this notion
(Cramer et al., 2016; Van Borkulo et al., 2013). This may shed new light on a
long-standing discussion whether psychopathology is dimensional or categorical
(Borsboom et al., 2016): networks with weak connectivity may behave as a con-
176

10.3. PREDICTION
tinuum in response to stress (i.e., no sudden phase transition; psychopathology
is dimensional), while networks with strong connectivity may behave as either
healthy or disordered (i.e., sudden phase transitions; psychopathology is categori-
cal). This implies that different people may have the same diagnosis, for instance
MDD, but that the connectivity of the network structure would determine whether
the disorder is a continuum or a dimension for them.
10.3.2
Prediction via network characteristics
Another important aspect of network research is the prediction of the course
of psychopathology from network characteristics of groups of individuals. Two
studies showed that the temporal emotion networks of patients with MDD and
psychosis (Pe et al., 2015; Wigman et al., 2015) were more strongly connected than
the temporal emotion networks of healthy controls. Stronger temporal connec-
tions between emotions mean that the state of an emotion at a certain timepoint
depends strongly on the state of emotions at the previous timepoint. In another
study, Van Borkulo et al. (2015) hypothesized that higher levels of connectivity
in depressed patients at baseline are associated with worse outcomes at 2-year
follow-up. They found that patients with persistent depression at follow-up had
a more densely connected cross-sectional network at baseline compared to re-
mitted patients at follow-up — even after controlling for differences in severity
(Van Borkulo et al., 2015). This is consistent with other work arguing that more
densely connected temporal network structures may be more vulnerable to psy-
chopathology (Wichers et al., 2015). Whether this also applies to particular individ-
uals (in contrast to network structures at the group level), however, remains to be
investigated with within-person analyses (E. H. Bos & Wanders, 2016; Van Borkulo,
Borsboom, & Schoevers, 2016).
Another study on predicting the future course of psychopathology showed
that the most interconnected or central depression symptoms in the baseline
network were the ones most predictive of future MDD onset (Boschloo, Schoevers,
et al., 2016). Fatigue and depressed mood, for example, were more predictive of
MDD than other symptoms. This implies that the nature of symptoms may play
an important role above and beyond the number of symptoms (Fried & Nesse,
2015b).
177

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
10.4
Clinical intervention
Network analysis may provide promising leads towards improving clinical pre-
vention and intervention strategies by investigating which symptoms are more
strongly connected or more central than others. In this section, we will ﬁrst ex-
plain the concept of centrality, and then discuss the results of research that points
to possible targets for intervention.
10.4.1
The concept of centrality
If a symptom (e.g., depressed mood) has many connections to other symptoms in
a psychopathological system, it may cause the development of these symptoms.
The number of connections of a symptom is known as degree centrality. This
type of centrality is illustrated in Figure 10.3: the red symptom is connected to six
other symptoms, whereas all other nodes have a lower number of connections (as
indicated by the numbers in each node). The red node thus has a high (degree)
centrality and, consequently, may be seen as a risk factor for developing further
symptoms (Borsboom & Cramer, 2013; Bringmann et al., 2013; Fried, Epskamp,
et al., 2016; Goekoop & Goekoop, 2014; Van Bork, Van Borkulo, Waldorp, Cramer,
& Borsboom, n.d.). That is, if someone develops a symptom that is central, the
probability of developing other symptoms will increase more than when someone
develops a peripheral symptom.
Degree centrality can be understood to quantify the importance of a node in
the network. Other common centrality measures are closeness and betweenness
(Opsahl et al., 2010), and several papers have described and calculated these
centrality measures for psychopathological networks (Fried, Epskamp, et al., 2016;
Van Bork et al., n.d.). In directed networks (e.g., longitudinal network models,
where nodes predict other nodes over time), degree can be further speciﬁed with
indegree being the number of connections pointing towards the focal symptom
and outdegree being the number of connections pointing from the focal symptom
to other symptoms (cf. Bringmann et al., 2013). Especially, symptoms with a high
outdegree might be viable targets for intervention, since they inﬂuence many
other symptoms.
178

10.4. CLINICAL INTERVENTION
FIGURE 10.3. Psychopathological network showing the pairwise associations among ten
symptoms. Each node depicts a number that is the sum of all connections of the node with
all other nodes, called degree centrality. The red node has the highest degree centrality
with six connections.
10.4.2
What are good symptoms for clinical intervention?
Providing an overview of which symptoms are more central than others across
studies turns out to be a challenging task for several reasons. Different studies
used different variables, making comparisons across studies challenging. For
MDD, for instance, different questionnaires were used to assess symptomatology,
or researchers analyzed other types of variables, such as emotions or mental states
(Bringmann, Pe, et al., 2016; Pe et al., 2015; Wigman et al., 2015). Other factors
that vary across studies are the temporal nature of the data (cross-sectional vs.
time-series data), the particular samples studied (e.g., healthy, moderately de-
pressed, and severely depressed samples), and the network estimation methods
(e.g., Bringmann et al., 2013; Epskamp & Fried, 2016). With these caveats in mind,
it seems that the two DSM-5 (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) core symp-
toms of MDD episode — depressed mood and loss of interest/pleasure — along
with energy/fatigue consistently appear as central symptoms and could thus be
179

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
understood as potential targets for intervention (Boschloo, Van Borkulo, et al.,
2016; Bringmann et al., 2015; Cramer et al., 2010; Fried, Epskamp, et al., 2016;
Koenders et al., 2015).
Since other disorders have not been investigated as frequently, it is not possi-
ble to identify similarities across studies. Therefore, we summarize the available
literature, urging researchers to replicate these results before translating them
into clinical settings. A cross-sectional network study of 2405 adults with different
substance abuse disorders revealed that using the substance longer than planned
and that the drug interferes with life signiﬁcantly were highly central (Rhemtulla
et al., 2016). Interestingly, these problems appear in the later course of the dis-
order, and provide a great example for central symptoms that may not prove to
be the best targets for clinical intervention. The symptoms may be central in the
cross-sectional substance abuse study primarily because they often develop as a
consequence of other symptoms. Rhemtulla et al. (2016) also found that the most
central symptoms in the full sample differed considerably in their centrality across
subgroups of people with different types of substance use disorders (cannabis,
sedatives, stimulants, cocaine, opioids, and hallucinogens). For PTSD, McNally et
al. (2015) concluded from analyzing crosssectional data that hypervigilance, im-
paired concentration, and physiological reactivity to reminders of the trauma are
promising targets for intervention (McNally et al., 2015). Sleep difﬁculty was also
among the most central symptoms, and aiming to stabilize patients′ sleep might
be a promising strategy (even before initiating other forms of psychotherapy),
which could induce a cascade of symptom deactivation.
Researchers have also included variables other than the symptoms of the
disorder itself in networks. First, a crosssectional study on psychosis included in-
formation on childhood trauma in the network of psychosis and psychopathology
symptoms, such as anxiety and depression. Different types of childhood trauma
were related to psychosis symptoms, but only through general psychopathology
symptoms, such as anxiety (Isvoranu, Van Borkulo, et al., 2016). Second, protec-
tive (resilience) variables might also be included in psychopathological networks
(for a brief discussion, see Borsboom et al., 2011). To our knowledge, only one
cross-sectional study investigated this, though not on a symptom level (Hoorel-
beke, Marchetti, De Schryver, & Koster, 2016). The authors found resilience to
be related to remission of depression and showed it was central in a network
with composite scores of other cognitive processes, such as cognitive control,
180

10.5. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
experienced cognitive functioning, maladaptive emotion regulation, and residual
depressive symptomatology. Third, Heeren and McNally (2016) investigated the
cross-sectional network structure of the core symptoms (fear and avoidance) of
Social Anxiety Disorder (SAD) with laboratory measures on attention bias. They
found that attention bias played an important role in the network, arguing that
process-level measures from laboratory tasks can shed more light on the mecha-
nisms of SAD (Heeren & McNally, 2016).
10.5
Future directions
Much exploratory network research has been conducted in the ﬁeld of psy-
chopathology network research: but where do we go from here? In this section, we
will discuss some future perspectives, structured into clinical and methodological
research.
10.5.1
Clinical research
From a clinical perspective, we suggest to investigate four topics. First, the network
framework generates speciﬁc hypotheses about treating disorders that should be
explored. In treating comorbid disorders, such as MDD and GAD, for example,
targeting bridge symptoms that transfer inﬂuence from one part of the network
to the other should be the strategy of choice. A related hypothesis is that targeting
central symptoms should reduce patients′ symptomatology (Fried, Epskamp, et
al., 2016).3 As the majority of research on ﬁnding possible targets for intervention
is based on crosssectional data, it is unclear whether an undirected edge between
symptoms A and B implies A →B, A ←B, or A ↔B.4 Longitudinal analyses allow
for an estimation of directed networks which reveal the direction of the association
between symptoms, such as A and B (e.g., Bringmann et al., 2015), and present a
more promising route to investigate possible targets for clinical intervention.
3The simulation tool “vax” provides a beautiful explanation of centrality and shows how such
treatment should work by targeting the most central nodes: http://vax.herokuapp.com/game.
4Note that there are two further possibilities that can explain an undirected edge between A and
B: an unmodeled inﬂuence of a (set of) latent variables C (A ←C →B); and conditioning on a common
effect D such that A →D ←B. The latter can arise if D is a variable included in the network, but also when
it is not, for instance when the investigated sample has been selected on (a function of) a common effect
of the variables in the network.
181

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
Second, and related to the previous point, it should be investigated whether
intervening on central symptoms will actually bring beneﬁts to patients. Although
studies have collected ESM data in therapeutic settings to provide feedback on
patterns of affect (aan het Rot et al., 2012; Hartmann et al., 2015; Kramer et al.,
2014), these data have not been analyzed using network models to derive, for
instance, the most central symptoms — and a large crowdsourcing study that
does provide feedback via personalized dynamic networks does so only outside
a therapeutic setting (Krieke et al., 2016). Merging these two approaches may
provide valuable insights, and we are aware of one such pioneering case study
that investigated personalized feedback based on network models within a thera-
peutic setting (Kroeze et al., 2016). In addition to treatment as usual, the patient
received feedback on symptom dynamics and explored the feasibility, acceptabil-
ity, and usability of such an integrated individualized network approach. This
initiated a therapeutic dialogue about possible causes of treatment resistance
and may provide new directions towards personalized medicine (Molenaar, 2004;
Myin-Germeys et al., 2009). While it may not always be feasible or possible to
target a speciﬁc symptom, establishing that the network framework provides good
explanatory and predictive models of psychopathology may imply the need for
developing new approaches for targeting speciﬁc symptoms.
Third, it would be worthwhile to apply the network perspective to yet unex-
plored mental disorders. The temporal dynamics of symptoms of Binge Eating
Disorder (BED), for example, may be a suitable candidate (American Psychi-
atric Association, 2013). One causal pathway could be between the symptoms
eating until one feels uncomfortably full and feeling disgusted, depressed, or
guilty, which could provide insights into risk factors for the development of BED
episodes.
Fourth, besides looking at the interactions of problems (e.g., symptoms), study-
ing factors that contribute to resilience may be worthwhile pursuing (Garmezy,
1987; Luthar, Cicchetti, & Becker, 2000). Investigating the role of protective factors
in psychopathology networks might inform us how these two opposing forces
relate to each other, and eventually inform clinical practice. For example, Alice
may beneﬁt from more social interactions in case social isolation leads to sad
mood, while Bob may beneﬁt from physical activity in case sad mood is preceded
by lack of activity.
182

10.5. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
10.5.2
Methodological research
Exploring the above questions relies on the accurate and reliable estimation of
psychopathological networks. When patients apply for treatment,5 there is often
a waiting period in which one could assess the emotion and symptom dynamics
with modern phone technology within an idiographic momentary assessment
study, and results could inform treatment. Similarly, relapse prevention in remit-
ted patients may beneﬁt from repeated assessment of core symptoms and related
factors over time to foresee relapse in an early phase and take preventive measures
to counteract its course. This all sounds promising, but before this can be put into
effect, there are some methodological issues that need to be addressed of which
we will discuss three.
A ﬁrst issue is what variables to study in psychopathological networks. While
cross-sectional network studies have focused on analyzing associations among
symptoms, ESM studies have focused on mood states, such as sadness, happiness,
anxiety, or anger (Bringmann, Pe, et al., 2016; Bringmann et al., 2013; Pe et al.,
2015; Wichers, 2014). It is unclear at present what level of variables is best to study
psychopathology.
A second issue is the time frame on which to measure symptoms or emo-
tions. In most ESM studies, the time frame between measurements is a few
hours. However, do symptoms or affects change within hours or minutes or days?
This might differ for different pairs of symptoms: experiencing somatic arousal
(e.g., increased heart rate and sweating) might lead to anticipating a panic attack
(Van Borkulo, Borsboom, & Schoevers, 2016), which will occur within minutes.
Sleep problems, on the other hand, might build up for a few days before inﬂuenc-
ing a person‚Äôs irritability. It is currently unknown what the best timeframe is to
capture dynamics.
Third, an important point is the generalization of group-level results to the
individual level, since many group-level network studies have implied that the
identiﬁed network structure of the population is more or less reﬂective of the
networks of all individual participants (e.g., Kievit, Frankenhuis, Waldorp, & Bors-
boom, 2013; Robinson, 1950). A well-known example of this phenomenon, known
as Simpson′s Paradox, is the speed-accuracy tradeoff. At a group-level, a nega-
5For an ongoing study on this topic, see http://www.trialregister.nl/trialreg/admin/
rctview.asp?TC=5707.
183

CHAPTER 10. A REVIEW OF RECENT INSIGHTS
tive relationship exists between typing speed and typing accuracy: people with
higher typing speed make fewer errors, likely because experience leads to faster
typing and fewer mistakes. At the individual level, however, a person who types
faster will make more, not less errors (Hamaker, 2012). While this is an extreme
example — it seems unlikely that symptoms of mental disorders are predomi-
nantly positively associated at group-level, but negatively in the individual — we
currently do not know to what extent group-level networks differ from individ-
ual networks (Van Borkulo, Borsboom, & Schoevers, 2016). A related point was
made by E. H. Bos and Jonge (2014) and E. H. Bos and Wanders (2016) who warn
that between-person effects should not be confused with within-person effects.
Taken together, this implies that we need future studies that investigate to which
degree idiographic networks match group-level networks, and to disentangle
between-person from within-person effects.
Finally, numerous network papers analyzed data that contained a skip struc-
ture. This is often the case when large populations are screened via the DSM
diagnostic criteria. For a diagnosis of MDD, for instance, subjects need to endorse
at least one of the two core symptoms depressed mood or anhedonia. If that
is not the case, the remaining seven MDD symptoms are skipped. In statistical
analyses, such skipped items are usually recoded as 0s (e.g., Borsboom & Cramer,
2013; Boschloo, Van Borkulo, et al., 2016; Rhemtulla et al., 2016), but just because
someone does not endorse the core symptoms does not mean that the person
cannot exhibit other MDD symptoms. The recoding of missing data to 0s may
pose a considerable problem, because it introduces spurious correlations among
items (for many people, the seven remaining items will be coded as 0s and thus
be highly correlated, although this may not reﬂect the true correlations among
items). Although Boschloo et al. (2015) showed similarity of the network structure
based on the original data with 49% missing and a subsample with less than 20%
missing, it still may have introduced bias. Future research is required to investigate
imputation strategies for skip data that go beyond recoding them as 0s.
10.6
Summary
In contrast to current categorical diagnostic classiﬁcations that hardly ﬁt clinical
reality, the network approach offers a model that captures both complexity and
individual variation in psychopathology that clinicians and patients immediately
184

10.6. SUMMARY
recognize. Due to recent statistical advances, these networks and the resulting
hypotheses can now be empirically tested and validated, both in nomothetic and
idiographic (n = 1) designs. Electronic devices, such as smartphones, watches,
and other “wearable tech” offer the possibility of continuous/repeated data col-
lection to address important clinical issues regarding vulnerability for and onset
of psychopathology as well as relapse prevention. However, it is also likely to be
helpful in regular therapy as it enhances patients′ insight into their own symp-
tom dynamics and how these relate to contextual and behavioral factors that
they themselves may be able to inﬂuence. Pilot studies suggest that this type of
objective and differentiated feedback attributes to traditional “talking therapy”
and may also lead to more informed pharmacotherapy (F. M. Bos, Schoevers,
& aan het Rot, 2015). Taken together, the network approach offers a promising
conceptual framework to further develop personalized medicine in psychiatry.
185

