110	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
Ewa Sikora
Anna Bielak-Zmijewska
Grazyna Mosieniak
Laboratory of Molecular Bases of Ageing, 
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS, 
Warsaw, Poland
Laboratory of Molecular Bases of Ageing, 
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, PAS, 
3 Pasteura St., 02-093 Warsaw, Poland; e-mail: 
e.sikora@nencki.gov.pl
Received: July 10, 2018
Accepted: August 5, 2018
Key words: ageing, cancer, DNA damage, se-
nescence, telomeres
Abbreviations: ATM – ataxia-telangiecta-
sia mutated; ATR – ataxia telangiectasia and 
Rad3-related; DDR – DNA damage response; 
DNA-PK – DNA-dependent protein kinase; 
DSBs – double-strand breaks; SA-β-gal – se-
nescence-associated-β-galactosidase; 
SAHF 
– senescence-associated heterochromatin foci; 
SASP – senescence associated secretory phe-
notype; SIPS – stress-induced premature se-
nescence; TIS – therapy-induced senescence; 
VSMCs – vascular smooth muscle cells
Acknowledgements: We are grateful to Karo-
lina Mosieniak for help with figure illustration.
What is and what is not cell senescence
ABSTRACT
Cell senescence is a process that occurs due to telomere erosion or can be induced by various 
stresses. Senescent cells cease to divide but remain alive, metabolically active and able to se-
crete many molecules. They also show many hallmarks of senescence, such as enlarged size, 
increased granularity, increased activity of SA-β-galactosidase, increased level of cyclin-de-
pendent kinase inhibitors, p16 and p21, and DNA damage foci. Originally, cell senescence was 
attributed to proliferating normal cells, in contrast to cancer cells, which were considered as 
those endowed with indefinite growth ability. Recently, it has become evident that anticancer 
treatment induces senescence in cancer cells. Moreover, certain hallmarks of senescence were 
detected in non-proliferating post-mitotic cells. There are many signalling pathways involved 
in cell senescence, but the most prevalent is the DNA damage response pathway. In this review 
we have summarized our long lasting input in the global study of the mechanisms of senes-
cence of normal and cancer cells and discussed the diversity of the concept of cell senescence.
INTRODUCTION
Human life expectancy (a statistical measure of the average time a human being 
at a given age is expected to live), has increased across the world steadily for nearly 
200 years. During the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the increase in life 
expectancy was driven mainly by improvements in sanitation, housing and educa-
tion, causing a steady decline in early and mid-life mortality, which was mainly 
due to infections. This trend continued with the development of vaccines and then 
antibiotics. Presently, the continuing increase is due almost entirely to a new phe-
nomenon: the decline in late-life mortality [Oeppen & Vaupel 2002]. The number 
of the oldest old centenarians (people who live to or beyond the age of 100 years) is 
expected to increase even faster than just the elderly population and it is predicted 
that one-third of babies born in 2013 in the UK will live up to 100 (http://webarchive.
nationalarchives.gov.uk). Centenarians are the most studied group of the old people 
(the program of Polish centenarians was accomplished some time ago [Mossakows-
ka et al., 2008]) due to their exceptionality in terms of long and relatively healthy life. 
On the other hand, ageing, considered as a decreased fertility and progressive tissue 
deterioration leading to increased mortality, is strictly connected with age-related 
diseases. Such diseases as atherosclerosis, insulin resistance, osteoporosis, osteoar-
thritis, neurodegeneration, cancer and many others will affect the steadily growing 
population of old and very old people. Thus, it is very reasonable to consider age-
ing and age-related diseases as disorders with common biological roots [Franceschi 
et al., 2018]. This raises the question of why and how do we age. There are many 
theories trying to dissect this problem. Generally, the evolutionary theories aim to 
answer the question why we age and mechanistic theories cope with the problem of 
how we age [Sikora 2014]. One such theory falling to the category of mechanistic the-
ories, is based on the assumption that ageing and age-related diseases are the result 
of cell senescence [Sikora et al., 2011; Sikora 2013; Sikora et al., 2014]. Indeed, recently 
this approach has gained very strong support. Namely, preventing cell senescence, 
or eliminating senescent cells by genetic manipulation or treatment of mice with so 
called senolitic drugs, can rejuvenate the organism. The recently just coined new 
term “senotherapy” refers to the process of body rejuvenation by pharmacological 
treatment with senolytic drugs [Childs et al., 2015]. Thus, the question of what ex-
actly is and what is not cell senescence seems to be very actual.
WHAT IS CELL SENESCENCE
The phenomenon of cell senescence was discovered by Hayflick and Moore-
head who were studying human fibroblasts [Hayflick & Moorhead 1961]. Their 
observation was against the paradigm existing at that time, according to which 
both normal and cancer cells were able to grow indefinitely in culture [Bielak-
Zmijewska et al., 2018]. Subsequently, this paradigm was replaced by another 
one stating that normal cells, in contrast to cancer cells, could undergo, a so 

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
111
called, replicative senescence as they had a limited num-
ber of cell divisions. The term “Hayflick limit” was coined 
for the number of population doublings, which cells can 
achieve in the culture. For human fibroblasts it is about 50-
70 divisions. Then the cells remain alive but do not divide. 
After the discovery of telomeres [Blackburn et al., 2006] the 
counter of cell divisions was assigned to telomere erosion, 
due to a phenomenon called the “end-replication problem”, 
which cells experience during DNA replication. Most so-
matic cells, do not have or have very low activity of telom-
erase, the enzyme which is able to elongate telomeres.
Several years ago it became obvious that cells can also 
undergo rapid senescence, which does not rely on telomere 
shortening. This phenomenon was termed stress-induced 
premature senescence-SIPS [Toussaint et al., 2000]. Many 
kinds of stress can induce a quite rapid, irreversible halt of cell 
divisions, which in culture usually takes several days, while 
cells need weeks and even months to undergo replicative 
senescence. Interestingly, also oncogenic viruses, which 
finally cause neoplastic transformation, induce senescence-
associated proliferation arrest, which gained the name of 
oncogene-induced senescence (OIS). The direct inducer 
of this kind of senescence is stress caused by forced DNA 
replication [Bartkova et al., 2010]. Generally, it seems that the 
main culprit of cell senescence is DNA damage, especially 
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs). Subsequently, the signal 
is transduced via DNA damage response (DDR), that is a 
cascade of signaling events, to a stable increase in the cell cycle 
inhibitors, p16 and p21. Senescent cells are arrested in the G1 
or the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. They possess also many 
other hallmarks distinguishing them from proliferating non-
senescent cells. These include: morphological alterations, 
as senescent cells are enlarged and have an irregular shape; 
increased granularity, large but dysfunctional mitochondria 
that produce high levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS); 
compromised nuclear integrity due to the loss of lamin B1, 
which also leads to the appearance of chromatin fragments 
in the cytoplasm; senescence-associated heterochromatin foci 
(SAHF); DNA damage foci detectable as phosphorylated 
histon H2AX (γ-H2AX) and, last but not least, increased 
activity of lysosomal senescence-associated-β-galactosidase 
(SA-β-gal) (Fig. 1). The last one, although not fully specific, 
since it is characteristic also for overgrown quiescent cells 
and macrophages, is the most commonly used marker for 
fast identification of senescent cells. It is of note that senescent 
cells are not dying but, quite the opposite, they are resistant to 
apoptotic cell death and fully active metabolically. They have 
increased secretory activity, known as senescence-associated 
secretory phenotype (SASP). SASP is a very important attribute 
of cell senescence and senescent cells secrete a lot of factors, 
including growth factors, metalloproteinases, chemokines and 
cytokines, which can induce senescence in bystander cells. 
Moreover, SASP, together with cells of the immune system, 
create a so called chronic sterile low grade inflammation state 
(reviewed in [Sikora 2015; Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2018]). All 
these features can be attributed to both replicative and stress-
induced premature senescence (SIPS) in vitro. Interestingly, 
permanent irreparable DNA damage and the subsequent 
DNA damage response (DDR) signaling were detected in cells 
with short telomeres attributed to replicative senescence.
Although the majority of experiments concerning cell se-
nescence have been performed on human fibroblasts grow-
Figure 1. The main markers of cell senescence.

112	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
ing in vitro, replicative and/or stress-induced senescence was 
shown to occur also in many other cells such as keratinocytes, 
melanocyte, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, adipocytes and 
mesenchymal stem cells (reviewed in [Sikora et al., 2014]). 
Interestingly, the number of population doublings in case of 
replicative senescence appear to vary, depending on the cell 
type and cell culture conditions. For example, human peri-
toneal mesothelial cells were found to reach, on average, six 
population doublings before senescence [Ksiazek et al., 2006], 
whereas this number for human vascular smooth muscle 
cells (VSMCs), thoroughly studied by us, exceeded thirty, 
what usually takes several months [Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 
2014]. Interestingly, we have shown that VSMCs undergoing 
replicative senescence are arrested in the G1, but those un-
dergoing SIPS, in the G1 and G2/M phase of the cell cycle. 
Another difference between replicative senescence and SIPS 
concerns mineralization, which is typical only for replicative 
senescence of VSMCs [Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2014].
Some time ago it was postulated that we are ageing due 
to senescence of our cells [Campisi 2001]. This conclusion 
was made by Judith Campisi after discovering in her lab 
that SA- β-gal-positive cells can be found in the skin of the 
elderly but not in that of young people [Dimri et al., 1995]. 
Later on, γ-H2AX foci, the markers of DNA damage, were 
evidenced in the skin of an old baboon [Herbig et al., 2006]. 
From that time, using different set of markers, senescent 
cells were found in human, baboon and mouse skin, among 
human and rodent vascular endothelial and smooth muscle 
cells, in fat tissue, liver [Jeyapalan & Sedivy 2008], skeletal 
muscle of human, rodents and primates [Kreiling et al., 2011] 
and among hematopoietic stem cells [Akunuru & Geiger 
2016]. We have shown an increased number of senescent T 
cells (CD8+CD28-) in aged donors, including centenarians 
[Brzezinska et al., 2004]. Interestingly, we showed that 
women 65+ had less senescent T cells that men of the same 
age [Dudkowska et al., 2017]. Our very early experiments 
(before SA-β-gal assay implementation) indicated differences 
between lymphocytes derived from young and old mice in 
terms of AP-1 transcription factor activity [Sikora et al., 1992a; 
Sikora et al., 1992b].
There is also an experimental evidence of accumula-
tion of senescent cells in tissues related to some patholo-
gies, such as type 2 diabetes, atherosclerosis, hypertension, 
chronic pulmonary disease, cataracts and glaucoma [Naylor 
et al., 2013], diseased kidney [Valentijn et al., 2018] and liver 
[Sheedfar et al., 2013] (Fig. 2). We identified SA-β-gal- posi-
tive cells in human atherosclerotic plaques (unpublished).
Chronic inflammation constitutes an indirect proof of 
senescent cell accumulation in the body with age. It was 
originally assigned to the process of immunesenescence and 
termed inflammaging [Franceschi et al., 2000], but the present 
concept stipulates that the secretory phenotype of senescent 
cells can also create pro-inflammatory conditions. Moreover, 
inflammaging is connected with the emergence of age-related 
disorders, such as cardiovascular disease, neurodegenera-
tion, type 2 diabetes and cancer [Fulop et al., 2017].
However, the real challenge is to assess the number of 
senescent cells in a tissue. Until recently only senescent T cells, 
Figure 2. Scheme presenting the influence of normal and cancer senescent cells on ageing and age-related diseases: IPF – idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, COPD – chronic 
obturatory pulmonary disease, OA – osteoarthritis, AD – Alzheimer disease, CVD – cardiovascular disease, AS – atherosclerosis.

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
113
which are described as CD8+CD28- subpopulation, can be 
easily recognized and quantified by flow cytometry analysis. 
We showed that their number in the population of CD8+ 
cells increased from 20% in young people to almost 60% in 
centenarians [Brzezinska et al., 2004]. Recently, Krizhanovsky’s 
group, by utilizing a technology that combines flow cytometry 
with high content image analysis, has been able to estimate the 
number of senescent cells in tissues of aged mice [Biran et al., 
2017]. Interestingly, the relative number of senescent cells in old 
mice differed depending on the cell/tissue type and reached 
the highest value that is about 14% in adipocytes, which is 
ten times more than in young animals. One can argue that the 
number of senescent cells in the old organism is not very high, 
but it should be remembered that, on one hand, these cells can 
be removed by the immune cells, and that, on the other hand, 
even small population of senescent cells can be detrimental 
due to the low grade inflammation state they create.
Recently, studies of genetically modified mice treated 
with certain senolytic drugs, have delivered very convinc-
ing direct proofs that removal of senescent cells from the 
body led to rejuvenation of the organism (reviewed by 
[Kirkland & Tchkonia 2017]).
DOES CELL SENESCENCE CONCERN CANCER CELLS?
Cell senescence is considered as a barrier to cancer devel-
opment. It was shown, both in vitro and in vivo, that onco-
genic viruses induced senescence in normal cells. Bypassing 
senescence leads to cell immortality and malignancy (re-
viewed in [Sikora et al., 2011]). Cancer cells have mutations in 
genes involved in signaling pathways leading to senescence, 
which allows them to grow indefinitely. Paradoxically, at the 
beginning of this century, it became evident that anticancer 
treatment can induce the state of growth arrest in cancer cells 
together with some other hallmarks of cell senescence [Ron-
inson et al., 2001]. Using many experimental approaches, we 
showed that anticancer treatment of different cancer cells 
led to the expression of the hallmarks of senescence, such as 
growth arrest, altered morphology, increased granularity, 
increased activity of SA-β-gal, SASP and DNA damage [Da-
browska et al., 2009; Sliwinska et al., 2009; Mosieniak et al., 
2012; Mosieniak et al., 2015; Sikora et al., 2016; Was et al., 2017; 
Dabrowska et al., 2018].
Senescence of cancer cells very quickly became a desir-
able outcome of anticancer treatment (and the term therapy-
induced senescence-TIS has been coined), as it is possibly less 
harmful to the patients because of lower doses of therapeutics 
needed to induce cell senescence than cell death. However, 
the initial enthusiasm has recently turned into a more skepti-
cal attitude. Researchers realized that senescent cancer cells, 
due to the secretory phenotype (SASP), can create a favorable 
microenvironment for cancer development. Moreover, it ap-
pears that senescence of cancer cells can be reversible [Saleh 
et al., 2018] and we were one of the first research groups to 
postulate this. Moreover, trying to answer the question about 
the mechanisms of this phenomenon, we have turned our at-
tention to cancer cell polyploidization as a condition which 
can favor senescence escape.
Almost all human tumors display some heterogeneity and 
among the many histopathological features of human solid 
tumors is the presence of bizarre/giant cancer cells with mul-
tiple nuclei of different size (polyploidy). Cancer cells can 
undergo polyploidization upon treatment with both DNA 
damaging agents and those targeting the mitotic checkpoint. 
Induction of polyploidy was considered as a beneficial effect 
of the treatment leading to reduction of clonal growth, cancer 
cell death and positive response to therapy. There is however 
a growing body of evidence showing that polyploidization 
of cancer cells can lead to cancer renewal as polyploid cancer 
cells can give aneuploid or near diploid progeny capable of 
undergoing normal mitosis [Sliwinska et al., 2009; Erenpreisa 
et al., 2011]. This makes particularly interesting the question 
of the irreversibility of cancer cell senescence in the context 
of their polyploidization [Mosieniak & Sikora 2010]. Indeed, 
our data show that only those cancer cells, which became 
polyploid upon senescence-inducing treatment, can undergo 
atypical cell divisions and give rise to fully proliferation-
competent progeny [Sliwinska et al., 2009; Mosieniak et al., 
2015; Was et al., 2017]. Our still unpublished results of ex-
periments, performed on many cancer cell lines treated with 
clinically used anticancer chemotherapeutics, support this 
notion. It was postulated that the progeny of polyploid can-
cer cells, which arises as a consequence of atypical cell divi-
sions, namely, a sort of cell budding, possesses the feature of 
stemness (reviewed in [Sikora et al., 2016]). The occurrence of 
cell senescence during cancer cell treatment and its contribu-
tion to ageing of the organisms is presented in figure 2.
The cancer stem cell (CSC) concept was proposed four dec-
ades ago and states that tumor growth, analogous to the renew-
al of healthy tissues, is fueled by small numbers of dedicated 
stem cells. It has gradually become clear that many tumors har-
bor CSCs [Batlle & Clevers 2017], but can there be a connection 
between senescent and stem cancer cells? This intriguing ques-
tion is still awaiting elucidation; there are however, some data 
already emerging indicating that polyploid cancer cells arising 
after treatment with anticancer drugs, can possess markers of 
senescence and stemness at the same time [Erenpreisa & Cragg 
2013]. Currently, in cooperation with Jekaterina Erenpreisa, we 
are dealing with this fascinating issue.
AUTOPHAGY AND SENESCENCE
Autophagy is an evolutionarily conserved catabolic 
program for the degradation of subcellular elements through 
lysosomal proteolysis, which generally serves as a pro-survival 
mechanism that operates by recycling the cellular components. 
A characteristic morphological and functional feature of 
autophagy is the formation of autophagosomes, which fuse 
with lysosomes wherein their cargo is degraded and recycled. 
Autophagy is distinct from apoptosis and other cell death 
modes; it can, however, lead to cell demise. The question is 
about the connection between autophagy and senescence. In 
their seminal work Young et al., have shown that autophagy is 
activated upon acute induction of senescence and contributes to 
the establishment of senescence [Young et al., 2009]. In general, 
the relation between autophagy and senescence is unclear. 
Based on the review of literature, Gewirtz [Gewirtz 2013] 
points that it is difficult to judge whether these two processes 

114	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
are dependent or occur collaterally but independently. We 
showed that pulse treatment of breast cancer cells with a tacrine-
melatonin hybrid immediately induced autophagy, followed 
by autophagic flux inhibition and subsequent cell survival, 
with 20% of cells entering the senescence state [Kucharewicz et 
al., 2018]. In turn, senescence of HCT116 cancer cells induced by 
curcumin was accompanied by autophagy; inhibition of one of 
the autophagic genes, ATG5, by RNAi, decreased the number 
of senescent cells [Mosieniak et al., 2012]. In other studies we 
have shown that inhibition of autophagy by bafilomycin A1, 
in cancer cells induced to senesce, led to cell proliferation [Was 
et al., 2017]. Apart from the results showing that inhibition of 
autophagy compromises (or at least delays) senescence, there 
are studies showing the reverse effect, namely, that inhibition 
of autophagy promotes the senescent phenotype. Thus, even if 
the number of data regarding this issue is constantly growing, 
the picture is not getting clearer, but even more complicated. In 
cancer cells there seems to be an interplay between polyploidy, 
senescence, autophagy and stemness, all of which participate 
in cancer cell repopulation.
DNA DAMAGE RESPONSE AND CELL SENESCENCE
Many molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways in-
volved in cell senescence have been recognized [de Magal-
haes & Passos 2018]. Their components frequently serve as 
markers of cell senescence. DNA damage response, induced 
mainly by DNA double strand breaks-DSBs, seems to be the 
most universal signaling pathway involved in senescence of 
normal and cancer cells [Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2018] and 
γ-H2AX, the main sensor of DSBs, is one of the most univer-
sal markers of cell senescence.
It was shown that during replicative senescence fibro-
blasts accumulate proteins involved in DDR at telomeric 
regions [d’Adda di Fagagna et al., 2003]. Senescence in-
duced by stress is not driven by the shortening of telomeres 
per se, but shortening of telomeres can accompany it. We 
have shown that replicatively, but not prematurely (i.e. un-
dergoing SIPS), senescing human vascular smooth muscle 
cells have shorter telomeres [Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2014]. 
However, SIPS can affect the level of the shelterin proteins, 
which protect the structure of telomeres. We have shown 
that the level of the main shelterins, namely TRF1 and TRF2, 
decreased gradually during a seven-day culture, starting 
from 24h after SIPS induction [unpublished]. SIPS is initially 
characterized by DNA damage, which occurs randomly all 
over the genome and is followed by activation of DDR. As 
the senescent phenotype develops, most of the DNA dam-
age at telomeric regions remains unrepaired, thus contribut-
ing to a persistent DNA damage response characteristic for 
cell senescence. Moreover, permanent DNA damage is in-
dispensable for developing senescence-associated secretory 
phenotype-SASP [de Magalhaes & Passos 2018].
DNA damage response starts with DNA double-strand 
breaks which are sensed by specialized complexes that 
recruit and activate protein kinases from the PIKK (phos-
phatidylinositol 3-kinase-related kinases) family. These are: 
ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated), ATR (ataxia telangiec-
tasia and Rad3-related) and, possibly, DNA-PK (DNA-de-
pendent protein kinase). Activated ATM kinase, which was 
recognized as the main kinase involved in DNA damage re-
sponse of senescent cells, phosphorylates nibrin (NBS1) and 
histone H2AX, (γH2AX). Ultimately, Chk1, Chk2 (check-
point kinase 1 and 2, respectively) and p53 are activated. 
p53 promotes senescence (when DNA damage is irrepara-
ble) via transactivation of CDKN1A gene, which encodes 
the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p21 [Kobayashi et al., 
2002; d’Adda di Fagagna 2008].
Our results show that both replicative senescence and 
SIPS induced by doxorubicin (anticancer agent) or H2O2 in 
human VSMCs were characterized by increased incidence 
of DSBs and DDR activation with p21 protein level increase 
[Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2014; Przybylska et al., 2016]. Inter-
estingly, we showed that also curcumin induced DDR-de-
pendent senescence in cancer cells [Mosieniak et al., 2016]. It 
was quite unexpected as our previous studies showed that 
curcumin was not able to cause DNA damage [Mosieniak et 
al., 2006; Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2010; Korwek et al., 2013; 
Grabowska et al., 2015]. The explanation for this apparent 
discrepancy is that curcumin can induce DNA damage and 
DNA damage response not directly, but rather by mitotic 
disturbances [Mosieniak et al., 2016].
It seems however, that DNA damage can evoke cell se-
nescence even when DDR is not fully activated due to muta-
tions in genes encoding the effector proteins that may occur 
in cancer and non-cancer cells. In fact, we documented this 
for HCT116 p53-deficient cancer cells [Mosieniak et al., 2012; 
Strzeszewska et al., 2018] and for an immortal line of lympho-
cytes derived from a patient with Nijmegen Breakage Syn-
drome (NBS) caused by mutation in the nibrin gene [Alster 
et al., 2014]. In normal VSMCs undergoing curcumin-induced 
senescence we showed activation of ATM but, unexpectedly, 
ATM silencing had no effect on cell senescence [Grabowska 
et al., 2015]. This implies that even if activated, ATM is not the 
crucial for transducing the signal for cell senescing. Indeed, 
our recent results led us to the conclusion that ATR, but not 
ATM kinase, is crucial for the onset of senescence in HCT 116 
cells [Strzeszewska et al., 2018]. However, ATR does not play 
important role in curcumin-induced senescence of VSMCs 
(submitted), which indicates cell senescence diversity.
Interestingly, it was shown that persistent activation of 
DNA damage response is maintained by ROS production and 
Figure 3. Progress in the understanding of the process of cell senescence in terms 
of the type (replicative and SIPS) and cell (normal proliferating cell, cancer cells 
and post-mitotic cells) context.

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
115
that dysfunctional mitochondria are the main ROS producers 
[Correia-Melo et al., 2016; Herranz & Gil 2016]. Dysfunction 
of mitochondria can be caused by upregulation of NADPH 
oxidase (NOX4), which induces senescence in human 
endothelial cells as reported by Koziel et al. [Koziel et al., 2013]. 
Conversely, we have observed a decreased level of NOX4 
in senescent VSMCs and shown that silencing of NOX4 can 
evoke senescence with the reduction of ROS level and without 
induction of DDR [Przybylska et al., 2016]. These results show 
that stress evoked both by an increase or decrease of ROS can 
induce cell senescence, and that DNA damage is linked to ROS 
induction. Altogether, our results indicate that, regarding the 
involvement of DDR in cell senescence, different scenarios 
can be envisaged. Simplifying, the classical ATM-p53-p21 
signaling pathway can be engaged, ATM can be replaced by 
ATR, p53 may be omitted, DDR does not have to be activated.
CURCUMIN AND CELL SENESCENCE
Curcumin is a polyphenol derived from Curcuma longa. 
Our interest in curcumin as a potential anticancer compound 
started as early as 25 years ago. Since that time we have pub-
lished several papers revealing the mechanism of cell death 
induced by this natural compound (e.g. [Jaruga et al., 1998; 
Piwocka et al., 1999; Bielak-Zmijewska et al., 2000; Piwocka et 
al., 2001; Piwocka et al., 2002; Magalska et al., 2006a; Magal-
ska et al., 2006b; Mosieniak et al., 2006; Wolanin et al., 2006]). 
A plethora of reports describe curcumin as a beneficial 
agent having anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, pro-apoptot-
ic, chemopreventive, chemotherapeutic, antiproliferative, 
wound healing and other properties. Animal studies have 
suggested that curcumin may be active against a wide range 
of human diseases, including diabetes, obesity, neurological 
and psychiatric disorders and cancer, as well as chronic ill-
nesses affecting the eyes, lungs, liver, kidneys and gastroin-
testinal and cardiovascular systems (e.g. [Gupta et al., 2012]). 
Accordingly, we have postulated that curcumin can act as an 
anti-ageing agent [Salvioli et al., 2007; Sikora et al., 2010]. Ac-
tually, some studies have shown that curcumin elongates the 
lifespan and healthspan of model organisms such as Drosoph-
ila melanogaster, Cenorabdithis elegans and even mouse [Liao et 
al., 2011]. It seemed quite obvious to us that curcumin should 
protect cells against senescence or, at least, postpone it when 
used in concentration lower than that inducing apoptosis. It 
appeared not to be the case. However, we have revealed that 
low doses of curcumin elevated the level of sirtuins, which 
normally declines in senescing cells [Grabowska et al., 2017]. 
Sirtuins possess either mono-ADP ribosyltransferase or dea-
cetylase activity. It has been documented that sirtuins play 
a key role during cell response to a variety of stresses, such 
as oxidative or genotoxic stress, and are crucial for cell me-
tabolism. Although some data put in question direct involve-
ment of sirtuins in extending human lifespan, it was shown 
that proper lifestyle, including physical activity and diet, can 
influence healthspan via increasing the level of sirtuins. For 
this reason sirtuins are sometimes called “ proteins of youth” 
(reviewed in [Grabowska et al., 2017]).
Paradoxically, we have revealed that curcumin, in a 
certain range of concentrations, induced senescence by 
itself in both normal (VSMCs) and cancer (HCT116) cells 
[Mosieniak et al., 2012; Grabowska et al., 2015; Mosieniak et 
al., 2016]. Curcumin possesses pleiotropic activity and may 
influence many signaling pathways. This is also reflected 
in its ability to activate different mechanisms of senescence 
(Grabowska et al., unpublished results).
SENESCENCE OF NEURONS
The term cell senescence is generally attributed to prolifer-
ating cells as, per definition, senescence is a cessation of cell 
divisions. However, there are a few studies, including ours, 
showing increased activity of SA-β-gal in long term cultures 
of postmitotic neurons and in murine brains ([Piechota et 
al., 2016] and literature there). We were interested whether 
also other markers of senescence are present in cultured rat 
cortical neurons and if the DNA damage response signaling 
pathway is active. It turned out that the basal level of DNA 
damage foci and of some key proteins of DDR increased only 
negligibly with time, which indicates that they could not be 
considered as crucial for neuronal senescence. Moreover, in-
duction of DNA damage in neurons did not strengthen, but 
on the contrary, alleviated the activity of SA-β-gal.
In order to shed more light on neuronal senescence in vitro, 
we studied the level of neuronal REST, which is a protein char-
acteristic for aging brain and is known to promote expression 
of anti-apoptotic and antioxidant genes [Lu et al., 2014]. To our 
knowledge, we were the first to describe late induction of nu-
clear REST in neurons [Piechota et al., 2016] and we think that 
we have identified a specific marker of neuronal senescence 
in vitro. REST upregulation occurred in neuronal cultures that 
also exhibited higher level of IL-6 mRNA than early day cul-
tures. Increase in IL-6 indicates development of a pro-inflam-
matory environment, which can foster pro-aging changes in 
cells. Primary source of IL-6 in the brain are astrocytes [Gruol 
2015]. Therefore, in long-term neuronal cultures IL-6 mRNA 
upregulation could result from an increasing number of astro-
cytes. However, neurons can also produce IL-6 under certain 
conditions [Tsakiri et al., 2008] and it cannot be excluded that 
aging neurons could also contribute to the observed increase in 
IL-6 mRNA. Thus, it seems that postmitotic cells such as neu-
rons display some features of cell senescence that are typical 
for proliferation-competent cells. Fig.3 outlines the progress in 
the understanding of the process of cell senescence in terms of 
the type (replicative and SIPS) and cell (normal proliferating 
cell, cancer cells and post-mitotic cells) context.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Recently, a great progress has been made in the field of 
cell senescence and not surprisingly, it has emerged that the 
process is much more complex than it seemed to be a few 
decades ago. Accordingly, based on our research, as well as 
data obtained by others, we postulate that it is time to update 
the so far prevailing paradigms concerning cell senescence:
•	 senescence is an attribute of normal proliferating 
cells; in contrast, cancer cells escape senescence and 
become immortal. However, cancer cells exposed to a 
stress inducer (anticancer treatment) become arrested in 
the cell cycle (due to the increased level of p21 rather 
than p16, as silencing of p16 gene promoter by DNA 
methylation is common in the majority of cancer cells), 

116	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
have increased activity of SA-β-gal, activated DDR even 
despite p53 mutation, altered morphology and secre-
tory phenotype. Based on these phenomena a compel-
ling picture emerges showing that also cancer cells can 
undergo stress-induced premature senescence.
•	 senescence is a process defined by cessation of prolif-
eration of mitotic (dividing) cells. Although the study 
of senescence of post-mitotic cells is in its infancy and the 
data are scarce, we showed that some markers charac-
teristic for senescence of mitotic cells can be applied also 
to post-mitotic neurons both in vivo and in vitro. At this 
point, the usefulness of SA-β-gal (a dramatic increase in 
activity of which we observed in long lasting culture of 
neurons) as a marker of cell senescence comes into ques-
tion, as the enzyme is also present in quiescent cells. In 
our opinion, as far as increased activity of SA-β-gal re-
flects altered function of lysosomes in senescent cells (this 
needs to be elucidated), it can be considered a candidate 
to mark cell senescence. We think that cell senescence 
may refer also to post-mitotic cells.
•	  cessation of cell division is irreversible in cells which 
achieved the state of senescence. Although this problem 
has emerged in the context of cancer cell senescence, it 
seems that it also refers to senescence of normal cells. Name-
ly, some convincing data show that normal senescent fibro-
blasts (Walen 2008) and epithelial cells (Garbe et al., 2007) 
can re-gain the ability to proliferate. We have shown that T 
cells, considered as senescent (CD8+28-) when derived from 
centenarians, maintain the ability to proliferate (Brzezinska 
et al., 2004). Thus, we postulate that senescence is a perma-
nent (but not irreversible) growth arrest, which under some 
circumstances can be reversed. Summing up, the process 
of cell senescence is not only much more complex but also 
more heterogeneous than it seemed to be at the dawn of the 
studies. The phenotype of senescent cell is dynamic, chang-
ing in time and characteristic for the particular phase of se-
nescence as well as the cell type, stimuli and cellular context. 
In contrast to autophagy or apoptosis, in which specific “au-
tophagic” or “apoptotic” genes are involved, respectively, 
there are no genes specific for senescence. Cell senescence 
has to be perceived as a consequence of interactions of spe-
cific signaling pathways (involved also in e.g. DNA damage 
repair, temporal cell cycle arrest, secretion) and metabolic 
remodeling, which altogether give a specific phenotype dis-
tinct from cell quiescence, cell differentiation or cell death. 
Moreover, under some circumstances cell senescence can be 
reversed, proving that it is not necessarily the ultimate end-
point of the cell fate.
Importantly, senescent cells accumulate in tissues during 
ageing. Moreover, they may be the cause of ageing and age-
related diseases as their elimination results in a prolonga-
tion of health span. However, it seems that the process per 
se, especially the stress-induced premature senescence-SIPS, 
which can take place in any time of life, has nothing to do 
with ageing understood as getting older. Moreover, pro-
grammed senescence which takes place during embryonic 
development [Munoz-Espin et al., 2013] and cell senescence 
observed during wound healing in the post developmental 
period may be beneficial [Demaria et al., 2014].
We are proud that we could contribute to the develop-
ment of such a fascinating field of biology, which we be-
lieve, adds even more splendor to the one hundred years of 
history of the Nencki Institute.
REFERENCES
Akunuru S, Geiger H (2016) Aging, clonality, and rejuvenation of hemat-
opoietic stem cells. Trends Mol Med 22: 701-712
Alster O, Bielak-Zmijewska A, Mosieniak G, Moreno-Villanueva M, Dud-
ka-Ruszkowska W, Wojtala A, Kusio-Kobialka M, Korwek Z, Burkle 
A, Piwocka K, Siwicki JK, Sikora E (2014) The role of nibrin in doxo-
rubicin-induced apoptosis and cell senescence in Nijmegen Breakage 
Syndrome patients lymphocytes. PLoS One 9, e104964
Bartkova J, Hamerlik P, Stockhausen MT, Ehrmann J, Hlobilkova A, 
Laursen H, Kalita O, Kolar Z, Poulsen HS, Broholm H, Lukas J, Bartek 
J (2010) Replication stress and oxidative damage contribute to aberrant 
constitutive activation of DNA damage signalling in human gliomas. 
Oncogene 29: 5095-5102
Batlle E, Clevers H (2017) Cancer stem cells revisited. Nat Med 23: 1124-
1134
Bielak-Zmijewska A, Koronkiewicz M, Skierski J, Piwocka K, Radzisze-
wska E, Sikora E (2000) Effect of curcumin on the apoptosis of rodent 
and human nonproliferating and proliferating lymphoid cells. Nutr 
Cancer 38: 131-138
Bielak-Zmijewska A, Mosieniak G, Sikora E (2018) Is DNA damage indis-
pensable for stress-induced senescence? Mech Ageing Dev 170: 13-21
Bielak-Zmijewska A, Sikora-Polaczek M, Nieznanski K, Mosieniak G, 
Kolano A, Maleszewski M, Styrna J, Sikora E (2010) Curcumin dis-
rupts meiotic and mitotic divisions via spindle impairment and inhibi-
tion of CDK1 activity. Cell Prolif 43: 354-364
Bielak-Zmijewska A, Wnuk M, Przybylska D, Grabowska W, Lewinska 
A, Alster O, Korwek Z, Cmoch A, Myszka A, Pikula S, Mosieniak G, 
Sikora E (2014) A comparison of replicative senescence and doxoru-
bicin-induced premature senescence of vascular smooth muscle cells 
isolated from human aorta. Biogerontology 15: 47-64
Biran A, Zada L, Abou Karam P, Vadai E, Roitman L, Ovadya Y, Porat Z, 
Krizhanovsky V (2017) Quantitative identification of senescent cells in 
aging and disease. Aging Cell 16: 661-671
Blackburn EH, Greider CW, Szostak JW (2006) Telomeres and telomerase: 
the path from maize, Tetrahymena and yeast to human cancer and ag-
ing. Nat Med 12: 1133-1138
Brzezinska A, Magalska A, Szybinska A, Sikora E (2004) Proliferation and 
apoptosis of human CD8(+)CD28(+) and CD8(+)CD28(-) lymphocytes 
during aging. Exp Gerontol 39: 539-544
Campisi J (2001) From cells to organisms: can we learn about aging from 
cells in culture? Exp Gerontol 36: 607-618
Childs BG, Durik M, Baker DJ, van Deursen JM (2015) Cellular senescence 
in aging and age-related disease: from mechanisms to therapy. Nat 
Med 21: 1424-1435
Correia-Melo C, Marques FD, Anderson R, Hewitt G, Hewitt R, Cole J, 
Carroll BM, Miwa S, Birch J, Merz A, Rushton MD, Charles M, Jurk 
D, Tait SW, Czapiewski R, Greaves L, Nelson G, Bohlooly YM, Rodri-
guez-Cuenca S, Vidal-Puig A, Mann D, Saretzki G, Quarato G, Green 
DR, Adams PD, von Zglinicki T, Korolchuk VI, Passos JF (2016) Mito-
chondria are required for pro-ageing features of the senescent pheno-
type. EMBO J 35: 724-742
d’Adda di Fagagna F (2008) Living on a break: cellular senescence as a 
DNA-damage response. Nat Rev Cancer 8: 512-522
d’Adda di Fagagna F, Reaper PM, Clay-Farrace L, Fiegler H, Carr P, Von 
Zglinicki T, Saretzki G, Carter NP, Jackson SP (2003) A DNA damage 
checkpoint response in telomere-initiated senescence. Nature 426: 194-
198
Dabrowska M, Mosieniak G, Skierski J, Sikora E, Rode W (2009) Metho-
trexate-induced senescence in human adenocarcinoma cells is accom-
panied by induction of p21(waf1/cip1) expression and lack of poly-
ploidy. Cancer Lett 284: 95-101

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
117
Dabrowska M, Uram L, Zielinski Z, Rode W, Sikora E (2018) Oxidative 
stress and inhibition of nitric oxide generation underlie methotrexate-
induced senescence in human colon cancer cells. Mech Ageing Dev 
170: 22-29
de Magalhaes JP, Passos JF (2018) Stress, cell senescence and organismal 
ageing. Mech Ageing Dev 170: 2-9
Demaria M, Ohtani N, Youssef SA, Rodier F, Toussaint W, Mitchell JR, La-
berge RM, Vijg J, Van Steeg H, Dolle ME, Hoeijmakers JH, de Bruin A, 
Hara E, Campisi J (2014) An essential role for senescent cells in optimal 
wound healing through secretion of PDGF-AA. Dev Cell 31: 722-733
Dimri GP, Lee X, Basile G, Acosta M, Scott G, Roskelley C, Medrano EE, 
Linskens M, Rubelj I, Pereira-Smith O, et al., (1995) A biomarker that 
identifies senescent human cells in culture and in aging skin in vivo. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 92: 9363-9367
Dudkowska M, Janiszewska D, Karpa A, Broczek K, Dabrowski M, Sikora 
E (2017) The role of gender and labour status in immunosenescence of 
65+ Polish population. Biogerontology 18: 581-590
Erenpreisa J, Cragg MS (2013) Three steps to the immortality of cancer 
cells: senescence, polyploidy and self-renewal. Cancer Cell Int 13: 92
Erenpreisa J, Salmina K, Huna A, Kosmacek EA, Cragg MS, Ianzini F, 
Anisimov AP (2011) Polyploid tumour cells elicit paradiploid progeny 
through depolyploidizing divisions and regulated autophagic degra-
dation. Cell Biol Int 35: 687-695
Franceschi C, Bonafe M, Valensin S, Olivieri F, De Luca M, Ottaviani E, 
De Benedictis G (2000) Inflamm-aging. An evolutionary perspective 
on immunosenescence. Ann N Y Acad Sci 908: 244-254
Franceschi C, Garagnani P, Morsiani C, Conte M, Santoro A, Grignolio 
A, Monti D, Capri M, Salvioli S (2018) The continuum of aging and 
age-related diseases: Common mechanisms but different rates. Front 
Med 5: 61
Fulop T, Larbi A, Dupuis G, Le Page A, Frost EH, Cohen AA, Witkowski 
JM, Franceschi C (2017) Immunosenescence and inflamm-aging as two 
sides of the same coin: Friends or foes? Front Immunol 8: 1960
Garbe JC, Holst CR, Bassett E, Tlsty T, Stampfer MR (2007) Inactivation 
of p53 function in cultured human mammary epithelial cells turns the 
telomere-length dependent senescence barrier from agonescence into 
crisis. Cell Cycle 6: 1927-1936
Gewirtz DA (2013) Autophagy and senescence: a partnership in search of 
definition. Autophagy 9: 808-812
Grabowska W, Kucharewicz K, Wnuk M, Lewinska A, Suszek M, Przyb-
ylska D, Mosieniak G, Sikora E, Bielak-Zmijewska A (2015) Curcumin 
induces senescence of primary human cells building the vasculature in 
a DNA damage and ATM-independent manner. Age (Dordr) 37: 9744
Grabowska W, Sikora E, Bielak-Zmijewska A (2017) Sirtuins, a promising 
target in slowing down the ageing process. Biogerontology 18: 447-476
Gruol DL (2015) IL-6 regulation of synaptic function in the CNS. Neurop-
harmacology 96: 42-54
Gupta SC, Patchva S, Koh W, Aggarwal BB (2012) Discovery of curcumin, 
a component of golden spice, and its miraculous biological activities. 
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 39: 283-299
Hayflick L, Moorhead PS (1961) The serial cultivation of human diploid 
cell strains. Exp Cell Res 25: 585-621
Herbig U, Ferreira M, Condel L, Carey D, Sedivy JM (2006) Cellular senes-
cence in aging primates. Science 311: 1257
Herranz N, Gil J (2016) Mitochondria and senescence: new actors for an 
old play. EMBO J 35: 701-702
Jaruga E, Salvioli S, Dobrucki J, Chrul S, Bandorowicz-Pikula J, Sikora E, 
Franceschi C, Cossarizza A, Bartosz G (1998) Apoptosis-like, revers-
ible changes in plasma membrane asymmetry and permeability, and 
transient modifications in mitochondrial membrane potential induced 
by curcumin in rat thymocytes. FEBS Lett 433: 287-293
Jeyapalan JC, Sedivy JM (2008) Cellular senescence and organismal aging. 
Mech Ageing Dev 129: 467-474
Kirkland JL, Tchkonia T (2017) Cellular Senescence: A Translational Per-
spective. EBioMedicine 21: 21-28
Kobayashi J, Tauchi H, Sakamoto S, Nakamura A, Morishima K, Matsu-
ura S, Kobayashi T, Tamai K, Tanimoto K, Komatsu K (2002) NBS1 lo-
calizes to gamma-H2AX foci through interaction with the FHA/BRCT 
domain. Curr Biol 12: 1846-1851
Korwek Z, Bielak-Zmijewska A, Mosieniak G, Alster O, Moreno-Villanue-
va M, Burkle A, Sikora E (2013) DNA damage-independent apoptosis 
induced by curcumin in normal resting human T cells and leukaemic 
Jurkat cells. Mutagenesis 28: 411-416
Koziel R, Pircher H, Kratochwil M, Lener B, Hermann M, Dencher NA, 
Jansen-Durr P (2013) Mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I is in-
activated by NADPH oxidase Nox4. Biochem J 452: 231-239
Kreiling JA, Tamamori-Adachi M, Sexton AN, Jeyapalan JC, Munoz-Na-
jar U, Peterson AL, Manivannan J, Rogers ES, Pchelintsev NA, Ad-
ams PD, Sedivy JM (2011) Age-associated increase in heterochromatic 
marks in murine and primate tissues. Aging Cell 10: 292-304
Ksiazek K, Piwocka K, Brzezinska A, Sikora E, Zabel M, Breborowicz 
A, Jorres A, Witowski J (2006) Early loss of proliferative potential of 
human peritoneal mesothelial cells in culture: the role of p16INK4a-
mediated premature senescence. J Appl Physiol 100: 988-995
Kucharewicz K, Dudkowska M, Zawadzka A, Ogrodnik M, Szczepank-
iewicz AA, Czarnocki Z, Sikora E (2018) Simultaneous induction and 
blockade of autophagy by a single agent. Cell Death Dis 9: 353
Liao VH, Yu CW, Chu YJ, Li WH, Hsieh YC, Wang TT (2011) Curcumin-
mediated lifespan extension in Caenorhabditis elegans. Mech Ageing 
Dev 132: 480-487
Lu T, Aron L, Zullo J, Pan Y, Kim H, Chen Y, Yang TH, Kim HM, Drake 
D, Liu XS, Bennett DA, Colaiacovo MP, Yankner BA (2014) REST and 
stress resistance in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease. Nature 507: 448-
454
Magalska A, Brzezinska A, Bielak-Zmijewska A, Piwocka K, Mosieniak 
G, Sikora E (2006a) Curcumin induces cell death without oligonu-
cleosomal DNA fragmentation in quiescent and proliferating human 
CD8+ cells. Acta Biochim Pol 53: 531-538
Magalska A, Sliwinska M, Szczepanowska J, Salvioli S, Franceschi C, 
Sikora E (2006b) Resistance to apoptosis of HCW-2 cells can be over-
come by curcumin- or vincristine-induced mitotic catastrophe. Int J 
Cancer 119: 1811-1818
Mosieniak G, Adamowicz M, Alster O, Jaskowiak H, Szczepankiewicz 
AA, Wilczynski GM, Ciechomska IA, Sikora E (2012) Curcumin induc-
es permanent growth arrest of human colon cancer cells: link between 
senescence and autophagy. Mech Ageing Dev 133: 444-455
Mosieniak G, Sikora E (2010) Polyploidy: the link between senescence and 
cancer. Curr Pharm Des 16: 734-740
Mosieniak G, Sliwinska M, Piwocka K, Sikora E (2006) Curcumin abol-
ishes apoptosis resistance of calcitriol-differentiated HL-60 cells. FEBS 
Lett 580: 4653-4660
Mosieniak G, Sliwinska MA, Alster O, Strzeszewska A, Sunderland P, 
Piechota M, Was H, Sikora E (2015) Polyploidy formation in doxoru-
bicin-treated cancer cells can favor escape from senescence. Neoplasia 
17: 882-893
Mosieniak G, Sliwinska MA, Przybylska D, Grabowska W, Sunderland 
P, Bielak-Zmijewska A, Sikora E (2016) Curcumin-treated cancer cells 
show mitotic disturbances leading to growth arrest and induction of 
senescence phenotype. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 74: 33-43
Mossakowska M, Barcikowska M, Broczek K, Grodzicki T, Klich-Raczka 
A, Kupisz-Urbanska M, Podsiadly-Marczykowska T, Sikora E, Szybin-
ska A, Wieczorowska-Tobis K, Zyczkowska J, Kuznicki J (2008) Polish 
Centenarians Programme. Multidisciplinary studies of successful age-
ing: aims, methods, and preliminary results. Exp Gerontol 43: 238-244
Munoz-Espin D, Canamero M, Maraver A, Gomez-Lopez G, Contreras J, 
Murillo-Cuesta S, Rodriguez-Baeza A, Varela-Nieto I, Ruberte J, Col-
lado M, Serrano M (2013) Programmed cell senescence during mam-
malian embryonic development. Cell 155: 1104-1118
Naylor RM, Baker DJ, van Deursen JM (2013) Senescent cells: a novel 
therapeutic target for aging and age-related diseases. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther 93: 105-116
Oeppen J, Vaupel JW (2002) Demography. Broken limits to life expectan-
cy. Science 296: 1029-1031

118	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
Czym jest i czym nie jest starzenie komórki?
Ewa Sikora, Anna Bielak-Żmijewska, Grażyna Mosieniak
Pracownia Molekularnych Podstaw Starzenia, Instytut Biologii Doświadczalnej im. Marcelego Nenckiego Polskiej Akademii Nauk,  
ul. Pasteura 3, 02-093 Warszawa
e-mail: e.sikora@nencki.gov.pl
Słowa kluczowe: starzenie, uszkodzenia DNA, nowotwór, telomery
STRESZCZENIE
Starzenie komórki jest procesem, który zachodzi pod wpływem skracania się telomerów lub może być indukowane stresem. Stare komórki 
przestają się dzielić, lecz pozostają aktywne metabolicznie i wydzielają do środowiska wiele różnych cząsteczek. Wykazują też markery 
starzenia, takie jak powiększone rozmiary i zwiększona ziarnistość, zwiększona aktywność β-galaktozydazy związanej ze starzeniem, pod-
wyższony poziom inhibitorów cyklino-zależnych kinaz, p16 i p21 oraz skupiska uszkodzeń DNA. Chociaż znanych jest wiele ścieżek sy-
gnałowych związanych ze starzeniem, to jednak najpowszechniejsza jest ścieżka indukowana uszkodzeniami DNA. Początkowo starzenie 
komórki uznawane było za atrybut prawidłowych komórek dzielących się, co odróżnia je od komórek nowotworowych nie mających limitu 
podziałów. Ostatnio udowodniono, że terapia przeciwnowotworowa indukuje starzenie komórek nowotworowych. Co więcej, występowanie 
pewnych markerów starzenia wykazano w niedzielących się post-mitotycznych komórkach. Artykuł ten przedstawia wkład naszego zespołu 
w badania procesu starzenia komórkowego oraz zwraca uwagę na różnorodność przebiegu tego procesu.
Piechota M, Sunderland P, Wysocka A, Nalberczak M, Sliwinska MA, 
Radwanska K, Sikora E (2016) Is senescence-associated beta-galactosi-
dase a marker of neuronal senescence? Oncotarget 7: 81099-81109
Piwocka K, Bielak-Zmijewska A, Sikora E (2002) Curcumin induces 
caspase-3-independent apoptosis in human multidrug-resistant cells. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 973: 250-254
Piwocka K, Jaruga E, Skierski J, Gradzka I, Sikora E (2001) Effect of glu-
tathione depletion on caspase-3 independent apoptosis pathway in-
duced by curcumin in Jurkat cells. Free Radic Biol Med 31: 670-678
Piwocka K, Zablocki K, Wieckowski MR, Skierski J, Feiga I, Szopa J, Drela 
N, Wojtczak L, Sikora E (1999) A novel apoptosis-like pathway, inde-
pendent of mitochondria and caspases, induced by curcumin in hu-
man lymphoblastoid T (Jurkat) cells. Exp Cell Res 249: 299-307
Przybylska D, Janiszewska D, Gozdzik A, Bielak-Zmijewska A, Sunder-
land P, Sikora E, Mosieniak G (2016) NOX4 downregulation leads 
to senescence of human vascular smooth muscle cells. Oncotarget 7: 
66429-66443
Roninson IB, Broude EV, Chang BD (2001) If not apoptosis, then what? 
Treatment-induced senescence and mitotic catastrophe in tumor cells. 
Drug Resist Updat 4: 303-313
Saleh T, Tyutynuk-Massey L, Cudjoe EK, Jr., Idowu MO, Landry JW, 
Gewirtz DA (2018) Non-cell autonomous effects of the senescence-
associated secretory phenotype in cancer therapy. Front Oncol 8: 164
Salvioli S, Sikora E, Cooper EL, Franceschi C (2007) Curcumin in cell 
death processes: a challenge for CAM of age-related pathologies. Evid 
Based Complement Alternat Med 4: 181-190
Sheedfar F, Di Biase S, Koonen D, Vinciguerra M (2013) Liver diseases and 
aging: friends or foes? Aging Cell 12: 950-954
Sikora E (2013) Rejuvenation of senescent cells-the road to postponing hu-
man aging and age-related disease? Exp Gerontol 48: 661-666
Sikora E (2014) [Aging and longevity]. Postepy Biochem 60: 125-137
Sikora E (2015) Activation-induced and damage-induced cell death in ag-
ing human T cells. Mech Ageing Dev 151: 85-92
Sikora E, Arendt T, Bennett M, Narita M (2011) Impact of cellular 
senescence signature on ageing research. Ageing Res Rev 10: 146-152
Sikora E, Bielak-Zmijewska A, Mosieniak G (2014) Cellular senescence 
in ageing, age-related disease and longevity. Curr Vasc Pharmacol 5: 
698-706
Sikora E, Kaminska B, Kaczmarek L (1992a) Formation of AP1 transcrip-
tional complex in concanavalin A-stimulated splenocytes derived 
from young and old mice. Ann N Y Acad Sci 663: 458-459
Sikora E, Kaminska B, Radziszewska E, Kaczmarek L (1992b) Loss of tran-
scription factor AP-1 DNA binding activity during lymphocyte aging 
in vivo. FEBS Lett 312: 179-182
Sikora E, Mosieniak G, Sliwinska MA (2016) Morphological and func-
tional characteristic of senescent cancer cells. Curr Drug Targets 17: 
377-387
Sikora E, Scapagnini G, Barbagallo M (2010) Curcumin, inflammation, 
ageing and age-related diseases. Immun Ageing 7: 1
Sliwinska MA, Mosieniak G, Wolanin K, Babik A, Piwocka K, Magalska 
A, Szczepanowska J, Fronk J, Sikora E (2009) Induction of senescence 
with doxorubicin leads to increased genomic instability of HCT116 
cells. Mech Ageing Dev 130: 24-32
Strzeszewska A, Alster O, Mosieniak G, Ciolko A, Sikora E (2018) Insight 
into the role of PIKK family members and NF-кB in DNAdamage-
induced senescence and senescence-associated secretory phenotype of 
colon cancer cells. Cell Death Dis 9: 44
Toussaint O, Dumont P, Dierick JF, Pascal T, Frippiat C, Chainiaux F, 
Sluse F, Eliaers F, Remacle J (2000) Stress-induced premature senes-
cence. Essence of life, evolution, stress, and aging. Ann N Y Acad Sci 
908: 85-98
Tsakiri N, Kimber I, Rothwell NJ, Pinteaux E (2008) Mechanisms of inter-
leukin-6 synthesis and release induced by interleukin-1 and cell depo-
larisation in neurones. Mol Cell Neurosci 37: 110-118
Valentijn FA, Falke LL, Nguyen TQ, Goldschmeding R (2018) Cellular 
senescence in the aging and diseased kidney. J Cell Commun Signal 
12: 69-82
Walen KH (2008) Genetic stability of senescence reverted cells: genome 
reduction division of polyploidy cells, aneuploidy and neoplasia. Cell 
Cycle 7: 1623-1629
Was H, Barszcz K, Czarnecka J, Kowalczyk A, Bernas T, Uzarowska E, 
Koza P, Klejman A, Piwocka K, Kaminska B, Sikora E (2017) Bafilomy-
cin A1 triggers proliferative potential of senescent cancer cells in vitro 
and in NOD/SCID mice. Oncotarget 8: 9303-9322
Wolanin K, Magalska A, Mosieniak G, Klinger R, McKenna S, Vejda S, 
Sikora E, Piwocka K (2006) Curcumin affects components of the chro-
mosomal passenger complex and induces mitotic catastrophe in ap-
optosis-resistant Bcr-Abl-expressing cells. Mol Cancer Res 4: 457-469
Young AR, Narita M, Ferreira M, Kirschner K, Sadaie M, Darot JF, Tavare 
S, Arakawa S, Shimizu S, Watt FM, Narita M (2009) Autophagy medi-
ates the mitotic senescence transition. Genes Dev 23: 798-803
