Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
119
Iwona Anna Ciechomska*
Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Neu-
robiology Center, Nencki Institute of Experi-
mental Biology, 3 Pasteura Str., 02-093 War-
saw, Poland
*Laboratory 
of 
Molecular 
Neurobiology, 
Neurobiology Center, Nencki Institute of 
Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteura Str., 02-093 
Warsaw, Poland; fax: (48 22) 822 53 42, phone: 
(48 22) 589 23 28, e-mail: i.ciechomska@nencki.
gov.pl
Received: July 20, 2018
Accepted: July 27, 2018
Key words: autophagy, apoptosis, glioma, cyc-
losporine A, Beclin 1, LC3
Abbreviations: ATG – autophagy-related 
genes; CsA – cyclosporine A; ER – endoplas-
mic reticulum; GFAP – glial fibrillary acidic 
protein; IRE – inositol-requiring enzyme 1; 
MAP1-LC3 – microtubule-associated protein 
1 light chain 3; mTOR – mechanistic target of 
rapamycin; PARP – poly-ADP-ribose poly-
merase; PERK – PKR-like ER kinase; TMZ – te-
mozolomide
The role of autophagy in cancer – characterization of crosstalk between apoptosis 
and autophagy; autophagy as a new therapeutic strategy in glioblastoma
ABSTRACT
T
he Noble Assembly decided to award the 2016 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 
to Yoshinori Ohsumi for his discoveries of mechanisms of autophagy, a fundamental 
process for degrading and recycling cellular components. His discoveries opened a path to 
understanding the fundamental importance of autophagy in many physiological processes, 
such as adaptation to starvation or response to infection. Mutations in autophagy genes can 
cause disease, and the autophagic process is involved in several conditions including cancer 
and neurological disease. It shows the importance of autophagy research, as many questions 
remain open. The main aim of our research presented here was to better understand the role 
of autophagy in cancer. Here, we present articles concerning correct monitoring autophagy 
in cancer cells, characterization of the molecular links between autophagy and apoptosis and 
analysis of autophagy as a new therapeutic strategy in glioma.
INTRODUCTION
The term autophagy derived from the Greek meaning “self-eating”, was first 
coined by Christoph de Duve over 50 years ago, and was largely based on the 
observed degradation of intra-cellular structures within lysosomes. Research re-
veals that autophagy is a highly conserved process that occurs in yeast, plant, 
and mammalian cells. In mammalian cells, there are three primary types of 
autophagy: microautophagy, macroautophagy and chaperone-mediated au-
tophagy. Of the three types of autophagy, macroautophagy has been studied the 
most exclusively. Macroautophagy (referred to here as autophagy) is an intracel-
lular process, in which cytoplasmic components, including long-lived or mal-
functioning proteins and obsolete or damaged organelles are sequestered within 
double-membraned vesicles called autophagosomes. The complete autophago-
some matures by fusion with an endosome and/or a lysosome to form a single-
membraned autolysosome, in which the contents are digested by hydrolases and 
recycled for biosynthesis in the cell [1,2] (Figure 1A). Sequestration of cytosolic 
components can be either nonspecific (the engulfment of bulk cytoplasm), or 
selective, targeting specific cargoes, such as organelles (mitochondria, endoplas-
mic reticulum) or invasive microbes.
Autophagy is important for a wide range of physiological processes. Au-
tophagy occurs at a low basal level in most cells to perform homeostatic func-
tions (cytoplasmic and organelle turnover) but is also a critical mechanism 
for the adaptation of cells to stress. It can be induced by numerous stimuli, 
including nutrient deprivation, accumulation of misfolded proteins, protein 
aggregates, hypoxia or toxic compounds [3,4]. Although autophagy is thought 
to be predominantly a cell-survival mechanism, some evidence points towards 
a role in cell death. In some context autophagy, as distinct from type I pro-
grammed cell death (apoptosis), is called as the type II programmed cell death 
or autophagic cell death. We need to be aware that this term simply describes 
cell death with autophagy rather than cell death by autophagy [5]. Perhaps 
the most fundamental point is that either too little or too much autophagy 
can be deleterious, that is exemplified by its dual role in cytoprotection and 
cell death. Various forms of cell death were for long time studied in isolation, 
as the prevailing model suggested that they represented mutually exclusive 
cellular states. However, over the last decade studies suggest that apoptosis, 
autophagy and necrosis are often regulated by similar pathways, engage com-
mon sub-cellular sites and organelles, and even share the same initiator and 
effector molecules [6,7]. Autophagy is also induced by many apoptotic stimuli 
[8]. The mechanisms by which apoptotic stimuli activate autophagosome for-
mation and how autophagy machinery contributes to cell death were not well 
defined ten years ago. Therefore, our studies focused on the regulatory ties 
between autophagy and apoptosis [9,10].

120	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
Autophagy has been implicated in several human dis-
eases, including cancer [11-13]. For tumor cells, autophagy 
is a double-edged sword. On one hand autophagy can be 
tumor suppressive through the elimination of oncogenic 
protein substrates, toxic unfolded proteins, damaged orga-
nelles and prevention of chromosomal instability. But on the 
other hand, it can be tumor promoting in established cancers 
through autophagy-mediated intracellular recycling that 
provides substrates for metabolism, and maintains the func-
tional pool of mitochondria [14] (Figure 1B). Some data indi-
cate that the role of autophagy in tumorigenesis is tissue and 
genetic context-dependent. Recently, autophagy has become 
one of the most attractive targets in designing novel antican-
cer treatments, since most chemotherapeutics induce cellular 
damage that triggers autophagy, but the impact of autophagy 
on tumor cell death or survival is unclear. Therefore in our 
studies, we try to understand the paradoxical role of the au-
tophagy in cancer, in particularly in brain tumors [15-18].
Autophagy is regulated by a complex network that 
consists of different signaling pathways and a number of 
highly conserved autophagy-related genes (ATGs). Recent 
studies have described that besides transcriptional factors 
and microRNAs, also histone modifications are involved 
in the nuclear regulation of autophagy [19,20]. ATGs have 
been originally identified in yeasts, but many of their 
homologues have been discovered and characterized in 
mammalian cells [2,21,22]. Some of them are required for 
autophagosome formation, and thus are termed the core au-
tophagy machinery. The core Atg proteins can be divided 
into different functional subgroups. Atg1/ULK complex is 
the autophagy initiation complex that regulates the induc-
tion of autophagosome formation and integrates signal 
from mTOR serine-threonine kinase (mechanistic target of 
rapamycin) [23,24]. mTOR kinase negatively regulates au-
tophagy. Expansion of phagophore, a small cup-shaped 
membrane precursor formed upon induction of autophagy, 
is poorly defined events, in which ATG9 and its cycling 
system may have a role in membrane delivery to the ex-
panding phagophore. Nucleation and elongation of the 
pre-autophagosomal membrane are controlled by class-III 
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3KC3)/hVps34, which is es-
Figure 1. Autophagy and its paradoxical role in cancer. 
(A) Autophagy is a highly conserved cellular degradation process in which portions of cytosol and organelles are sequestered into a double-membrane vesicle, an autopha-
gosome, before delivered to lysosome for breakdown and eventual recycling of the resulting macromolecules. (B) At the early stages of tumor, autophagy acts as a tumor 
suppressor through preventing accumulation of toxic cellular waste (misfolded protein, protein aggregates, defective organelles, source of oxidative stress), reducing 
chromosome instability, inhibiting necrosis and inflammation. Additionally, induction of autophagy by treatments may lead to autophagic cell death. On the other hand, 
during tumor progression, autophagy can contribute to tumor growth by increasing resistance to apoptosis, metastasis and survival during therapy. Autophagy also 
provides metabolic substrates to support cellular metabolism.

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
121
sential for generating phosphatidylinositol (3)-phosphate 
(PtdIns(3)P). PI3KC3 is a part of a large macromolecular 
complex that contains Beclin 1 (a homologue of Atg6), a 
central scaffold protein [25]. The elongation and expansion 
of phagophore membrane is mediated by two ubiquitin-like 
(ATG12-ATG5 and Atg8/LC3-PE) conjugation systems [26], 
which regulate each other. ATG12 is conjugated to ATG5 in 
a reaction that requires ATG7 and ATG10 (E1 and E2-like 
enzymes, respectively) [27]. The second ubiquitination-like 
reaction involves the conjugation of microtubule-associated 
protein 1 light chain 3 (MAP1-LC3, also known as Atg8 and 
LC3) to the phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) [28]. This reac-
tion requires the E1 protein ATG7 and the E2 protein ATG3. 
Lipidation of LC3 converts the soluble LC3-I into LC3-II, the 
autophagosome-associated form of LC3, which is attached 
to the membranes of autophagosomes. LC3-II levels corre-
late with the number of autophagic vacuoles, which can be 
assessed by scoring LC3-positve cytoplasmic vesicles [29]. 
Therefore, expression of LC3 is now in widespread use to 
visualize autophagy in cultured cells also in cancer cells. 
However, there are some cautions, and proper monitoring 
of autophagy in cells is very important [30,31].
ASSESSMENT AND OPTIMIZATION OF AUTOPHAGY 
MONITORING METHOD: ANALYSIS OF GFP-LC3 DOTS
LC3 or the protein tagged at its N terminus with a flu-
orescent protein such as GFP, GFP-LC3, has been used to 
monitor/vizualize autophagy through indirect immunoflu-
orescence or direct fluorescence microscopy, measured as 
an increase in punctate LC3 or GFP-LC3. However, Kuma 
et al. [32] highlighted some limitations using GFP‑LC3, 
demonstrating that GFP‑LC3 is easily incorporated into 
protein aggregates independently of autophagy, and that 
it is difficult to distinguish these aggregates from the true 
autophagosomes. The difficulty in scoring GFP‑LC3 puncta 
per cell (or the percentage of cells with GFP‑LC3 puncta) is 
compounded by the fact that GFP‑LC3 is diffusely located 
in the cytosol and in the nucleus, giving rise to high back-
ground fluorescence. Therefore, the detergent saponin has 
been used to improve detection of membrane‑bound pro-
teins, such as disabled‑2 [33], Rab7 [34], and LC3‑II [35], as 
a low amount of saponin removes soluble cellular proteins, 
including the soluble nuclear and cytosolic fluorescence of 
GFP‑LC3 [35].
Surprisingly, we have found [31] that treatment with 
saponin and other detergents can provoke artifactual GFP-
LC3 puncta formation in different cell lines such as Cos 7 
(fibroblast-like cell line derived from monkey kidney tis-
sue), human embryonic kidney 293 cells (HEK 293A), and 
also cervical cancer HeLa cells. We observed aggregation of 
GFP‑LC3 into autophagosome look‑alike structures when 
cells were permeabilized with saponin for as short as 1 min-
ute before cell fixation. Treatment with saponin reduced 
diffused cytosolic and nuclear GFP‑LC3, but caused an in-
crease in the number and intensity of fluorescent puncta per 
cell regardless of whether the cells were induced to undergo 
autophagy. Saponin also induced GFP‑LC3 puncta in au-
tophagy-deficient cells (Atg5‑/‑ MEF cells) transfected with 
GFP‑LC3, where no LC3‑II is produced, demonstrating that 
the puncta are autophagosome‑independent. The increase 
in GFP‑LC3 puncta was not matched by an increase in en-
dogenous LC3‑II or GFP‑LC3‑II detected by immunoblot-
ting when protein samples were normalized to cell number. 
Our results also indicated a qualitatively similar effect when 
cells were treated with other detergents, commonly used for 
membrane permeabilization, such as CHAPS, Triton X‑100, 
or digitonin. We also noted that a-tubulin could not be used 
to normalize for protein loading on blots after applying sap-
onin, as it was selectively extracted from untreated cells but 
not from cells treated with vinblastine, a drug that perturbs 
microtubule networks and stimulates autophagosome for-
mation. When using mild detergents to remove background 
fluorescence, we recommend using a membrane‑associated 
protein such as ATP synthase b for normalization. Deter-
gents used prior to fixation may precipitate GFP‑LC3 ag-
gregation into structures that appear autophagosomal and 
so should be used with caution. These results suggest that 
use of the saponin extraction method has its limitation and 
caution should be taken when it is performed before the cell 
fixation. The controls need to be included in such experi-
ments in light of these findings. In general, it is preferable 
to include additional assays that measure autophagy, rather 
than relying solely on monitoring GFP-LC3.
CHARACTERIZATION OF MOLECULAR LINKS 
BETWEEN AUTOPHAGY AND APOPTOSIS: BECLIN 1 
AT THE NEXUS OF AUTOPHAGY AND APOPTOSIS
How autophagic machinery contributes to cell death was 
not clear ten years ago, therefore we investigated the regu-
latory ties between autophagy and apoptosis, focusing on 
whether the interaction of Beclin 1 with Bcl-2 alters the abil-
ity of Bcl-2 to protect cells from apoptosis.
Beclin 1, a protein essential for autophagy and a haplo-
insufficient tumor suppressor, was first identified as a pro-
tein that interacts with the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and 
Bcl-xL, but not with Bax/Bak [36]. The interaction between 
endogenous Beclin 1 and Bcl-2 was found to inhibit Beclin 
1-dependent autophagy in yeast and mammalian cells [37]. 
Interestingly, the binding of Beclin 1 to Bcl-2, specifically en-
doplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized Bcl-2 (but not mitochon-
drion-targeted Bcl-2) reduces starvation induced autophagy 
[38]. Additionally, it was shown that Beclin 1 possesses a 
BH3 domain (amino acids 114–123) [39,40] that enables its 
binding to anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family (e.g., 
Bcl-2, Bcl-xL). BH3-only proteins are pro-apoptotic regula-
tors of apoptosis, which binding to the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 
members is one mechanism of facilitating the activation of 
Bax/Bak, crucial mediators of the mitochondrial pathway of 
apoptosis [41-43]. Indeed, the Beclin 1-derived BH3 peptide 
inhibits Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic function [39, 40, 44]. Hence Be-
clin 1, like other BH3-only proteins, may be expected to be 
pro-apoptotic. However, no experiments using intact/full-
length Beclin 1 have been described that evaluate its role in 
modulation of apoptosis.
The aim of our research was to determine whether Be-
clin 1 neutralizes the anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-2 and 
thereby sensitizes cells to apoptosis [9]. We used several ap-
optotic stimuli that initiate ER and/or mitochondrial sign-
aling pathways (UV radiation, TNFa and cycloheximide, 

122	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
staurosporine, thapsigargin and tunicamycin). To investi-
gate protection against a wide range of insults, we targeted 
Bcl-2 to mitochondria (mit) or endoplasmic reticulum (ER). 
We show that overexpressed Beclin 1 interacts equally well 
with Bcl-2 variants that are exclusively targeted to the mi-
tochondrial or ER membranes (mit-Bcl-2 and ER-Bcl-2). Be-
clin 1 followed to the appropriate organelle with complete 
or near-complete overlapping. These interactions were ob-
served in cells in which autophagy is active (HeLa cells), 
as well as in autophagy deficient cells due to Atg5 gene 
deletion (Atg5-/- MEF cells). The interaction between Bec-
lin 1 and Bcl-2 was verified by immunoprecipitation, and a 
membrane-proximate localization of Beclin 1 was shown by 
immunoelectron microscopy. By contrast, mutated Beclin 1 
lacking the Bcl-2 binding domain was not colocalized with 
Bcl-2, and no Bcl-2 was immunoprecipitated. This indicated 
that the redistribution of Beclin 1 is due to its binding to Bcl-
2 and that the strength of binding to Beclin 1 is not altered 
by subcellular targeting of Bcl-2. Moreover, the interaction 
between overexpressed Bcl-2 and Beclin 1 was functional in 
that all Bcl-2 variants inhibited Beclin 1-induced autophagy, 
whereas ER-Bcl-2 was most effective during amino acid 
starvation, in keeping with previous reports. To examine 
whether Beclin 1 can modify Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic activity, 
cells were exposed to four different pro-apoptotic stimuli, 
because protection by Bcl-2 variants can be stimulus- and 
localization-specific. Following induction of apoptosis the 
changes in nuclear morphology, caspase-3 activity, poly-
ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage, or punctation of 
mRFP-Bax on mitochondria were analyzed. We found that 
protection of Bcl-2 against caspase-dependent apoptosis in-
duced by each stimulus was not altered by coexpression of 
Beclin 1 even when the molar concentration of Bcl-2 was 3.6-
fold lower than that of Beclin 1, or Beclin 1 was expressed 
in the absence of exogenous Bcl-2. Moreover, Beclin 1 did 
not disrupt the prevention by Bcl-2 of Bax-punctation, a key 
BH3 domain-dependent step in apoptosis commitment. The 
anti-apoptotic action of Bcl-2 coexpressed with Beclin 1 was 
maintained in Atg5-/- MEF cells, arguing against compensa-
tion for the loss of protection by Bcl-2 by autophagy-medi-
ated survival induced by Beclin 1. Hence, binding of Beclin 
1 to Bcl-2 does not modify apoptosis irrespective to Bcl-2 
concentration, location, apoptotic stimulus, and whether the 
autophagy is active or inactive [9]. Our results suggest that 
although Beclin 1 contains a BH3-only motif typical for pro-
apoptotic proteins, is at best a weak modulator of Bcl-2 anti-
apoptotic function, and that suppression of tumorigenesis 
in mammals by Beclin 1 is not related to its capacity to bind 
to Bcl-2.
The importance of our finding was noticed by the scientif-
ic community. Firstly, editorial commentary was published 
together with our original article. P. Boya et al. discussed 
the far-reaching implications for the comprehension of the 
cross-talk between apoptosis and autophagy [45]. Moreo-
ver, we were invited to write Autophagic Punctum review 
in the prestigious journal Autophagy. In this punctum [10] 
we discussed possible reasons why Beclin 1 fails to behave 
like other BH3-only proteins and induce apoptosis. One ex-
planation is that the binding of Beclin 1 to Bcl-2 is weak rela-
tive to that of other BH3-only proteins, so Beclin 1 would 
be easily displaced by BH3-only proteins (or by Bax) when 
their activity increases specifically in response to apoptotic 
stimuli. Other possibility is that Beclin 1 proapoptotic po-
tential requires a special stimulus that mobilizes the BH3-
only function of Beclin 1 preferentially. It is also possible, 
that due to the weak binding of Beclin 1 to Bcl-2, there is 
always ample free Bcl-2 to mediate full anti-apoptotic func-
tion. Moreover, we have to remember about the complexity 
of Beclin 1 partnerships in cells, which is just beginning to 
be appreciated. At least three complexes were discovered, 
which promote or inhibit autophagy. Additionally, post-
translational modification of both proteins, such as phos-
phorylation of Bcl-2 and/or Beclin 1, and caspase cleavage 
of Beclin 1, can also undermine their interaction. It remains 
to be determined which complexes predominate when Bcl-2 
is overexpressed, and whether these are modified posttrans-
lationally during apoptosis. To better understand mutual 
relationship between both proteins, we performed dynamic 
interplay between Beclin 1 and Bcl-2 in the modulation of 
autophagy and apoptosis on the schematic diagram [10]. 
We believe that our studies contributed to understanding 
of the molecular interdependencies that exist between ap-
optosis and autophagy. Recent studies have shown that the 
crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis occurs at sever-
al levels that can be classified into distinct paradigms on the 
basis of mechanistic features. Nowadays, we can distinguish 
three paradigms by which autophagy regulates apoptosis: 
(1) regulation of apoptosis by specific autophagy proteins; 
(2) activation of caspases on autophagosomal membranes 
depends on autophagosome formation, but not on lysoso-
mal activity; (3) regulation of apoptosis by autophagic deg-
radation requires both autophagosome formation and lyso-
somal activity. The two mechanistic paradigms by which 
apoptosis regulates autophagy are: (1) direct regulation of 
autophagy by specific apoptotic proteins; (2) regulation of 
autophagy by activated caspases, which necessitates the ac-
tivation of the apoptotic process as a whole [46].
AUTOPHAGY AS A NEW THERAPEUTIC 
STRATEGY IN GLIOBLASTOMA
Glioblastoma (GBM), grade IV astrocytoma, is the most 
frequent and malignant brain tumor in adults, character-
ized by aggressive cell proliferation, diffuse infiltration, 
and resistance to conventional therapy. Current treatment 
modalities have only a modest effect on patient outcomes. 
The median survival times of patients is around 15 months. 
Probably due to many genetic alterations and intratumoral 
heterogeneity, gliomas are resistant to radiation or/and 
chemotherapy. Recently, autophagy emerged as a promising 
therapeutic concept in glioma treatment [47], as autophagy 
rather than apoptosis accompanies cytotoxicity induced in 
glioma cells by conventional anti-cancer drugs, irradiation, 
and other compounds [48-53]. More information concerning 
therapeutic potential of autophagy in glioma was described 
in book chapter “Autophagy in Glioma Cells” [18]. Although 
autophagy has received increasing scientific attention as a 
promising therapeutic target, there are some data indicat-
ing that role of autophagy in tumor cells may depend on 
the type of tumor, the stage of tumorigenesis, or the nature 
and extent of the insult. It is important to determine the role 
of autophagy in each circumstances, therefore, our studies 
focus on the role of autophagy in glioma cells.

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
123
THE ROLE OF ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM STRESS  
AND AUTOPHAGY IN MALIGNANT 
GLIOMA CELLS UNDERGOING  
CYCLOSPORINE A-INDUCED CELL DEATH
We have previously demonstrated that cyclosporine A 
(CsA), which revolutionized transplantology due to its abil-
ity to block the activation of lymphocytes and other immune 
system cells, induces cell death in rat C6 glioma cells with 
some apoptotic features, and in human malignant glioma 
cells either growth arrest or non-apoptotic programmed cell 
death [54-57]. Interestingly, CsA-induced death in glioma 
cells was accompanied by formation of numerous cytoplas-
mic vacuoles [56], suggesting that also other mechanisms 
are involved in cell death. Moreover, CsA binds and inhibits 
the activity of the cyclophilin A (CyPA), a peptidyl-prolyl 
isomerase implicated in the maturation and folding of na-
tive proteins [58].
The aim of our study was to characterize a novel mo-
lecular pathway playing role in CsA-induced cell death of 
malignant glioma cells, which in the future could be used 
as a new therapeutic approach to enhance the anti-cancer 
efficacy of different drugs. We investigated whether CsA-
induced cell death of malignant glioma cells was associ-
ated with autophagy and ER stress, and how blocking of 
these processes would affect glioma cell death [15]. At the 
beginning, we compared efficacy of CsA-induced cell death 
with common apoptosis inducers: UVC and adriamycin 
(Adr, doxorubicin). All insults resulted in similar reduc-
tion of cell viability, but gradual appearance of biochemi-
cal hallmarks of apoptosis: cleaved fragments of caspase 7, 
caspase 3 and PARP, were more prominent after UVC or 
Adr treatments. UVC and Adr induced a ‘ladder-like’ oli-
gonucleosomal DNA fragmentation in glioma cells. Quan-
tification of subdiploid cell population by flow cytometry 
confirmed an increase in DNA fragmentation after tested 
stimuli. However, the percentages of cells with fragmented 
DNA were lower after CsA exposure, when compared with 
UVC and Adr-treated cultures. We observed formation of 
large vacuoles in rat and human glioma cells treated with 
CsA, which did not appear in cells treated with Adr or irra-
diated with UVC. Vacuolization induced in human glioma 
LN18 and T98G cells by CsA was completely blocked by the 
inhibitors of transcription and translation, suggesting block 
of de novo protein synthesis, or attenuation of CsA-induced 
protein aggregate accumulation or both. Evidently, UVC ir-
radiation and adriamycin induced apoptosis more potently 
than CsA, which triggers programmed cell death associated 
with vacuolation in studied glioma cells. We revealed that 
cytoplasmic vacuoles were immunostained for two specific 
ER markers: calreticulin and KDEL (retention sequence-
marking proteins localized in ER). The induction of ER 
stress in glioma cells by CsA was evidenced by accumula-
tion of ubiquitinated (unfolded) proteins and activation of 
the unfolded protein response (UPR). We found that CsA 
treatment triggers accumulation of IRE1a (inositol-requir-
ing enzyme 1) and phosphorylation of PERK (PKR-like ER 
kinase) in human glioma cells. The functional activation of 
IRE1a and PERK was confirmed by the appearance of Xbp1 
mRNA splice variants and the increase of eIF2a phospho-
rylation upon CsA-treatment, respectively. Accumulation 
of BIP/Grp78 (immunoglobulin-binding protein) and CHOP 
(C/EBP homologous protein), followed by the activation of 
IRE1a and PERK kinases in CsA-treated glioma cells. Simi-
lar changes were observed in malignant human glioma cells 
treated with typical ER stress inducers, such as thapsigargin 
(Tg) and tunicamycin (Tm). The presented evidence indi-
cate that CsA induces ER stress in malignant glioma cells, 
characterized by accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, 
induction of an UPR and dilatation of ER cisternae.
To examine whether CsA induces autophagy in glioma 
cells, we evaluated the appearance of several autophagy 
features following CsA treatment. We demonstrated the 
formation of acidic vesicular organelles (AVOs), increase 
of autophagosomes (detected by an electron microscopy 
and GFP-LC3 dots formation); and finally LC3-II accumu-
lation upon CsA treatment. The changes induced by CsA 
in glioma cells were partially blocked by autophagy inhibi-
tor, 3-methyladenine. Additionally, we found that GFP-LC3 
dots or autophagosomes localize close to cytoplasmic vacu-
oles/swollen ER cisternae. The increase of LC3 staining in 
a murine intracranial glioma model in CsA-treated animals 
demonstrates that autophagy also occurs in vivo. Addition-
ally, CsA-induced autophagy was associated with inhibition 
of the mTOR pathway, which acts as a negative regulator 
of autophagy. Decrease of phosphorylation of 4E-BP1, and 
p70S6K (the two direct downstream effectors of mTORC1) 
was observed in human glioma cells. These results suggest 
that CsA-induced autophagy was associated with mTORC1 
inhibition in human glioma cells. We also studied interde-
pendence between ER stress, autophagy, and cell death. 
We found that an ER stress response develops prior to 
autophagy, as its pharmacological inhibition reduces au-
tophagy. Use of salubrinal (inhibitor of eIF2a dephosporyl-
ation) or silencing of PERK or/and IRE1a partially blocked 
CsA-induced accumulation of LC3-II. These results suggest 
that ER stress is triggered prior to CsA-induced autophagy.
Inhibition of different stages of autophagy may result in 
different outcomes in glioma cells [48,59]. Therefore, we si-
lenced ULK1, implicated in the initiation of autophagy, and 
ATG5 and ATG7, required for autophagosome formation. 
We observed effective silencing of ULK1, ATG5, ATG7 at the 
mRNA and protein levels. To test whether autophagy con-
trols the extent of CsA-induced death, we performed clono-
genic survival assay and analysis of biochemical hallmarks 
of apoptosis after knockdown of autophagy regulators fol-
lowed by treatment with CsA. Inhibition of autophagy in-
creased the efficacy of CsA in reduction of colony forma-
tion, suggesting a protective role of autophagy. Silencing 
of autophagy effectors ULK1, ATG5 or ATG7, increased the 
level of active caspases 3, 7 and PARP degradation, as well 
as enhanced caspase 3 activity in CsA-treated cells. Inter-
estingly, the strongest effect was observed in ATG5 siRNA-
transfected cells. Our findings show that genetic inhibition 
of autophagy at different levels enhances the CsA-induced 
cell death, suggesting a mainly protective role of autophagy 
in those cells. These observations lead us to conclude that 
CsA induces both apoptosis and autophagy in malignant 
glioma cells via induction of ER stress and inhibition of the 
mTORC1/p70S6K pathway; however, autophagy is cyto-
protective in this context. As the cytoprotective role of au-

124	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
tophagy could be the main obstacle in anticancer therapy, 
its inhibition should be a new strategy to explore. So far, dif-
ferent inhibitors of autophagy such as hydroxychloroquine, 
3-methyladenine and bafilomycin A1 effectively sensitized 
cultured cancer cells to therapeutic agents [60]. It is note-
worthy, that some autophagy inhibitors are tested in clinical 
trials in GBM patients [18].
In the review [16], we described complex molecular 
mechanism of CsA action in malignant glioma cells, which 
was discovered by Prof. Bozena Kaminska’s group. We have 
previously found that rat glioma cells express NFAT (nu-
clear factor of activated T cells) proteins, and CsA inhibits 
calcineurin-NFAT signalling; however, blocking this path-
way was not sufficient to induce death of glioma cells. CsA 
induces cell death with apoptotic features in rat C6 glioma 
cells that is mediated by activation of p53 and its transcrip-
tional target gene Bax resulting in stimulation of the intrinsic 
mitochondrial death pathway. Interestingly, in human ma-
lignant glioma cells, defective in p53 and/or PTEN tumor 
suppressors, CsA induces either senescence-like growth ar-
rest (U87MG cells) or non-apoptotic programmed cell death 
(U373MG/U251MG, T89G cells) [54,56,57]. In p53-deficient 
cells CsA induces Erk1/2-dependent activation of cell cycle 
inhibitor p21 that results in cell cycle arrest. Moreover, inhi-
bition of the prosurvival pathway (Akt1) results in the acti-
vation of FoxO1 transcription factor, that cooperates with 
the AP-1 transcription factor in the transcriptional upregu-
lation of Fas ligand (that belongs to TNF (tumor necrosis 
factor) family). CsA, likely due to inhibition of cyclophilins, 
induces accumulation of unfolded proteins in the endoplas-
mic reticulum that triggers an unfolded protein response. 
Activation of PERK/eIF2a and the IRE1a/XBP1/JNK path-
ways upregulates the expression of CHOP and BIP. Induc-
tion of ER stress and/or decreased activity of the Akt1/
mTORC1 pathway contribute to initiation of autophagy. 
Autophagy inhibits apoptotic cell death induced by CsA. 
These observations lead us to conclude that CsA induces 
both apoptosis and autophagy (which is cytoprotective) via 
induction of ER stress, but also CsA induces cell cycle arrest 
in malignant glioma cells.
THE ROLE OF AUTOPHAGY IN DIFFERENTIATION 
OF GLIOMA STEM-LIKE CELLS
Stem-like cell populations have been identified in a num-
ber of malignancies including glioblastoma. These rare stem 
cells (called also glioma-initiating cells) are believed to be 
responsible not only for tumor initiation and progression 
but also resistance to therapeutic agents and tumor recur-
rence. Recently, the population of cells within glioblastoma 
with stem-like properties has gained increasing attention as 
a target to refine treatment strategies. In the review [61] we 
summarize the recent data regarding isolation, biology and 
mechanisms of chemotherapy resistance of glioma stem-
like cells (GSCs). GSCs are characterized by the ability (i) 
to self-renew, (ii) to initiate brain tumors upon orthotopic 
implantation in immunodeficient mice, (iii) to express neu-
ral stem cell markers, and (iv) to differentiate into cells with 
a neuronal, astrocytic, or oligodendroglial phenotype. The 
differentiated cells loose long-term self-renewal potential in 
vitro and fail to propagate tumors in vivo [62], suggesting 
that induction of GSC differentiation may be a good strat-
egy to eliminate GSCs in GBM [63]. Autophagy is highly 
active during mammalian development and differentiation, 
maintains the quality control and cellular homeostasis of 
terminally differentiated cells [64], as well as participates 
in self-renewal, pluripotency and differentiation of stem 
cells [65, 66]. Recently, it was shown that activation of the 
autophagic process may promote GSC differentiation and 
increase radio- and chemosensitivity [67-70].
Epigenetic-based drugs targeting epigenetic enzymes in 
cancer have been shown to affect GSC differentiation and 
induce autophagy [69,71]. BIX01294, a specific inhibitor of 
G9a histone methyltransferase (introducing H3K9me2 and 
H3K27me3 repressive marks) [72], induced autophagy or 
autophagy-associated cell death in many tumor cell lines 
[73-77], but underlying mechanisms have not been explored 
in glioma cells. Additionally, BIX01294 is a potent modula-
tor of stem cell differentiation. BIX01294 pre-treatment im-
proved differentiation of stem cells [78-81].
The aim of our study was to understand the role of 
BIX01294-induced autophagy in differentiation of glioma 
stem-like cells, as a potential target for cancer therapy [17]. 
First, we examined whether BIX01294 induces autophagy 
in human glioma cell line LN18 and patient-derived glio-
ma stem-like cells (L0125) without affecting cell viability. 
We found that 2 μM BIX01294 was sufficient to decrease 
H3K9me2 and H3K27me3 levels without reducing cell viabil-
ity, treatment with higher doses of BIX01294 (3 and 10 μM) 
resulted in accumulation of the cleaved caspase 3, caspase 7 
and PARP, the biochemical hallmark of apoptosis. At a non-
toxic dose, BIX01294 stimulated LC3-II accumulation and 
autophagosome formation (detected by accumulation and 
GFP-LC3 punctation) in established cell line and primary 
human glioma cells that evidenced induction of autophagy. 
Moreover, BIX01294-induced autophagy was partially 
blocked by 3-methyladenine and by selective silencing of cru-
cial autophagy genes ATG5, ATG7, ULK1 and BECN1. Here, 
we demonstrated for the first time, that BIX01294 reduces 
H3K9me2 and H3K27me3 levels and induces autophagy in 
glioma cells, as well as in glioma stem-like cells.
Then using “selection by growth requirement”, one of 
the method for enrichment in GSCs [61,82], we expanded 
GSCs from established glioma LN18 cells and culture de-
rived from GBM specimen (WG4). We confirmed that GSCs 
enriched spheres expressed higher levels of pluripotency 
markers: NANOG, OCT4 (encoded by the POU5F1), SOX2 
and CD133 (encoded by the PROM1) as compared to the 
adherent tumor cells growing in the presence of serum. In-
terestingly, tumor spheres expressed a significantly lower 
levels of LC3-II and autophagy related (ATG) genes than the 
parental glioma cell cultures. These data suggest reduced 
autophagy and increased stemness capacity of the spheres.
To explore the role of autophagy in GSCs differentia-
tion, we used L0125 and L0627 cell lines (originating from 
human GBMs), previously characterized as GSCs possess-
ing self-renewal and tumor-initiating ability, and multi-
lineage differentiation potential [83,84]. These cell lines are 
characterized by different expression of epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR), which is a known diagnostic and 

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
125
prognostic marker of human GBM. L0125 cells are EGFR 
negative, while L0627 cells are EGFR positive. We revealed 
that typical differentiation inducers: serum and all-trans 
retinoid acid (ATRA), upregulated astrocytic (GFAP, glial 
fibrillary acidic protein) and neuronal (b-Tubulin III) mark-
ers, and concomitant decreased in OLIG2 and SOX2 expres-
sion at mRNA and protein levels. Untreated spheres did 
not express differentiation markers, while high levels of 
OLIG2, SOX2 and NESTIN (neural stem/progenitor mark-
ers) were detected. Transcriptomic analysis, using Affym-
etrix microarrays, also confirmed these changes. These re-
sults verify that serum and ATRA induce differentiation of 
GBM spheres along astrocytic and neuronal lineages. Next, 
we analyzed the level of autophagy using typical differ-
entiation inducers. We found significantly higher levels of 
ATG genes (such as ATG5, ATG7, BECN1, ULK1 and LC3B) 
in cells upon serum- and ATRA-induced differentiation. 
Western blot analysis confirmed accumulation of LC3-II 
and increases in the levels of ATG7 and ULK1 in differen-
tiated cells, compared to untreated GSCs. Similar changes 
were demonstrated using the transcriptomic analysis. This 
indicates restoring of autophagic machinery and increased 
autophagy throughout GSC differentiation independently 
of EGFR level. Additionally, we found that serum induced 
changes in cell morphology. Under control conditions 80% 
of spheres were floating or semi-attached, maintaining their 
spherical shapes. In contrast, in serum-treated cultures, 93% 
of spheres were flattened and cells branched out. Co-treat-
ment with autophagy inhibitors (3MA, BafA1) significantly 
decreased the number of flattened spheres, and increased 
the amount of spheres maintaining their spherical shapes. 
Moreover, GFAP and b-Tubulin III expression became less 
abundant in serum-differentiated spheres upon inhibition 
of autophagy with 3MA, suggesting causative relationship 
between autophagy and differentiation.
Next, we verified the hypothesis that there is causative 
relationship between BIX01294-induced autophagy and dif-
ferentiation process. First, we assessed if spheres undergo 
morphological alterations (attachment to the cell culture 
plates) upon BIX0124 treatment and how autophagy inhibi-
tors have an influence on this process. Although the changes 
were less potent than after serum administration, we found 
that spheres treated with BIX01294 were more attached 
to the culture plates and began to lose their shapes when 
compared to untreated spheres. These effects were slowed 
down when the cells were co-treated with autophagy inhibi-
tors, BafA1 or 3MA. Additionally, BIX01294 induced the ex-
pression of ATG genes such as LC3B and WIPI1, along with 
differentiation markers GFAP and TUBB3 in spheres, how-
ever, less potently than serum. Increased levels of astrocytic 
(GFAP) and neuronal (b-Tubulin III) markers in BIX01294-
treated tumor spheres were confirmed at protein levels. It 
suggests that BIX01294 is a strong inducer of autophagy, as 
well as a potent modulator of GSC differentiation. We tested 
whether alleviating autophagy could influence BIX01294-in-
duced differentiation process of GSCs. Autophagy inhibitor 
partially abolished the increase of GFAP and b-Tubulin III 
expression induced in sphere cultures by BIX01294 at both 
mRNA and protein levels. Similar changes were observed 
in GSCs-enriched spheres originating from established 
glioma cells and GBM patient-derived cultures. These data 
indicate that induction of GSC differentiation by BIX01294 
depends on transcriptional activation of autophagy.
To get insights into molecular mechanisms of BIX01294-
induced differentiation and autophagy processes, we per-
formed a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR anal-
ysis for selected histone modifications and G9a binding to the 
promoters of the genes involved in these two processes. We 
demonstrated that histone methyltransferase G9a binds to 
the promoters of autophagy-related (LC3B, WIPI1) and dif-
ferentiation-related genes (GFAP, TUBB3) in spheres. Higher 
levels of H3K4me3 (an active chromatin mark) and lower 
levels of H3K9me2 (a repressive mark) at the promoters of 
studied genes were observed in serum-differentiated cells in 
comparison to spheres. BIX01294 increased H3K4me3 levels 
and reduced H3K9me2 levels, which was accompanied by 
upregulation of RNA polymerase II binding to the promoters 
of studied genes. This was consistent with prominent reduc-
tion of H3K9me2 in BIX01294-treated spheres. Based on our 
findings, we propose a model in which BIX01294 inhibits G9a 
histone methyltransferase in GSCs, which results in reduction 
of the repressive H3K9me2 mark and the increase in the ac-
tivation H3K4me3 mark at the promoters of autophagy- and 
differentiation-related genes. These changes trigger restora-
tion of autophagy components and activation of this process 
in GSCs, which triggers cell differentiation.
Finally, question arises regarding the role of epigenetic re-
programing, restoration of autophagy and apoptosis in glio-
ma cells in cancer therapy. A number of studies have shown, 
that adding inhibitors of histone modifying enzyme to con-
ventional glioma therapy may increase its efficacy [71,85,86]. 
Temozolomide (TMZ) is a first line therapeutic agent in GBM 
patients, however median survival of such patients is poor 
(15 months). The resistance is due to high level of DNA re-
pair 
protein, 
O6-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase 
(MGMT) and/or occurrence of glioma stem-like cells contrib-
ute to GBM resistance to the drug. Recently, we have explored 
a possibility of epigenetic reprograming of glioma cells to in-
crease sensitivity to TMZ and restore apoptosis/autophagy 
competence in glioma cells. We found that pre-treatment or 
post-treatment with non-toxic dose BIX01294 (the inhibitor 
of G9a) improve anti-tumor efficacy of TMZ in glioma cells 
and glioma stem-like cells (Ciechomska et al. 2018 submit-
ted). Our results suggest that G9a is a potential therapeutic 
target in malignant glioma. A number of studies have shown 
an important role for G9a in the progression of solid tumors 
and metastasis [87]. The G9a inhibitor can be used alone or 
in combination with other standard therapies currently used 
in the clinic in order to develop better treatments for cancer 
patients. Nowadays, inhibitors of histone methyltransferases 
have not yet reached the clinical trial stage. Various histone 
deacetylase inhibitors, for example valproic acid, have been 
approved by the FDA and are undergoing trials in different 
types of malignancies, including glioblastoma [88].
SUMMARY
In the series of the publications presented above we ana-
lyzed autophagy process in mammalian cells. We optimized 
the method for detection of autophagy, then we character-

126	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
ized the molecular link between apoptosis and autophagy, 
and finally we studied the role of autophagy in cancer cells.
We found accumulation of GFP-LC3 puncta upon sapo-
nin and other detergent extraction in transient and stable 
transfectants independently of autophagy. Therefore, deter-
gents used prior to fixation should be used with caution. 
We have analyzed the bilateral links between apoptosis and 
autophagy. Our work focuses on the interaction between 
Beclin 1, a protein essential for autophagy, and anti-apop-
totic protein Bcl-2. Our results suggest that, although Beclin 
1 contains BH3-only motif typical of pro-apoptotic proteins, 
it is negligible modulator of Bcl-2 anti-apoptotic function. 
To understand the role of autophagy in cancer treatment we 
have used the most common and most aggressive cancer, 
glioblastoma, that is generally incurable. We found that im-
munosuppresant cyclosporine A, induces both apoptosis 
and autophagy in malignant glioma cells via induction of 
endoplasmic reticulum stress and inhibition of mTORC1/
p70S6K pathway. Our results revealed that autophagy was 
cytoprotective in this context, suggesting that combining 
cyclosporine A with autophagy inhibitors may improve the 
anti-cancer efficacy of the drug, which is in agreement with 
the findings from other researchers. GBMs are characterized 
by extensive heterogeneity at the cellular and molecular lev-
els. Therefore, we also analyzed the role of autophagy in sub-
population of cells called glioma stem-like cells, which are 
defined as undifferentiated cells responsible for tumor initi-
ation and resistance to therapy. We found that BIX01294, the 
inhibitor that modulates the epigenetic status of chromatin 
(introducing H3K9me2 and H3K27me3 repressive marks) 
triggers autophagy in established cell line, as well as in the 
patient-derived glioblastoma stem-like cell cultures. Moreo-
ver, we found that BIX01294 induced differentiation of GSC 
by activating autophagy. Our recent data have shown that 
BIX01294 sensitized adherent and glioma stem-like cells to 
temozolomide (TMZ, a conventional chemotherapeutics). 
These results may contribute to designing novel therapeutic 
strategies.
REFERENCES
1.	 Levine B, Klionsky DJ (2004) Development by self-digestion: molecu-
lar mechanisms and biological functions of autophagy. Dev Cell 6: 463-
477
2.	 Xie Z, Klionsky DJ (2007) Autophagosome formation: core machinery 
and adaptations. Nat Cell Biol 9: 1102-1109
3.	 Klionsky DJ, Emr SD (2000) Autophagy as a regulated pathway of cel-
lular degradation. Science 290: 1717-1721
4.	 He C, Klionsky DJ (2009) Regulation mechanisms and signaling path-
ways of autophagy. Annu Rev Genet 43: 67-93
5.	 Kroemer G, Levine B (2008) Autophagic cell death: the story of a mis-
nomer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 9: 1004-1010
6.	 Nikoletopoulou V, Markaki M, Palikaras K, Tavernarakis N (2013) 
Crosstalk between apoptosis, necrosis and autophagy. Biochim Bio-
phys Acta 1833: 3448-3459
7.	 Mukhopadhyay S, Panda PK, Sinha N, Das DN, Bhutia SK (2014) Au-
tophagy and apoptosis: where do they meet? Apoptosis 19: 555-566
8.	 Crighton D, Wilkinson S, O’Prey J, Syed N, Smith P, Harrison PR, 
Gasco M, Garrone O, Crook T, Ryan KM (2006) DRAM, a p53-induced 
modulator of autophagy, is critical for apoptosis. Cell 126: 121-134
9.	 Ciechomska IA, Goemans GC, Skepper JN, Tolkovsky AM (2009) Bcl-2 
complexed with Beclin-1 maintains full anti-apoptotic function. Onco-
gene 28: 2128-2141
10.	Ciechomska IA, Goemans CG, Tolkovsky AM (2009) Why doesn’t Bec-
lin 1, a BH3-only protein, suppress the anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-2? 
Autophagy 5: 880-881
11.	Levine B, Kroemer G (2008) Autophagy in the pathogenesis of disease. 
Cell 132: 27-42
12.	Kondo Y, Kondo S (2006) Autophagy and cancer therapy. Autophagy 
2: 85-90
13.	Mizushima N, Levine B, Cuervo AM, Klionsky DJ (2008) Autophagy 
fights disease through cellular self-digestion. Nature 451: 1069-1075
14.	White E (2012) Deconvoluting the context-dependent role for au-
tophagy in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 12: 401-410
15.	Ciechomska IA, Gabrusiewicz K, Szczepankiewicz AA, Kaminska B 
(2013) Endoplasmic reticulum stress triggers autophagy in malignant 
glioma cells undergoing cyclosporine A-induced cell death. Oncogene 
32: 1518-1529
16.	Ciechomska IA, Kaminska B (2012) ER stress and autophagy contrib-
ute to CsA-induced death of malignant glioma cells. Autophagy 8: 
1526-1528
17.	Ciechomska IA, Przanowski P, Jackl J, Wojtas B, Kaminska B (2016) 
BIX01294, an inhibitor of histone methyltransferase, induces au-
tophagy-dependent differentiation of glioma stem-like cells. Sci Rep 6: 
38723
18.	Ciechomska IA, Ellert-Miklaszewska A, Kaminska B (2014) Autophagy 
in Glioma Cells. Glioma Cell Biology, A. Sedo and R. Mentlein, Edi-
tors, Springer Vienna: Vienna. 117-149
19.	Feng Y, Yao Z, Klionsky DJ (2015) How to control self-digestion: tran-
scriptional, post-transcriptional, and post-translational regulation of 
autophagy. Trends Cell Biol 25: 354-363
20.	Füllgrabe J, Klionsky DJ, Joseph B (2014) The return of the nucleus: 
transcriptional and epigenetic control of autophagy. Nat Rev Mol Cell 
Biol 15: 65-74
21.	Suzuki K, Ohsumi Y (2007) Molecular machinery of autophagosome 
formation in yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett 581: 2156-2161
22.	Mizushima N, Noda T, Yoshimori T, Tanaka Y, Ishii T, George MD, 
Klionsky DJ, Ohsumi M, Ohsumi Y (1998) A protein conjugation sys-
tem essential for autophagy. Nature 395: 395-398
23.	Mizushima N (2010) The role of the Atg1/ULK1 complex in au-
tophagy regulation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 22: 132-139
24.	Jung CH, Jun CB, Ro SH, Kim YM, Otto NM, Cao J, Kundu M, Kim DH 
(2009) ULK-Atg13-FIP200 complexes mediate mTOR signaling to the 
autophagy machinery. Mol Biol Cell 20: 1992-2003
25.	Itakura E, Kishi C, Inoue K, Mizushima N (2008) Beclin 1 forms two 
distinct phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase complexes with mammalian 
Atg14 and UVRAG. Mol Biol Cell 19: 5360-5372
26.	Yang Z, Klionsky DJ (2010) Mammalian autophagy: core molecular 
machinery and signaling regulation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 22: 124-131
27.	Mizushima N, Yamamoto A, Hatano M, Kobayashi Y, Kabeya Y, Su-
zuki K, Tokuhisa T, Ohsumi Y, Yoshimori T (2001) Dissection of au-
tophagosome formation using Apg5-deficient mouse embryonic stem 
cells. J Cell Biol 152: 657-668
28.	Tanida I, Ueno T, Kominami E (2004) LC3 conjugation system in mam-
malian autophagy. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 36: 2503-2518
29.	Kabeya Y, Mizushima N, Ueno T, Yamamoto A, Kirisako T, Noda T, 
Kominami E, Ohsumi Y, Yoshimori T (2000) LC3, a mammalian homo-
logue of yeast Apg8p, is localized in autophagosome membranes after 
processing. EMBO J 19: 5720-5728
30.	Klionsky DJ, Abdelmohsen K, Abe A, Abedin MJ, Abeliovich H, Ace-
vedo Arozena A, Adachi H, Adams CM, Adams PD, Adeli K, Adhi-
hetty PJ, Adler SG, Agam G, Agarwal R, Aghi MK, et al. (2016) Guide-
lines for the use and interpretation of assays for monitoring autophagy 
(3rd edition). Autophagy 12: 1-222
31.	Ciechomska IA, Tolkovsky AM (2007) Non-autophagic GFP-LC3 
puncta induced by saponin and other detergents. Autophagy 3: 586-
590
32.	Kuma A, Matsui M, Mizushima N (2007) LC3, an autophagosome 
marker, can be incorporated into protein aggregates independent 

Postępy Biochemii 64 (2–3) 2018	
127
of autophagy: caution in the interpretation of LC3 localization. Au-
tophagy 3: 323-328
33.	Morris SM, Cooper JA (2001) Disabled-2 colocalizes with the LDLR in 
clathrin-coated pits and interacts with AP-2. Traffic 2: 111-123
34.	Young AR, Chan EY, Hu XW, Köchl R, Crawshaw SG, High S, Hailey 
DW, Lippincott-Schwartz J, Tooze SA (2006) Starvation and ULK1-
dependent cycling of mammalian Atg9 between the TGN and en-
dosomes. J Cell Sci 119: 3888-3900
35.	Köchl R, Hu XW, Chan EY, Tooze SA (2006) Microtubules facilitate 
autophagosome formation and fusion of autophagosomes with en-
dosomes. Traffic 7: 129-145
36.	Liang XH, Kleeman LK, Jiang HH, Gordon G, Goldman JE, Berry G, 
Herman B, Levine B (1998) Protection against fatal Sindbis virus en-
cephalitis by beclin, a novel Bcl-2-interacting protein. J Virol 72: 8586-
8596
37.	Pattingre S, Tassa A, Qu X, Garuti R, Liang XH, Mizushima N, Packer 
M, Schneider MD, Levine B (2005) Bcl-2 antiapoptotic proteins inhibit 
Beclin 1-dependent autophagy. Cell 122: 927-939
38.	Boya P, Gonzalez-Polo RA, Casares N, Perfettini JL, Dessen P, Laro-
chette N, Metivier D, Meley D, Souquere S, Yoshimori T, Pierron G, 
Codogno P, Kroemer G (2005) Inhibition of macroautophagy triggers 
apoptosis. Mol Cell Biol 25: 1025-1040
39.	Maiuri MC, Le Toumelin G, Criollo A, Rain JC, Gautier F, Juin P, Tas-
demir E, Pierron G, Troulinaki K, Tavernarakis N, Hickman JA, Gen-
este O, Kroemer G (2007) Functional and physical interaction between 
Bcl-X(L) and a BH3-like domain in Beclin-1. EMBO J 26: 2527-2539
40.	Oberstein A, Jeffrey PD, Shi Y (2007) Crystal structure of the Bcl-XL-
Beclin 1 peptide complex: Beclin 1 is a novel BH3-only protein. J Biol 
Chem 282: 13123-13132
41.	Scorrano L, Korsmeyer SJ (2003) Mechanisms of cytochrome c release 
by proapoptotic BCL-2 family members. Biochem Biophys Res Com-
mun 304: 437-444
42.	Certo M, Del Gaizo Moore V, Nishino M, Wei G, Korsmeyer S, Arm-
strong SA, Letai A (2006) Mitochondria primed by death signals de-
termine cellular addiction to antiapoptotic BCL-2 family members. 
Cancer Cell 9: 351-365
43.	Adams JM, Cory S (2007) The Bcl-2 apoptotic switch in cancer devel-
opment and therapy. Oncogene 26: 1324-1337
44.	Feng W, Huang S, Wu H, Zhang M (2007) Molecular basis of Bcl-xL’s 
target recognition versatility revealed by the structure of Bcl-xL in 
complex with the BH3 domain of Beclin-1. J Mol Biol 372: 223-235
45.	Boya P, Kroemer G (2009) Beclin 1: a BH3-only protein that fails to 
induce apoptosis. Oncogene 28: 2125-2127
46.	Rubinstein AD, Kimchi A (2012) Life in the balance - a mechanistic 
view of the crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis. J Cell Sci 125: 
5259-5268
47.	Lefranc F, Facchini V, Kiss R (2007) Proautophagic drugs: a novel 
means to combat apoptosis-resistant cancers, with a special emphasis 
on glioblastomas. Oncologist 12: 1395-1403
48.	Kanzawa T, Germano IM, Komata T, Ito H, Kondo Y, Kondo S (2004) 
Role of autophagy in temozolomide-induced cytotoxicity for malig-
nant glioma cells. Cell Death Differ 11: 448-457
49.	Kanzawa T, Kondo Y, Ito H, Kondo S, Germano I (2003) Induction of 
autophagic cell death in malignant glioma cells by arsenic trioxide. 
Cancer Res 63: 2103-2108
50.	Daido S, Kanzawa T, Yamamoto A, Takeuchi H, Kondo Y, Kondo S 
(2004) Pivotal role of the cell death factor BNIP3 in ceramide-induced 
autophagic cell death in malignant glioma cells. Cancer Res 64: 4286-
4293
51.	Takeuchi H, Kondo Y, Fujiwara K, Kanzawa T, Aoki H, Mills GB, 
Kondo S (2005) Synergistic augmentation of rapamycin-induced au-
tophagy in malignant glioma cells by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/
protein kinase B inhibitors. Cancer Res 65: 3336-3346
52.	Aoki H, Takada Y, Kondo S, Sawaya R, Aggarwal BB, Kondo Y (2007) 
Evidence that curcumin suppresses the growth of malignant gliomas 
in vitro and in vivo through induction of autophagy: role of Akt and 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling pathways. Mol Phar-
macol 72: 29-39
53.	Salazar M, Carracedo A, Salanueva IJ, Hernandez-Tiedra S, Lorente 
M, Egia A, Vazquez P, Blazquez C, Torres S, Garcia S, Nowak J, Fimia 
GM, Piacentini M, Cecconi F, Pandolfi PP, et al. (2009) Cannabinoid 
action induces autophagy-mediated cell death through stimulation of 
ER stress in human glioma cells. J Clin Invest 119: 1359-1372
54.	Mosieniak G, Figiel I, Kaminska B (1997) Cyclosporin A, an immuno-
suppressive drug, induces programmed cell death in rat C6 glioma 
cells by a mechanism that involves the AP-1 transcription factor. 
J  Neurochem 68: 1142-1149
55.	Pyrzynska B, Mosieniak G, Kaminska B (2000) Changes of the trans-
activating potential of AP-1 transcription factor during cyclosporin 
A-induced apoptosis of glioma cells are mediated by phosphorylation 
and alterations of AP-1 composition. J Neurochem 74: 42-51
56.	Zupanska A, Dziembowska M, Ellert-Miklaszewska A, Gaweda-
Walerych K, Kaminska B (2005) Cyclosporine a induces growth arrest 
or programmed cell death of human glioma cells. Neurochem Int 47: 
430-441
57.	Pyrzynska B, Serrano M, Martínez-A C, Kaminska B (2002) Tumor 
suppressor p53 mediates apoptotic cell death triggered by cyclosporin 
A. J Biol Chem 277: 14102-14108
58.	Wang P, Heitman J (2005) The cyclophilins. Genome Biol 6: 226
59.	Shingu T, Fujiwara K, Bogler O, Akiyama Y, Moritake K, Shinojima N, 
Tamada Y, Yokoyama T, Kondo S (2009) Inhibition of autophagy at a 
late stage enhances imatinib-induced cytotoxicity in human malignant 
glioma cells. Int J Cancer 124: 1060-1071
60.	Chen S, Rehman SK, Zhang W, Wen A, Yao L, Zhang J (2010) Au-
tophagy is a therapeutic target in anticancer drug resistance. Biochim 
Biophys Acta 1806: 220-229
61.	Ciechomska I, Kocyk M, Kaminska B (2013) Glioblastoma Stem-Like 
Cells - Isolation, Biology and Mechanisms of Chemotherapy Resist-
ance. Current Signal Transduction Therapy 8: 256-267
62.	Suvà ML, Rheinbay E, Gillespie SM, Patel AP, Wakimoto H, Rabkin 
SD, Riggi N, Chi AS, Cahill DP, Nahed BV, Curry WT, Martuza RL, 
Rivera MN, Rossetti N, Kasif S, et al. (2014) Reconstructing and repro-
gramming the tumor-propagating potential of glioblastoma stem-like 
cells. Cell 157: 580-594
63.	Binello E, Germano IM (2011) Targeting glioma stem cells: a novel 
framework for brain tumors. Cancer Sci 102: 1958-1966
64.	Mizushima N, Levine B (2010) Autophagy in mammalian develop-
ment and differentiation. Nat Cell Biol 12: 823-830
65.	Phadwal K, Watson AS, Simon AK (2013) Tightrope act: autophagy 
in stem cell renewal, differentiation, proliferation, and aging. Cell Mol 
Life Sci 70: 89-103
66.	Vessoni AT, Muotri AR, Okamoto OK (2012) Autophagy in stem cell 
maintenance and differentiation. Stem Cells Dev 21: 513-520
67.	Zhao Y, Huang Q, Yang J, Lou M, Wang A, Dong J, Qin Z, Zhang T 
(2010) Autophagy impairment inhibits differentiation of glioma stem/
progenitor cells. Brain Res 1313: 250-258
68.	Zhuang W, Li B, Long L, Chen L, Huang Q, Liang Z (2011) Induction 
of autophagy promotes differentiation of glioma-initiating cells and 
their radiosensitivity. Int J Cancer 129: 2720-2731
69.	Zhuang W, Long L, Zheng B, Ji W, Yang N, Zhang Q, Liang Z (2012) 
Curcumin promotes differentiation of glioma-initiating cells by induc-
ing autophagy. Cancer Sci 103: 684-690
70.	Nabissi M, Morelli MB, Amantini C, Liberati S, Santoni M, Ricci-Vi-
tiani L, Pallini R, Santoni G (2015) Cannabidiol stimulates Aml-1a-
dependent glial differentiation and inhibits glioma stem-like cells pro-
liferation by inducing autophagy in a TRPV2-dependent manner. Int J 
Cancer 137: 1855-1869
71.	Chiao MT, Cheng WY, Yang YC, Shen CC, Ko JL (2013) Suberoylani-
lide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) causes tumor growth slowdown and 
triggers autophagy in glioblastoma stem cells. Autophagy 9: 1509-1526
72.	Kubicek S, O’Sullivan RJ, August EM, Hickey ER, Zhang Q, Teodoro 
ML, Rea S, Mechtler K, Kowalski JA, Homon CA, Kelly TA, Jenuwein 

128	
www.postepybiochemii.pl
Rola autofagii w komórkach nowotworowych: charakterystyka wzajemnych 
zależności pomiędzy procesami autofagii i apoptozy; modulacja 
autofagii jako nowa strategia terapeutyczna w leczeniu glejaków
Iwona Anna Ciechomska*
Pracownia Neurobiologii Molekularnej, Centrum Neurobiologii, Instytut Biologii Doświadczalnej im. Marcelego Nenckiego PAN, ul. Pasteura 3, 
02-093 Warszawa
*e-mail: i.ciechomska@nencki.gov.pl
Słowa kluczowe: autofagia, apoptoza, glejaki, cyclosporyna A, beklina 1, LC3
STRESZCZENIE
W 2016 roku nagrodę Nobla w dziedzinie medycyny i fizjologii otrzymał japoński naukowiec Yoshinori Ohsumi, za odkrycie molekularnych 
mechanizmów leżących u podstaw autofagii. Odkrycie to miało fundamentalne znaczenie w zrozumieniu w jaki sposób komórka poddaje 
recyklingowi swoją zawartość. Jego odkrycie utorowało drogę do zrozumienia wielu procesów fizjologicznych takich jak adaptacja do wa-
runków niedoboru substancji odżywczych czy odpowiedz na infekcję patogenami. Ponadto mutacje genów regulujących proces autofagii 
mogą przyczyniać się do rozwoju wielu chorób, w tym nowotworów czy chorób neurodegeneracyjnych. Pokazuje to, jak ważne są badania 
dotyczące autofagii i jak istotną rolę odgrywa ten proces zarówno w stanach fizjologicznych i patologicznych. Wciąż wiele pytań pozostaje 
jednak bez odpowiedzi m.in. zagadnienie funkcji autofagii w komórkach nowotworowych. Celem omawianych prac było przybliżenie roli 
autofagii w komórkach nowotworowych poprzez ocenę niektórych metod detekcji autofagii, określenie molekularnych współzależności po-
między autofagią i apoptozą w komórkach nowotworowych, a także poszukiwanie nowych strategii leczenia najczęstszych nowotworów 
mózgu, glejaków.
T (2007) Reversal of H3K9me2 by a small-molecule inhibitor for the 
G9a histone methyltransferase. Mol Cell 25: 473-481
73.	Kim Y, Kim YS, Kim DE, Lee JS, Song JH, Kim HG, Cho DH, Jeong SY, 
Jin DH, Jang SJ, Seol HS, Suh YA, Lee SJ, Kim CS, Koh JY, et al. (2013) 
BIX-01294 induces autophagy-associated cell death via EHMT2/G9a 
dysfunction and intracellular reactive oxygen species production. Au-
tophagy 9: 2126-2139
74.	Ke XX, Zhang D, Zhu S, Xia Q, Xiang Z, Cui H (2014) Inhibition of 
H3K9 methyltransferase G9a repressed cell proliferation and induced 
autophagy in neuroblastoma cells. PLoS One 9: e106962
75.	Ren A, Qiu Y, Cui H, Fu G (2015) Inhibition of H3K9 methyltransferase 
G9a induces autophagy and apoptosis in oral squamous cell carcino-
ma. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 459: 10-17
76.	Fan JD, Lei PJ, Zheng JY, Wang X, Li S, Liu H, He YL, Wang ZN, Wei 
G, Zhang X, Li LY, Wu M (2015) The selective activation of p53 target 
genes regulated by SMYD2 in BIX-01294 induced autophagy-related 
cell death. PLoS One 10: e0116782
77.	Savickiene J, Treigyte G, Stirblyte I, Valiuliene G, Navakauskiene R 
(2014) Euchromatic histone methyltransferase 2 inhibitor, BIX-01294, 
sensitizes human promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 and NB4 cells to 
growth inhibition and differentiation. Leuk Res 38: 822-829
78.	Culmes M, Eckstein HH, Burgkart R, Nüssler AK, Guenther M, Wag-
ner E, Pelisek J (2013) Endothelial differentiation of adipose-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells is improved by epigenetic modifying drug 
BIX-01294. Eur J Cell Biol 92: 70-79
79.	Ling BM, Bharathy N, Chung TK, Kok WK, Li S, Tan YH, Rao VK, 
Gopinadhan S, Sartorelli V, Walsh MJ, Taneja R (2012) Lysine meth-
yltransferase G9a methylates the transcription factor MyoD and regu-
lates skeletal muscle differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109: 841-
846
80.	Mezentseva NV, Yang J, Kaur K, Iaffaldano G, Rémond MC, Eisen-
berg CA, Eisenberg LM (2013) The histone methyltransferase inhibitor 
BIX01294 enhances the cardiac potential of bone marrow cells. Stem 
Cells Dev 22: 654-667
81.	Yang J, Kaur K, Ong LL, Eisenberg CA, Eisenberg LM (2015) Inhibition 
of G9a Histone methyltransferase converts bone marrow mesenchy-
mal stem cells to cardiac competent progenitors. Stem Cells Int 2015: 
270428
82.	Dirks PB (2010) Brain tumor stem cells: the cancer stem cell hypothesis 
writ large. Mol Oncol 4: 420-430
83.	Di Tomaso T, Mazzoleni S, Wang E, Sovena G, Clavenna D, Franzin 
A, Mortini P, Ferrone S, Doglioni C, Marincola FM, Galli R, Parmiani 
G, Maccalli C (2010) Immunobiological characterization of cancer stem 
cells isolated from glioblastoma patients. Clin Cancer Res 16: 800-813
84.	Galli R, Binda E, Orfanelli U, Cipelletti B, Gritti A, De Vitis S, Fiocco R, 
Foroni C, Dimeco F, Vescovi A (2004) Isolation and characterization of 
tumorigenic, stem-like neural precursors from human glioblastoma. 
Cancer Res 64: 7011-7021
85.	Roy Choudhury S, Karmakar S, Banik NL, Ray SK (2011) Valproic acid 
induced differentiation and potentiated efficacy of taxol and nanotaxol 
for controlling growth of human glioblastoma LN18 and T98G cells. 
Neurochem Res 36: 2292-2305
86.	Persano L, Pistollato F, Rampazzo E, Della Puppa A, Abbadi S, Fras-
son C, Volpin F, Indraccolo S, Scienza R, Basso G (2012) BMP2 sensitiz-
es glioblastoma stem-like cells to Temozolomide by affecting HIF-1α 
stability and MGMT expression. Cell Death Dis 3: e412
87.	Casciello F, Windloch K, Gannon F, Lee JS (2015) Functional Role of 
G9a Histone Methyltransferase in Cancer. Front Immunol 6: 487
88.	Berendsen S, Broekman M, Seute T, Snijders T, van Es C, de Vos F, 
Regli L, Robe P (2012) Valproic acid for the treatment of malignant 
gliomas: review of the preclinical rationale and published clinical re-
sults. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 21: 1391-1415
