This paper proposes scalable and fast algorithms for solving the Robust PCA problem, namely recovering a low-rank matrix with an unknown fraction of its entries being arbitrarily corrupted. This problem arises in many applications, such as image processing, web data ranking, and bioinformatic data analysis. It was recently shown that under surprisingly broad conditions, the Robust PCA problem can be exactly solved via convex optimization that minimizes a combi- nation of the nuclear norm and the ℓ1-norm . In this paper, we apply the method of augmented Lagrange multipliers (ALM) to solve this convex program. As the objective function is non-smooth, we show how to extend the classical analysis of ALM to such new objective functions and prove the optimality of the proposed algorithms and characterize their convergence rate. Empirically, the proposed new algorithms can be more than ﬁve times faster than the previous state-of-the-art algorithms for Robust PCA, such as the accelerated proximal gradient (APG) algorithm. Moreover, the new algorithms achieve higher precision, yet being less storage/memory demanding. We also show that the ALM technique can be used to solve the (related but somewhat simpler) matrix completion problem and obtain rather promising results too. Matlab code of all algorithms discussed are available at http://perception.csl.illinois.edu/matrix-rank/home.html This is only a technical report. Please cite “Zhouchen Lin, Risheng Liu, and Zhixun Su, Linearized Alternating Direction Method with Adaptive Penalty for Low Rank Representation, NIPS 2011.” (available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.0367) instead for a more general method called Linearized Alternating Direction Method. Thanks! Zhouchen Lin Key Laboratory of Machine Perception, School of EECS, Peking University. E-mail: zlin@pku.edu.cn Minming Chen Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. Yi Ma Visual Computing Group, Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing 100190, China, an