Body Language Communication

Derek Chadee  •  Aleksandra Kostić
Editors
Body Language 
Communication

ISBN 978-3-031-70063-7        ISBN 978-3-031-70064-4  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-70064-4
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2024
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
If disposing of this product, please recycle the paper.
Editors
Derek Chadee
University of the West Indies
St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago
Aleksandra Kostić
Faculty of Philosophy
University of Nis
Nis, Serbia

To Dr. Hamid Farabi, for his spiritual guidance, friendship and love.  
And to my darling, loving and ever-caring wife, Mary Chadee (DC)
Paul Ekman, a great scientist and friend who awakened  
my interest in the field of nonverbal behavior (AK)

vii
In 1970, just over a half-century ago, Julius Fast published a well-­received 
commercialized book titled Body Language (Fast 1970). Though this 
book popularized body language and created international curiosity 
about this emerging topic, the science, literature, and precision in under-
standing body language have developed many folds since then. Today, 
tremendous literature and material on this engaging area elucidate more 
than mystify as fifty years ago.
People are social beings who communicate with others emotionally, 
expressing themselves not only verbally but powerfully with their bodies 
via facial expressions, gestures, and postures. They choose the verbal or 
non-verbal channel to articulate their cognition and affect states volun-
tarily or involuntarily. Though people are interested in the quality of their 
communication, they often do not understand the functioning of their 
communication channels, especially the nonverbal ones.
Nonverbal signals are elements of behaviour emitted by one person, 
which then affect the behaviour of the person receiving them (Argyle, 
1988). Unlike pre-planned, precisely thought out, and organized speech, 
nonverbal messages are perceived as more spontaneous, sincere, and reli-
able because they are less controlled than verbal ones and more trusted 
(Rot, 2004). The often vague link between nonverbal signals and their 
meanings can shield sensitive or intimate feelings that a person uncon-
sciously conveys but may not be ready to express clearly and directly in 
Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body 
Language

viii 
Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language
words. This is especially true when it comes to communicating emotions. 
Nonverbal signals, such as facial expressions, touch, eye contact, gestures, 
body posture, and tone of voice, convey a wide range of messages about 
emotions, interpersonal attitudes, and a person’s sincerity. These signals 
add complexity to interactions, requiring strong communication skills 
from people. For effective communication, individuals must stay focused 
and attuned to the nuances of the interaction, paying attention to the 
body language and nonverbal cues and their meanings at the appropriate 
moments.
During a given communication, parties strive to convey a relatively 
general impression of their interlocutor, relying not only on their words 
but also on facial expressions, tone of voice, and body movements. 
Communication with other people should create an atmosphere of 
mutual trust, benevolence, an open and honest exchange of information, 
the experience of new perspectives and positive expectations. Nonverbal 
signals and their messages are important in realizing goals within interac-
tion. Of course, they must be adequately used and correctly interpreted 
within the framework of a given relationship and a social context.
Understanding body language provides insights into a dimension of 
social interaction that, even after half a century, there are more questions 
than answers. As a supplement to speech, body language often talks 
louder than words. As conveyors, our nonverbal behaviour expresses 
many emotions, even if the social situation may suppress their expression. 
Though body language is present in all social situations, understanding it 
is crucial during negotiation, persuasion, expression of leadership, con-
flict resolution, and presentation of ourselves. The paradigm of body lan-
guage and nonverbal behaviour has grown over the last five decades. As 
this paradigm evolves, new theories, research, and questions emerge that 
require serious consideration. This volume addresses some of the emerg-
ing concerns and issues in the body language and nonverbal behaviour 
paradigm.
The volume covers a wide range of areas within the body language lit-
erature, intending to add further insights, address debates, and meaning-
fully contribute to the existing literature. Among the topics covered in 
the book are hand gestures and communication, touch and emotional 
connections, contextual influences on facial expressions, voice and 

ix
  Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language 
nonverbal expression, posture in social relationships, critiques of body 
language analyses, personality and nonverbal behaviour, expressive body 
movements, emotions in movements, postures, and dance, non-facial 
emotional expressions and conflict resolution, facial thermography and 
emotions, physical manifestations of thoughts and feelings, nonverbal 
behaviour in investigative interviewing, lie detection, complexities of 
facial expressions, relational dominance and predictability, and human-­
machine nonverbal interaction.
Kinesics, often thought of as body language, is a communication code 
with a wide range of nonverbal communications through gestures and 
movements. The chapter by Judee K. Burgoon, Norah E. Dunbar, Steven 
Pentland, Xinran Wang, Xunyu Chen, and Saiying Ge explores how non-
verbal cues communicate credibility, trust, and deception. While facial 
expressions are often highlighted in nonverbal communication studies, 
the chapter expands the focus to include channels like vocalics, kinesics, 
and proxemics. They note that the body is a rich source of communica-
tion about everything from one’s identity, social status, and emotional 
state, to self-presentation, credibility, social influence, and veracity. The 
authors explore the importance of facial expressions and discuss other 
nonverbal channels like voice, gestures, and eye movements. After sum-
marizing some of the more prominent literature about nonverbal com-
munication from these kinesic and vocalic channels, three studies 
illustrate how these cues can assess credibility, composure, and trustwor-
thiness in various situations. The chapter concludes by discussing appli-
cations in areas like interview training and business negotiations.
Our hands, often taken for granted, play a surprisingly complex role in 
how we communicate, learn, and experience the world around us. John 
White and David Givens’ chapter probes into the fascinating role of the 
hands, exploring how hands have evolved to enable us to grasp objects 
and shape our thoughts and interactions. The journey begins with the 
neurological underpinnings of nonverbal communication through hand 
gestures, a skill rooted in ancient neural pathways. The authors note that 
human use of their hands to send nonverbal messages is rooted in ancient 
neurocircuits of the posterior hindbrain and anterior spinal cord. The 
chapter traces the development of the hand from an infant’s early reflexes 
to the refined precision grip by the age of one. The chapter also explores 

x 
Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language
the connection between hand movements and cognition. The concept of 
embodied cognition, explaining how gestures can influence memory and 
communication, is discussed. Touch is one of our earliest sensory experi-
ences that plays a crucial role in both childhood development and adult 
relationships. The various messages conveyed through common hand 
movements, from the ubiquitous handshake to hands-on-hip posture, are 
explored. By weaving together evolutionary biology, developmental psy-
chology, and cultural influences, the chapter paints a rich portrait of our 
hands, not just as tools but as fundamental aspects of what makes us 
human. The authors concluded that hands are integral to interacting with 
and learning about the world around us. With deep evolutionary roots, 
hands are hard-wired in how humans engage with the world.
Jonathan Bowman and Benjamin Compton’s chapter stimulatingly 
investigates touch in nonverbal emotional communication, highlighting 
how haptic interactions can influence relationships. They note that touch 
as a form of nonverbal expression is known as haptic messaging (often 
shortened to “haptics” as a stand-in for the longer expression). While 
much of the existing research emphasizes facial expressions, this chapter 
argues that touch conveys emotional messages with unique potency. 
From the initial interactions between strangers that can set the tone for 
their relationship to the nuanced expressions of affection, openness, or 
even anger in established connections, touch emerges as a powerful non-
verbal code. The chapter explores various structural forms and functional 
expressions of touch, examining how they convey emotions and affect 
both the giver and receiver. Additionally, Expectancy Violation Theory is 
applied to understand how touch impacts relationships in different con-
texts, offering insights into the dynamics of both anticipated and unex-
pected tactile interactions.
Context plays a crucial role in how we perceive and interpret our real-
ity, including facial expressions. Sam Day, Danielle Shore and Eva 
Krumhuber’s chapter focuses on the importance of interpreting facial 
expressions within social interactions, highlighting that accurately decod-
ing these expressions is complex due to the influence of various contex-
tual cues, such as body language. They posit that decoding a social 
partner’s emotions is fundamental to initiating and maintaining social 
interactions and interpersonal relationships. The chapter reviews 

xi
  Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language 
empirical research on how these contextual factors affect the interpreta-
tion of facial expressions and vice versa. They advocate for a holistic and 
contextualized approach in future research in affective and social psychol-
ogy to better understand the interplay between facial expressions and 
their surrounding context in social and emotional judgments.
Terrence Horgan, Judith Hall, and Nathaniel Miller’s chapter on non-
verbal expression in voice acknowledges that the human voice expresses 
emotions through variations in sound elements like pitch, volume, tim-
bre, tone, rhythm, and speed, which indicate how people feel and their 
physical and mental conditions. The chapter moves forward to discuss 
the implications of the human voice in disorders such as alexithymia, 
which affects emotional awareness, and Parkinson’s disease, which impacts 
vocal function, can hinder this form of communication. Conversely, psy-
chiatric conditions like depression and mania might amplify emotional 
expression through the voice. The chapter also provides insights for care-
givers to understand better and respond to the emotional needs of those 
with these conditions.
Hallee Altman and Stephen Nowicki provide a very intriguing under-
standing of posture and the formation of social relationships. Their chap-
ter explores the role of posture as a key aspect of nonverbal communication 
within the Nowicki and Duke four-phase model of relationship and its 
impact on relationships throughout various stages, including initiation, 
development, and conclusion. The authors argue that posture is often 
undervalued in discussions about relationship dynamics and provide evi-
dence supporting its significance. They advocate for educational pro-
grammes to enhance individuals’ postural communication skills and 
outline a potential approach for such training. The chapter concludes by 
emphasizing the need for further research to better understand and 
improve postural communication abilities in both children and adults. 
Despite extensive research on other nonverbal cues, posture remains 
underexplored but is vital in conveying authentic emotions.
Vincent Denault, Miles Patterson, Mircea Zloteanu, and Victoria 
Talwar’s chapter critically assesses body language and the associated anal-
yses. The term “body language” has been commercialized since the 1970s, 
with the emergence of numerous training programmes and a plethora of 
materials, including books and videos on understanding and interpreting 

xii 
Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language
body movements. The rise of social media has further fuelled this indus-
try by spreading body language content to an unprecedentedly broad 
audience.
However, Denault and colleagues’ aim is to demystify the concept of 
body language, asserting that no consistent or clear-cut interpretations 
can be reliably drawn from specific nonverbal behaviours. They address 
common misconceptions associated with body language analysis, criti-
cally evaluating the effectiveness of training programmes designed to 
teach the “codes” for deciphering facial and bodily expressions. They note 
that a central theme since the 1970 in body language literature is that 
there are codes to understand what others say with their bodies. Finally, 
the belief that “the body never lies,” a core tenet in many body language 
training courses and publications, is debunked. The chapter concludes by 
offering guidance on critically assessing the claims made by body lan-
guage experts. The chapter is a refreshing critical commentary on body 
language.
What is the relationship between nonverbal bodily behaviour and per-
sonality in social interaction? This is the core question that Nora Murphy 
addresses in her exceedingly insightful chapter. At the start of her chapter, 
Murphy posits that nonverbal behaviour occurs automatically and is vital 
to social perception processes and personality traits, profoundly impact-
ing individual and social outcomes. The chapter addresses the following 
crucial areas (1) the role of nonverbal behaviour and personality in social 
perception processes; (2) how observable nonverbal behaviour is funda-
mental to defining personality; (3) documented nonverbal bodily behav-
iours associated with specific personality traits; (4) whether descriptions 
of personality include bodily behaviours; and (5) whether nonverbal 
bodily behaviours are captured in personality inventories. She concludes 
with a simple but profound statement: “Personality and nonverbal bodily 
behaviour are not linked in simple ways during social interactions.”
R.  Thomas Boone and Joseph Cunningham’s chapter explores the 
research on the emotional meaning conveyed through expressive body 
movement, covering various forms such as dance, gait, posture, and 
dynamic movement. Despite the limited research in this area, their chap-
ter supports the view that body movement is a robust nonverbal channel 
for communicating emotions. It matches the effectiveness and 

xiii
  Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language 
developmental alignment of other nonverbal channels like facial expres-
sions, vocal intonations, and music. The chapter aims to provide an over-
view of existing research, discuss the challenges specific to studying body 
movement, highlight overlooked theoretical connections, and suggest 
directions for future research to deepen our understanding of how body 
movements convey emotions. In concluding, they state, “Recent efforts 
have identified a methodology for coding these behaviours, it is now time 
to refine that methodology via a more theoretically driven approach to 
establishing emotion-specifying cue structures and perceptions.”
Alan Crawley and Ronald Riggio make a useful contribution by not-
ing the evolution and complexity of nonverbal communication and 
focusing on how body movements and postures express emotions through 
a probabilistic relationship influenced by natural selection. They argue 
that emotions are conveyed through various nonverbal cues, each with its 
efficiency and redundancy in communication. The discussion emphasizes 
that while certain body movements are generally associated with specific 
emotions, their interpretation is context-dependent and culturally influ-
enced. The chapter calls for future research to use more realistic methods 
to understand better how emotions are conveyed through body expres-
sions accurately and reliably. The main arguments of the chapter are: (1) 
the nonverbal modalities used to express emotions depend on the type of 
affect felt at the moment, and the efficiency of that modality; (2) the 
modalities of nonverbal displays of emotions are interrelated such that 
redundancy is built into the communication system; and (3) evolution 
has endowed humans with a probabilistic repertoire of behaviours associ-
ated with emotions. In concluding, they recognize that body movements 
and positions are complex and not as straightforward as detecting a pos-
ture and instantaneously determining the corresponding emotion.
Our human emotions allow us to engage, coordinate, and manage a 
range of social interactions and to respond to the daily range of interper-
sonal conflicts that emerge and must be negotiated. Martin Remland and 
Tricia Jones, in their chapter on emotional expressions beyond the face, 
noted that much attention has been paid to the relationship between 
particular emotions and discrete patterns of facial cues that convey these 
emotions. However, less attention has been given to the similarity between 
emotions and vocal and bodily expressions of these emotions. The authors 

xiv 
Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language
acknowledge that emotional communication is a multi-modal process 
involving the voice, the whole body, and personal space, gaze and touch. 
They assess the nature and range of emotions and the role of contexts in 
the expression of body and vocal communication of human emotions. 
An observation from the chapter is the importance of vocal cues reflect-
ing emotional states often identified by listeners when there are audible 
modifications of a speaker’s respiration, phonation, and articulation. 
Identification of emotional states via voice is crucial in interpersonal rela-
tionships. The authors’ findings applied to how the non-facial expressions 
of 
self-conscious 
emotions 
influence 
conflict 
management 
interventions.
Dennis Küster’s chapter explores what facial thermography can tell us 
about emotions. While progress in recording and analysing facial image 
data has been notable, this development has overlooked using facial ther-
mal imaging (FTI) to study facial expressions. The author accentuates 
facial thermal imaging to reveal underlying emotional states and focuses 
on the physiological basis and ability to distinguish between different 
facial regions of interest (ROIs) using FTI. In addition, the author 
emphasizes the opportunities and challenges in integrating FTI with 
other modalities and biosignals. The author recommends that such inte-
gration provides a more robust approach to data for modelling real-time 
adaptive systems and emotions. However, it is recommended to develop 
ethical adaptive systems that leverage thermal imaging data to benefit 
humans while protecting their privacy and autonomy. This chapter pro-
vides an interesting and what may appear to be a rare angle to under-
standing nonverbal behaviour and beckons body language research into a 
dimension that is sparse in the nonverbal communication literature.
Mark Frank, Zachary Glowacki, Madison Neurohr, Ifeoma Nwogu, 
and Anne Solbu’s chapter highlights how the human body communicates 
messages from its appearance and movements via the processes of our 
thoughts and feelings. As they observe, our bodies’ dynamic movement, 
fast, voluntary and involuntary, sends messages that reflect our thoughts 
and feelings. Their chapter examines Darwin’s theory of evolution, 
emphasizing the principle of serviceable habits, antithesis, and nerve 
force on the body’s physiological responses. The authors suggest we com-
municate messages through postural actions, forward, backwards, up and 

xv
  Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language 
out or down and in, as well as hand and head movements. Therefore, our 
emotions and cognitive processes manifest in body movements such as 
touch, gait, and gestures. The discussion emphasizes the convergences of 
complex interactive situations and emotional processes that influence 
body behaviour. As they note, body movements are not just social signals 
but can also be instrumental in survival in both a distal and a proximal 
sense. The authors conclude the chapter by discussing the challenges to 
coding bodies using machine-based approaches.
Mary Chadee, Derek Chadee, and Aleksandra Kostic assess how inves-
tigative interviews may be affected by the interpretation of nonverbal 
behaviour and body language. Investigative interviews aim to elicit accu-
rate information, yet nonverbal communication poses a complex chal-
lenge. The authors observed that investigators are often trained to look 
for nonverbal cues at the start of an interview to ascertain truthful non-
verbal behaviour, which is then used as a baseline to detect deceit. 
However, the perception and interpretation of body language in these 
interviews are influenced by various factors. These include psychological 
reactance, cognitive schemas, interviewer bias, the fundamental attribu-
tion error and how the brain’s amygdala and prefrontal cortex respond to 
high anxiety situations such as those that exist in an investigative inter-
view as they are intrusive. In conclusion, the authors note that future 
research and theorization must consider an investigative interview’s social 
and psychological dynamics. There is a need to understand the power 
relationship between the interviewer and the interviewee and the domi-
nance and subordination messages that may be present as the interview 
progresses.
Aldert Vrij and Ronald Fisher’s chapter examines detecting deception 
from nonverbal signals, stating that the interviewing process is cogni-
tively demanding and physical signals can point towards deception or 
evidence of truth. However, the authors draw attention to seminal 
research in deception that highlights the non-universality of nonverbal 
lying cues, emphasizing deception detection techniques like microexpres-
sions of emotions and the behaviour analysis interview (BAI). They fur-
ther discuss several reasons why nonverbal cues to deception are unreliable, 
stating that both lie and truth-tellers employ the same nonverbal strategy. 
They will show similar signs of increased nervousness due to the fear of 

xvi 
Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language
not being believed. The chapter concludes by discussing the future of 
nonverbal lie detection, focusing on automated lie detection, the devel-
opment of interview techniques to elicit or enhance nonverbal cues to 
deception and situations in which analyses of only nonverbal behaviour 
can be made.
José-Miguel Fernández-Dols and Roberto García-Gonzalez’s work on 
facial expression at the crossroads is a useful contribution to the body 
language literature. The assumption that there are several universal expres-
sions of evolutionary acquired emotions has undergone methodological 
and theoretical criticism supported by empirical findings. Hence, with 
this premise, the authors argue that this area is at a crossroads. Recent 
advancements call for rethinking the concept of facial expressions. The 
traditional notion, which views facial expressions as fixed, innate, and 
independent of context, is being challenged. Modern research empha-
sizes the adaptability and context-dependency of facial behaviour, sug-
gesting that expressions are not static but influenced by surrounding 
circumstances and cultural factors. Studies show that situational context 
can significantly alter the perception of facial expressions, indicating that 
expressions are not isolated behaviours but part of a broader communica-
tive framework. This leads to the proposal that understanding facial 
expressions should involve considering their dynamic and interactive 
nature across different cultures and contexts. Fernández-Dols and García-
Gonzalez conclude that the concept of facial expression requires an urgent 
re-conceptualization that has been simultaneously demanded by three 
parallel processes—new theoretical hypotheses; new technologies; and 
the recognition of the growing sensitivity to cross-cultural differences.
“Dominance and submission exist in all relationships” is the starting 
point of James Honeycutt, Ryan Rasner, Laura Labato, and Dongdong 
Yang’s contribution. The majority of research describes dominance as a 
trait. However, the authors posit the usefulness of conceptualizing domi-
nance from a state perspective. Both situational dominance and the 
evolving stages in a relationship influence the body language display and 
its intensity associated with dominance. Dominance varies depending on 
how much power an individual wields in a situational context. Some 
persons are inflexible and context-insensitive in the expression of domi-
nance and submissive patterns. Dominance is reflected through 

xvii
  Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language 
nonverbal cues such as facial expressions, gestures, postures, movement, 
access to greater personal space, nonreciprocal touch, and eye gaze and 
paralanguage cues including pitch, volume, pauses, and interruptions. 
The authors discuss the stages of relational escalation: initiating, experi-
menting, intensifying, integrating, and bonding. They argue that in view-
ing dominance as state rather than trait, dominance can be understood as 
a phenomenon represented by the asymmetry of predictability. During 
an argument between parties the asymmetry of predictability can be mea-
sured through various nonverbal communication cues. The chapter dis-
cusses the nonverbal aspects of conflict resolution, mutual vs. unilateral 
influence, and dominance in terms of nonverbal cues of predictability 
(e.g., eye gaze, silence, voice loudness). Essentially, the dominant person 
in an argument has less predictable behaviours, while the followers are 
more predictable. Honeycutt and colleagues have provided an under-
standing of dominance and body language that can be extrapolated to 
various social contexts.
Over the past two decades, there has been a significant expansion in 
the scope of human-machine interaction (HMI), moving beyond tradi-
tional textual and verbal communication to include nonverbal elements. 
The contribution of Isaac Wang, Jaime Ruiz, and Arvid Kappas is intrigu-
ing as they explore the relationship between HMI and nonverbal behav-
iour. Initial research predominantly centred on facial expressions, but 
recent advancements have broadened the focus to include “body lan-
guage,” such as gestures, posture, and proxemics. These new develop-
ments are reflected in areas such as affective computing and social 
robotics, which aim to enhance HMI by evaluating and interpreting 
human behaviours in affective, motivational, and socially pragmatic con-
texts. Nonverbal cues like gestures, gaze, and facial expressions enrich 
verbal communication by adding depth, emotion, and context. As tech-
nology advances, virtual and embodied agents are increasingly capable of 
mimicking human nonverbal behaviours. This capability allows machines 
to interpret user movements and emotions and convey their responses 
more naturally and effectively. The integration of body language in vir-
tual agents and robots significantly enhances human-machine interac-
tions by facilitating communication, conveying emotions, and improving 
collaboration. Studies show that nonverbal cues like nodding, mutual 

xviii 
Beyond Speech: The Dynamics of Body Language
gaze, and gestures help agents appear more attentive, human-like, and 
engaging while supporting efficient task completion and rapport building.
The exploration of body language throughout this book reveals its pro-
found influence on human communication and interaction. From its 
origins as a commercialized concept to its current status as a complex 
field, the study of body language has provided an in-depth understanding 
of conveying emotions, intentions, and social dynamics in social interac-
tions. The chapters address various facets, from facial expressions and 
gestures to posture and touch, highlighting their roles in shaping percep-
tions and fostering understanding in interpersonal relationships. 
Integrating body language into human-machine interactions opens new 
avenues for more empathetic and effective communication as technology 
advances. Despite its evolution over the decades, body language remains 
a dynamic area of study, continually evolving with new research and 
insights that enrich our understanding of nonverbal communication. As 
we look ahead, the ongoing exploration of body language promises to 
uncover further nuances and applications that enhance our ability to 
connect and communicate in an increasingly complex world.
References
Argyle, M. (1988). Bodily communication. Methuen.
Rot, N. (2004). Znakovi i Značenja (Signs and Meanings) (3rd ed.). Plato.
The University of the West Indies 
St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago
Aleksandra Kostić, University of Nis 
Nis, Serbia
Derek Chadee

xix
The production of this publication from its genesis to completion is the 
result of the kind and meticulous assistance of a number of persons and 
institutions. Thanks to the staff at Palgrave Macmillan, in particular, 
Steven Fassioms, Liam Inscoe-Jones and its production team, for their 
continued assistance. Sincerest thankfulness to our contributors. 
Specifically, deepest gratitude to Hallee Altman, R.  Thomas Boone, 
Jonathan M. Bowman, Judee K. Burgoon, Mary Chadee, Xunyu Chen, 
Benjamin L. Compton, Alan Crawley, Joseph Cunningham, Sam E. Day, 
Vincent Denault, Norah E.  Dunbar, José-Miguel Fernández-Dols, 
Ronald P.  Fisher, Mark G.  Frank, Roberto García-Gonzalez, Saiying 
(Tina) Ge, David Givens, Zachary R. Glowacki, Judith A. Hall, Terrence 
G.  Horgan, James Honeycutt, Tricia S.  Jones, Arvid Kappas, Eva 
G. Krumhuber, Dennis Küster, Laura Labato, Nathaniel S. Miller, Nora 
A. Murphy, Madison Neurohr, Stephen Nowicki, Ifeoma Nwogu, Miles 
L. Patterson, Steven J. Pentland, Ryan Rasner, Martin Remland, Ronald 
E. Riggio, Jaime Ruiz, Danielle M. Shore, Anne Solbu, Victoria Talwar, 
Aldert Vrij, Isaac Wang, Xinran Wang, John White, Dongdong Yang and 
Mircea Zloteanu. Deepest appreciation to everyone who provided the 
necessary technical and research assistance and other support leading up 
Acknowledgements

xx 
Acknowledgements
to the final publication. Heartfelt gratitude for the assistance of anyone 
who may be inadvertently left unacknowledged. This book is a research 
output of the ANSA McAL Psychological Research Centre at The 
University of the West Indies, St. Augustine Campus.

xxi
Contents
	 1	 Beyond the Face: Nonverbal Messages from the Voice, 
Head, Eyes and Posture
    1
Judee K. Burgoon, Norah E. Dunbar, Steven Pentland, Xinran 
Wang, Xunyu Chen, and Saiying Ge
Introduction
      1
The Nonverbal Codes
      3
Relational Messages, Deception, and Group Communication      5
Three Illustrative Investigations
      9
Asynchronous Interviews
    11
Summary of Results
    13
Summary
    23
References
    23
	 2	 The Nonverbal Language of Hands
  29
John White and David Givens
Introduction
    29
Hands and Evolution
    30
Human Development and Hands
    32
Hands and Gesture
    34
The Use of Gesture
    35
Hand Gestures, Learning and Embodied Cognition
    37
Hand Gestures and Culture
    40

xxii 
Contents
Touch
    41
Some Notable Uses of the Hands
    42
Conclusion
    49
References
    51
	 3	 Haptic Interactions: Connections Between Touch and 
Emotion in Relationships
  59
Jonathan M. Bowman and Benjamin L. Compton
Haptic Interactions: Connections Between Touch and 
Emotion in Relationships
    59
Primacy of Touch
    60
Early Haptic Research
    61
Structural Forms of Touch
    62
Functional Forms of Touch
    63
Attitudes Towards Touch
    69
Dark Side of Touch
    70
An Application: Expectancy Violation Theory
    72
Conclusion
    74
References
    75
	 4	 Contextual Influences on the Perception and 
Interpretation of Facial Expressions
  81
Sam E. Day, Danielle M. Shore, and Eva G. Krumhuber
Introduction
    81
Early Context Research
    82
Expression or Context Dominance
    83
Modern Context Research
    86
Combinations of Contextual Cues
    90
Effects of Traits and Gender
    91
Observer-Based Context
    92
Observer-Expresser Interactions
    93
Bidirectional Context Effects
    96
Conclusion
    97
References
    97

xxiii
  Contents 
	 5	 Nonverbal Expression in the Voice: Impact of Select Trait, 
Neurologic, and Psychiatric Conditions
107
Terrence G. Horgan, Judith A. Hall, and Nathaniel S. Miller
Nonverbal Expression in the Voice: Impact of Select Trait, 
Neurologic, and Psychiatric Conditions
  107
Overview
  108
Alexithymia
  110
Parkinson’s Disease
  112
Depression and Bipolar 1 Disorder
  115
Conclusion
  119
References
  121
	 6	 The Role of Posture in the Formation of Social 
Relationships
129
Hallee Pitterman Altman and Stephen Nowicki
Nonverbal Communication
  130
Challenges in Nonverbal Communication
  131
Nowicki and Duke’s Four-Phase Model
  136
Choice Phase
  137
Pilates: A New Way to View Posture as a Nonverbal Channel  140
Application of the Four-Phase Model to the Pilates Method   141
Suggesting an Intervention
  144
References
  145
	 7	 The Myth of Body Language and the Fallacies of Body 
Language Analysis and Training Programs
151
Vincent Denault, Miles L. Patterson, Mircea Zloteanu, and 
Victoria Talwar
The Myth of Body Language
  153
Fallacies of Body Language Analyses
  156
(Mis)applications of Body Language Analysis
  164
“The Body Never Lies”: An Assumption at the Core of Body 
Language Analysis
  170
Conclusion
  176
References
  178

xxiv 
Contents
	 8	 Nonverbal Bodily Behavior and Personality in Social 
Interactions
187
Nora A. Murphy
Overview
  187
Defining Personality with Behavior
  190
Personality Is Reflected in Nonverbal Bodily Behaviors
  192
Describing Personality with Nonverbal Bodily Behavior
  195
Personality Inventories and Nonverbal Bodily Behaviors
  196
Summary and Final Thoughts
  199
References
  201
	 9	 Expressive Body Movement: An Effective Nonverbal 
Channel in Need of Some Consolidation and Theoretical 
Consideration
211
R. Thomas Boone and Joseph G. Cunningham
Manifestations of Expressive Body Movement
  214
Theoretical Underpinnings
  221
Future Directions
  225
Conclusion
  228
References
  229
	10	 Emotions Expressed in Body Movements, Postures, Gait, 
and Dance
235
Alan Crawley and Ronald E. Riggio
Introduction
  235
Evolution
  237
Emotion
  239
Physiology
  240
Probabilistic Repertoire of Behavior
  241
Nonverbal Modalities of Body Movement
  242
Typologies of Nonverbal Cues
  243
Conclusion
  251
References
  252

xxv
  Contents 
	11	 Emotional Expressions Beyond the Face and Conflict 
Intervention
259
Martin S. Remland and Tricia S. Jones
The Nature of Emotion
  260
The Multimodal Expression of Human Emotions
  264
Emotions in Interpersonal Conflict Interaction
  271
Nonverbal Expressions of Emotion for Conflict Intervention   272
Conclusion
  278
References
  279
	12	 The Face Behind the Mask: Thermography of the Face
285
Dennis Küster
Introduction
  285
Technical and Conceptual Underpinnings
  287
Methods
  292
Future Directions in Facial Thermal Imaging
  300
Conclusions
  304
References
  304
	13	 Body Talk: Thoughts and Feelings in Action
315
Mark G. Frank, Zachary R. Glowacki, Madison Neurohr, 
Ifeoma Nwogu, and Anne Solbu
Body Talk: Thoughts and Feelings in Action
  315
Evolution and Nonverbal Communication
  317
Origins of Body Feelings
  317
Origins of Body Thoughts
  321
Specific Movements
  323
Compound Interactive Body Actions
  331
Challenges to ­Coding Bodies
  336
Conclusion
  340
References
  341

xxvi 
Contents
	14	 Investigative Interviewing: Implications for Nonverbal 
Behaviour
355
Mary Chadee, Derek Chadee, and Aleksandra Kostic′
Introduction
  355
Investigative Interviewing
  356
Investigator Bias
  358
Amygdala and Prefrontal Cortex
  359
Reactance and Investigative Interviewing
  362
Social Cognition
  365
Fundamental Attribution Error
  366
Epistemological Position
  370
Conclusion
  371
References
  372
	15	 Lie Detection and Nonverbal Behaviour: Present and 
Future
377
Aldert Vrij and Ronald P. Fisher
Lie Detection and Nonverbal Behaviour: Present State and 
Future
  377
Detecting Deception from Nonverbal Signals Is Natural 
(Compatible with Cognition)
  378
Why Is Nonverbal Lie Detection Popular?
  379
Nonverbal Lie Detection: The Empirical Evidence
  382
Reasons Why Nonverbal Lie Detection Is Unreliable
  386
The Future of Nonverbal Lie Detection
  392
References
  393
	16	 Facial Expression at the Crossroads
399
José-Miguel Fernández-Dols and Roberto García-González
The Foundations of the Expression of Emotion Paradigm
  400
A Turning Point: The Recognition Crisis
  404
The Universality Crisis
  407
Uncharted Waters: Recent Trends in the Study of Facial 
Expression
  412
Conclusion: Facial Expression at the Crossroads
  415
References
  419

xxvii
  Contents 
	17	 Cracking the Code: Relational Dominance and 
Predictability Across Developmental Stages
425
James M. Honeycutt, Ryan D. Rasner, Laura Labato, and 
Dongdong Yang
Introduction to Relational Dominance
  425
Communicating Dominance
  427
Stages of Relational Escalation
  429
Stages of Relational De-Escalation
  430
Predicting Dominant Behaviors
  432
Current Trends in Dominance Asymmetry
  434
Implications of Recent Research Findings
  435
Asymmetry, Nonverbal Signals, and Conflict Resolution
  436
Directions for Future Research
  437
References
  439
	18	 Body Language Between Humans and Machines
443
Isaac Wang, Jaime Ruiz, and Arvid Kappas
Introduction
  443
Recognizing Body Language for System Input
  444
Interacting with Virtual Agents and Robots
  448
Conclusion and Future Directions
  462
References
  463
Index
477

xxix
Hallee  Pitterman  Altman  (nee Pitterman) graduated from Emory 
University with a BA and from New York University with an MA in 
Dance Education. She worked as a creative movement and social skill 
educator, teaching children with special needs to use the power of move-
ment and nonverbal communication to connect with others. She oper-
ates Candlestick Pilates, a Pilates studio in New York City.
R. Thomas Boone  After receiving a Joint Master’s in Psychology and 
Women’s Studies, R Thomas Boone received his PhD in Social 
Developmental Psychology from Brandeis University in 1996. He is cur-
rently a full professor at the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, 
and Associate Provost for Faculty Affairs. He has served as an associate 
editor for the Journal of Nonverbal Behavior for the last seven years. 
Boone’s primary research interests include the development of nonverbal 
emotional communication skills and their behavioural consequences. 
Additionally, he has research that examines the role of the affective signal-
ling of trustworthiness, emotional expressivity, and Machiavellianism in 
the development of cooperation.
Jonathan M. Bowman,  PhD, is a Professor of Communication at the 
University of San Diego. Bowman teaches courses in human communi-
cation processes, focusing on fostering the engaged expression of ideas 
alongside the elucidation of concepts within the context of inclusion and 
Notes on Contributors

xxx 
Notes on Contributors
social justice. His research program investigates nonverbal and interper-
sonal communication processes in a variety of contexts, with a particular 
interest in the influence of gender. Bowman received graduate degrees at 
Michigan State University as a University Distinguished Fellow, and an 
undergraduate degree at the University of California Davis as a Regent’s 
Scholar.
Judee K. Burgoon  is Professor Emerita of Communication and Family 
Studies at the University of Arizona, where she was Director of Research 
for the Center for the Management of Information. Her writing credits 
include 14 books and 350 articles, chapters, and reviews related to non-
verbal communication, interpersonal relations, and deception. She is a 
Distinguished Scholar of the National Communication Association and 
Fellow of the International Communication Association.
Derek Chadee  is Professor of Social Psychology at The University of the 
West Indies, St. Augustine Campus. He is a Fulbright Scholar and has 
published several books in the area of social psychology. He has a robust 
research agenda on the psychology of fear of crime and has published in 
several international journals. His current research interests include non-
verbal behaviour, general fear, antecedents of emotions, copycat behav-
iour, media influence on perception, and social psychological theories. 
His most recent publications are Positive Psychology: An International 
Perspective, London: Wiley-Blackwell, 2021, and Theories in Social 
Psychology, London: Wiley-Blackwell, 2022.
Mary Chadee  obtained her PhD in Criminology and Criminal Justice 
and an M.Sc. in Mediation Studies (Distinction) from The University of 
the West Indies, St. Augustine Campus, Trinidad. She is the co-author of 
several articles in books and journals. She has an interest in forensic crim-
inology. The title of her PhD dissertation is Assessing the Relationship 
between Social Processes, Individual Characteristics and Delinquency.
Xunyu Chen  is Assistant Professor of Information Systems at Virginia 
Commonwealth University. He obtained his PhD in Management from 
the University of Arizona. He has broad research interests in multimodal 
communication, deception detection, social media platforms, and artifi-
cial intelligence. He has published multiple articles on leading journals 

xxxi
  Notes on Contributors 
and conferences such as Decision Support Systems, IEEE Transactions 
on Affective Computing, and International Conference on Information 
Systems.
Benjamin L. Compton,  PhD, is Assistant Professor of Communication 
at St. Mary’s College of California. His area of research focuses on inter-
personal sexual communication and attraction of verbal and nonverbal 
signals. Both Compton’s teaching and research coalesce into scholarship 
with attention to the processes and impact of how external behaviours 
might impact others’ internal experiences during interpersonal interac-
tions and relationships. Compton received his doctoral degree from the 
University of Washington, his master’s degree from the University of 
Kansas, and his bachelor’s degree from the University of San Diego.
Alan Crawley  is a PhD candidate at the University of California, Santa 
Barbara. Over the past decade, he has dedicated extensive research to 
Nonverbal Communication (NVC), integrating a broad range of inter-
disciplinary perspectives and methodologies. His research interests 
include theoretical developments in NVC, the nonverbal expression of 
passion, and facial expressions.
Joseph Cunningham  began his child development research and writing 
career as the eighth-grade sports editor of The Christopher at Seven 
Sorrows of the Blessed Virgin Mary School in Middletown, PA. Since 
growing up there, and further honing his experimental and clinical skills 
at Penn State University and Vanderbilt University, he has conducted 
numerous studies of children’s perception, expression, and understanding 
of emotion. He has taught courses in Clinical Psychology, Developmental 
Psychology, and The Art and Science of Typical and Atypical Development. 
He is Emeritus Professor of Psychology at Brandeis University, and a 
practicing Child and Family Psychologist.
Sam  E.  Day  is a DPhil candidate in the University of Oxford’s 
Department of Experimental Psychology. He previously received a BA in 
Experimental Psychology and an MSc in Psychological Research, both 
from Oxford. His research focuses on how social cues are integrated to 
guide facial expression perception, with a particular emphasis on smiles.

xxxii 
Notes on Contributors
Vincent Denault  is an assistant professor at the University of Montreal’s 
School of Criminology. His research primarily focuses on issues related to 
nonverbal behaviour, credibility assessment, and deception detection in 
courtrooms. In addition to his work in academia, Vincent Denault is a 
lawyer and a coroner investigating deaths that occurred as a result of neg-
ligence or in obscure or violent circumstances.
Norah E. Dunbar  is Professor of Communication at the University of 
California Santa Barbara and a Fellow of the International Communication 
Association. She teaches courses in nonverbal and interpersonal commu-
nication, communication theory, and deception detection. She has 
received over $18 Million in research funding from agencies such as the 
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, the National Science 
Foundation, and the Department of Defense. She has published over 100 
journal articles, book chapters, and encyclopaedia articles and has pre-
sented over 120 papers at National and International conferences. She is 
the immediate past Chair of the Communication Department at UCSB.
José-Miguel  Fernández-Dols  is Professor of Psychology at the 
Autonomous University of Madrid (UAM). He is particularly interested 
in four disciplines: Social Psychology, Political Psychology, Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, and Emotion. Currently he teaches Social Psychology and 
Political Psychology to European undergraduate students, and Cross-
Cultural Psychology to American undergraduate students. His research 
focuses on facial expression and everyday conceptions of emotion in dif-
ferent cultures.
Ronald  P.  Fisher  is Professor of Psychology at Florida International 
University. Ron conducts research in cognitive psychology and has co-
developed the Cognitive Interview, a memory-enhancing interview pro-
tocol that has been applied to interviewing knowledge sources (e.g., 
witnesses of crime and accidents). Ron served on the U.S. Department of 
Justice committee to develop national guidelines for collecting eyewitness 
evidence and has taught the Cognitive Interview to a variety of investiga-
tive agencies (e.g. FBI, NASA, National Transportation Safety Board).
Mark G. Frank  is a professor in the Department of Communication 
and director of the Communication Science Center at University at 

xxxiii
  Notes on Contributors 
Buffalo, State University of New York. He has published work on facial 
expressions, deception, and nonverbal communication, and in particular 
how technology and artificial intelligence can read nonverbal actions. He 
has won a SUNY Chancellor’s Award for Excellence in Scholarship and 
has worked with and trained many government security agencies.
Roberto García-Gonzalez  is a senior graduate student at Universidad 
Autónoma de Madrid with a master’s degree in research methods. His 
research interests include the experimental study of spontaneous facial 
expression and the automated analysis of facial behaviour.
Saiying Ge  obtained her PhD in Management from Eller College of 
Management, University of Arizona. Her research focus lies in utilizing 
advanced machine learning and statistical models to decode human 
behaviours, spanning from human-computer to human-human interac-
tions. She has a particular interest in credibility assessment and affective 
computing.
David  Givens  has recently retired as a teacher in the School of 
Professional Studies at Gonzaga University, USA, and is the Director of 
the Center for Nonverbal Studies. He began studying “body language” 
for his PhD in Anthropology at the University of Washington in Seattle, 
USA.  He served as Anthropologist in Residence at the American 
Anthropological Association in Washington, DC, from 1985–97 and has 
previously taught Anthropology at the University of Washington. His 
expertise is in nonverbal communication, anthropology, and the brain.
Zachary R. Glowacki,   MA, is a doctoral student in the Department of 
Communication at the University at Buffalo, State University of 
New York. His research encompasses topics such as nonverbal communi-
cation, facial expressions, voice tone, and how they affect trust, social 
perception, trait judgements, emotion, and deception, with a particular 
interest in how artificial intelligence can recognize and facilitate these 
clues in interactions. He has won multiple best paper awards at 
Communication conferences.
Judith  A.  Hall  is University Distinguished Professor of Psychology, 
Emerita, at Northeastern University in Boston, MA. She is a social psy-

xxxiv 
Notes on Contributors
chologist who studies interpersonal interaction, with a focus on person 
perception and nonverbal communication in daily life and in medical 
interactions. She co-authored Doctors Talking with Patients/Patients 
Talking with Doctors: Improving Communication in Medical Care and co-
edited Emotion in the Clinical Encounter. Other books include Nonverbal 
Sex Differences: Communication Accuracy and Expressive Style, Interpersonal 
Sensitivity: Theory and Measurement, and The Social Psychology of Perceiving 
Others Accurately.
James M. Honeycutt  is the senior managing co-editor of an interdisci-
plinary journal called Imagination, Cognition, and Personality. He is LSU 
Distinguished Professor Emeritus and lecturer at the University of Texas 
at Dallas in organizational behaviour, coaching, and consulting. He has 
authored books in relational conflict, imagery, and physiology. He has 
been teaching and researching in these areas for 45 years. Current research 
interests are in cognition and imagined interaction conflict-linkage the-
ory which explains serial arguing.
Terrence G. Horgan  is Myron and Margaret Winegarden Professor and 
Professor of Psychology at the University of Michigan-Flint. He is the 
author of The Nonverbal Communication of Our Gendered and Sexual 
Selves, coauthor of Nonverbal Communication in Human Interaction, and 
a former Associate Editor for the Journal of Nonverbal Behavior. He is a 
social psychologist who studies person perception and factors that impact 
person memory.
Tricia S. Jones  is Professor of Communication and Social Influence in 
the Klein College of Media and Communication at Temple University in 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Her research covers conflict dynamics and 
conflict intervention in families, workplace, and educational contexts. 
She is the Director of the Center for Conflict Management and Media 
Impact that supports projects with an emphasis on conflict management 
and social media in youth empowerment and violence prevention.
Arvid  Kappas  is Professor of Psychology at the School of Business, 
Social and Decision Sciences at Constructor University in Bremen, 
Germany. Having obtained his PhD in Social Psychology at Dartmouth 
College, NH, USA, in 1989, he worked in Switzerland, Canada, the UK, 

xxxv
  Notes on Contributors 
and, since 2003, in Germany. His research focuses on emotions, nonver-
bal behaviour, human-robot interaction, and affective computing. He is 
a fellow of the Association for Psychological Science and the Society for 
Personality and Social Psychology. From 2013 to 2018, he was president 
of the International Society for Research on Emotion.
Aleksandra Kostić  is Retired Professor of Social Psychology at Faculty 
of Philosophy, Department of Psychology, University of Nis, Serbia. She 
taught courses on Introduction to Social Psychology, Social Perception, 
Nonverbal Communication, and Psychology of Interpersonal Behavior. 
Her research interests include nonverbal communication, emotional 
experience, time perspective, ethnic identity, and similarities and differ-
ences between cultures in perception of category, intensity, and anteced-
ents of emotion. She published four books in Serbian and edited seven 
international books in the area of Social Psychology. Edited books: Time 
Perspective  – Theory and Research; The Social Psychology of Nonverbal 
Communication; Social Intelligence and Nonverbal Communication; Social 
Psychological Dynamics; Positive Psychology: An International Perspective; 
Nonverbal Communication in Close Relationships  – What Words Don’t 
Tell Us.
Eva  G.  Krumhuber  is an associate professor in the Department of 
Experimental Psychology at University College London, with research 
interests in the domain of emotion and facial expression. She obtained 
her doctoral degree in Social Psychology from Cardiff University for 
which she won the Hadyn Ellis Prize for Outstanding Dissertation. She 
has published widely within the field of psychology and computer sci-
ence, served on the program committee of multiple conferences, and 
acted as associate editor.
Dennis Küster  is a senior researcher at the “Minds, Media, Machines” 
high-­profile area at the University of Bremen. He obtained his PhD on 
the role of social context for facial expressions at Jacobs University Bremen 
in 2008. His research focuses on emotions and their measurement, elici-
tation, expression, and social functions, including interactions mediated 
by computers, avatars, or robots. He has authored several journal and 

xxxvi 
Notes on Contributors
conference contributions as well as book chapters on emotions and non-
verbal behaviour in computer-mediated communication.
Laura  Labato  is Assistant Director of the Global Training and 
Development Institute at the University of Connecticut. She holds a 
Master of Arts degree in International Studies and Graduate Certificates 
in Human Rights; Culture, Health, and Human Development; and 
College Instruction. She is a PhD student at the University of Connecticut 
with research interests focused on intercultural communication.
Nathaniel  S.  Miller  is an associate professor in the Department of 
Behavioral Sciences at the University of Michigan-Flint. His research 
focuses on understanding: behaviour; individual/subgroup differences in 
behaviour; brain-­behaviour relationships; how the brain changes with 
age/disease; and how we can use this knowledge to improve interventions 
that target the effects of aging and disease. He has a broad background in 
cognitive neuroscience, with specific training in working with individuals 
with Parkinson’s disease (PD).
Nora  A.  Murphy  is Professor of Psychological Science at Loyola 
Marymount University in Los Angeles, CA. Her research, which focuses 
on nonverbal communication in social interactions and behavioural mea-
surement, is published in numerous psychology journals including the 
Annual Review of Psychology, Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, Journal of 
Research in Personality, and Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. Dr. 
Murphy holds fellowship status in the Association for Psychological 
Science, Society for Experimental Social Psychology, Society for 
Personality and Social Psychology, and the Western Psychological 
Association.
Madison Neurohr,   MA, is a doctoral student in the Department of 
Communication at the University at Buffalo, State University of 
New York. Her research examines real world implications of nonverbal 
behaviour, including identifying terrorism and deception, and how evo-
lution and social perception are affected by these nonverbal features. She 
recently won a National Science Foundation grant to pursue examining 
systems to better detect dangerous people.

xxxvii
  Notes on Contributors 
Stephen Nowicki  received his PhD from Purdue University and com-
pleted his clinical psychology internship at Duke University Medical 
Center and a Diplomate in Applied Psychology. He is the Candler 
Professor of Psychology Emeritus at Emory University where he was 
responsible for founding the Emory University Counseling Center and 
Help Line. A co-recipient of the Applied Researcher of the Year from the 
American Psychological Association, he has served for decades as a con-
sultant to programs for neurodivergent children and adolescents in 
Atlanta and the State of Georgia.
Ifeoma Nwogu  is an associate professor in the Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering at the University at Buffalo, State University of 
New York. Her research addresses human behaviour modelling in com-
puter vision and machine learning processes. This includes probabilistic 
modelling and computer identification of sign language, rapport, and 
other cognitive, emotional, and relational states. She is a Co-I of a recent 
$20m National Science Foundation grant on Artificial Intelligence and 
education.
Miles L. Patterson  is Professor Emeritus and former Chairperson of the 
Psychology Department at the University of Missouri-St. Louis. He is the 
author of more than 100 publications, including 3 books, and co-editor 
of the 2006 Sage Handbook of Nonverbal Communication. He is a former 
editor of the Journal of Nonverbal Behavior and is a Fellow of the American 
Psychological Association, the Association for Psychological Science, and 
the Society of Experimental Social Psychology.
Steven Pentland  is Associate Professor of Information Technology and 
Supply Chain Management at Boise State University. He obtained his 
PhD in Management Information Systems from the University of 
Arizona. His research interests encompass automated interviewing, affec-
tive computing, and behavioural informatics. Currently, Dr. Pentland’s 
research is dedicated to developing scalable systems for the collection and 
analysis of human behaviours, with a particular focus on deception detec-
tion, personnel selection, and intragroup communication.
Ryan D. Rasner  is a relationship and personal success expert with over 
10 years of experience in the field. He holds a PhD in Interpersonal 

xxxviii 
Notes on Contributors
Communication and is the founder of the Resurgence Program which 
focuses on empowering men to master confidence, relationships, and 
success. He has authored and co-authored journal articles and book 
chapters on interpersonal communication and relationship development.
Martin S. Remland  is a professor in the Department of Communication 
and Media at the West Chester University of Pennsylvania. He is the 
author of the book Nonverbal Communication in Everyday Life, 4th edi-
tion (Sage Press). He is also the author of several books, book chapters, 
and peer-reviewed articles that focus on nonverbal behaviour, social rela-
tionships, and intercultural communication. He has been teaching and 
researching in these areas for close to 50 years.
Ronald E. Riggio,   PhD, is the Henry R. Kravis Professor of Leadership 
and Organizational Psychology and former Director of the Kravis 
Leadership Institute at Claremont McKenna College. Dr. Riggio is a 
leadership scholar with more than two dozen authored or edited books 
and more than 250 articles/book chapters. His research interests are in 
leadership, organizational communication, assessment centers, nonverbal 
communication, and social competence.
Jaime Ruiz  is an associate professor in the Department of Computer & 
Information Science & Engineering at the University of Florida, where 
he directs the Ruiz HCI Lab. His primary research is in the field of 
Human-Computer Interaction, focusing on multimodal and natural user 
interfaces. Dr. Ruiz received his PhD in Computer Science from the 
University of Waterloo. He also holds an MS in Computer Science from 
San Francisco State University and a BS in Psychology from the University 
of California, Davis. Dr. Ruiz’s work has been funded by NSF, DARPA, 
NIH, USDA, and Google. In 2018, he was awarded an NSF CAREER 
award for his project on next-­generation multimodal interfaces.
Danielle  M.  Shore  is a lecturer in the Department of Experimental 
Psychology at the University of Oxford, United Kingdom, with research 
interests in the field of emotion and social decision-making. She obtained 
her doctoral degree from the School of Psychology at Bangor University. 
She has published in the field of Social Psychology and Affective 

xxxix
  Notes on Contributors 
Computing on facial expressions, trust, interpersonal behaviour, and 
social decision-making.
Anne Solbu  is a Clinical Research Coordinator in the Department of 
Surgery at University at Buffalo, State University of New York. With a 
background in nonverbal communication and technology, she researches 
deception and collaboration in social interaction, the role of technology, 
and how people behave under various conditions.
Victoria Talwar  is a professor and a Canada Research Chair (II) in 
Forensic Developmental Psychology in the Department of Educational 
and Counselling Psychology at McGill University. Her research is in the 
area of developmental psychology with an emphasis on social-cognitive 
development. She has published numerous articles on children’s honesty 
and lie-telling behaviours as well as child witness issues.
Aldert  Vrij  is Professor of Applied Social Psychology, University of 
Portsmouth, UK. He conducts research in nonverbal and verbal decep-
tion and lie detection, resulting in more than 600 publications (> 30,000 
citations and H-index 90). He received grants from Governments and 
British Research councils, totalling > $11,900,000. He works closely 
with practitioners (police, security services, and intelligence) in terms of 
designing and conducting research and disseminating its findings.
Isaac Wang  is Assistant Professor of Computer Science at James Madison 
University. He received his PhD in Human-Centered Computing from 
the University of Florida in 2022. His research is in Human-Computer 
Interaction with an emphasis on natural user interfaces and intelligent 
virtual agents. He also has research experience in augmented/virtual real-
ity, gesture recognition, and nonverbal communication. During his 
career, Isaac has worked on multiple DARPA-funded projects and has 
also served as a reviewer and program committee member for several 
conferences and journals.
Xinran  Wang  completed PhD in Management with a major in 
Management Information Systems (MIS) at the University of Arizona 
and works as an assistant professor at the College of Business, Colorado 
State University. She has primarily worked on analysing multimodal 

xl 
Notes on Contributors
behavioural cues to deception and other relational constructs (e.g., domi-
nance, trust, and nervousness) in cross-­cultural group interaction and 
automated interviews.
John White  works on undergraduate and postgraduate education pro-
grammes in the Institute of Education, Dublin City University. He cur-
rently works as Director of the DCU Changemaker Schools Network. 
His research interests include nonverbal communication, primary educa-
tion, embodied cognition, arts-based research, and language acquisition. 
He is co-author of ‘The Classroom X –Factor: The Power of Body Language 
and Nonverbal Communication in Teaching’ (Routledge, 2011) and co-
author of ‘The Routledge Dictionary of Nonverbal Communication’ 
(Routledge, 2021).
Dongdong Yang  (Ph.D., University of Connecticut) is an assistant pro-
fessor in the School of Communication and Media at Montclair State 
University. She is broadly interested in the uses and effects of new com-
munication technologies in cross-cultural contexts. He has received four 
top paper awards as lead author at the AEJMC and ICA annual confer-
ences since 2021.
Mircea Zloteanu  is Senior Lecturer in Criminology and Investigative 
Psychology at Kingston University London. His research focuses on the 
how people form judgements under situations of uncertainty, including 
the behavioural cues used to ascertain if people are being truthful or 
deceptive. Mircea Zloteanu is also a Chartered Psychologist with the 
British Psychological Society (BPS) and an advocate of open research 
practices.

xli
Table 1.1	
Summary of hand and body cues to deception in  
meta-analyses
7
Table 1.2	
Sample survey questions and relational dimensions
14
Table 1.3	
Participants’ body language that expresses relational  
messages in the resistance game
15
Table 8.1	
Representative studies indicating valid nonverbal bodily 
behaviors for the Big Five personality traits in zero-
acquaintanceship interactions
193
Table 15.1	 Statistical results for verbal and nonverbal cues to  
deception based on meta-analysis from DePaulo  
et al. (2003)
383
List of Tables