Vol.:(0123456789)
Artificial Intelligence Review (2023) 56:8721–8814
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-022-10351-w
1 3
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning
Neville Kenneth Kitson1   · Anthony C. Constantinou1,2 · Zhigao Guo1 · Yang Liu1 · 
Kiattikun Chobtham1
Published online: 17 January 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Bayesian Networks (BNs) have become increasingly popular over the last few decades as 
a tool for reasoning under uncertainty in fields as diverse as medicine, biology, epidemiol-
ogy, economics and the social sciences. This is especially true in real-world areas where we 
seek to answer complex questions based on hypothetical evidence to determine actions for 
intervention. However, determining the graphical structure of a BN remains a major chal-
lenge, especially when modelling a problem under causal assumptions. Solutions to this 
problem include the automated discovery of BN graphs from data, constructing them based 
on expert knowledge, or a combination of the two. This paper provides a comprehensive 
review of combinatoric algorithms proposed for learning BN structure from data, describ-
ing 74 algorithms including prototypical, well-established and state-of-the-art approaches. 
The basic approach of each algorithm is described in consistent terms, and the similari-
ties and differences between them highlighted. Methods of evaluating algorithms and their 
comparative performance are discussed including the consistency of claims made in the 
literature. Approaches for dealing with data noise in real-world datasets and incorporating 
expert knowledge into the learning process are also covered.
Keywords  Causal discovery · Graphical models · Knowledge-based constraints · Structure 
learning evaluation · Structure learning review
 *	 Neville Kenneth Kitson 
	
n.k.kitson@qmul.ac.uk
	
Anthony C. Constantinou 
	
a.constantinou@qmul.ac.uk
	
Zhigao Guo 
	
zhigao.guo@qmul.ac.uk
	
Yang Liu 
	
yangliu@qmul.ac.uk
	
Kiattikun Chobtham 
	
k.chobtham@qmul.ac.uk
1	
Bayesian Artificial Intelligence Research Lab, Risk and Information Management (RIM) Research 
Group, School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Queen Mary University 
of London (QMUL), London E1 4NS, UK
2	
The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB, UK

8722
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
1  Introduction
The achievements of black-box machine learning, such as neural networks, are undeni-
able and have contributed to a renewed interest in machine learning and artificial intel-
ligence in general. Nevertheless, it is now well understood that black-box solutions that are 
restricted to predictive optimisation are unsuitable to inform decision making in domains 
that require transparency and tractability, such as in government policy and healthcare. The 
recent book by Pearl and Mackenzie (2018) highlights the need for models to be capable of 
reasoning under causal representation, in order to offer solutions that go beyond prediction. 
They illustrate this by presenting a ladder of causation that consists of three levels:
•	 Level 1: Models restricted to associational relationships, or are capable of generating 
predictions only; e.g., “What symptoms should we expect to observe given disease A?”.
•	 Level 2: Models that involve some form of causal representation and can answer ques-
tions about interventions; e.g., “What effect would taking drug A have on symptoms B 
given that they are caused by disease C?”.
•	 Level 3: Models that offer a complete form of causal representation and can answer 
questions about causation that extend to counterfactual reasoning; e.g., “If I had taken 
drug B instead of drug A, would my symptoms caused by disease C be less severe?”
Pearl and Mackenzie also refer to the three above levels as seeing, doing and imagin-
ing, respectively. The Bayesian network (BN) framework that Pearl described a few dec-
ades back (Pearl 1985, 1988) enables us to answer questions up to and including Level 
3, although this requires that the BN model is employed under causal assumptions; also 
referred to as a ‘causal BN’.
A BN is a probabilistic graphical model which provides a powerful general approach 
especially suited to modelling complex non-deterministic systems. A BN offers a compact 
probabilistic representation of the system and provides a means of applying probability 
theory to large collections, sometimes thousands or more, of variables. They have been 
used in many different domains, for example, in protein (Sachs et al. 2005) and gene (Imoto 
et al. 2004) networks in biology, pyschosis (Moffa et al. 2017) and cancer care (Sesen et al. 
2013) in healthcare, engineering fault diagnosis (Cai et al. 2017), and air pollution model-
ling (Vitolo et al. 2018). Koller and Friedman (2009) and Darwiche (2009) provide two 
excellent introductions to the theory behind, and use of, BNs.
A BN consists of graph which shows the direct dependence relationships between vari-
ables, or in a causal BN, direct cause and effect relationships. The BN also defines param-
eters which specify the form and the strengths of these relationships. Determining these 
parameters is generally much easier than recovering the graph accurately and so we focus 
here on the latter. The graph may be specified by human experts in a domain of inter-
est, but here, we describe structure learning algorithms which aim to learn the graph from 
data. We focus on combinatoric algorithms where the approach is to search or constrain the 
finite discrete space of possible graphs in some way. This paper aims to provide intuitive 
descriptions of a comprehensive range of these algorithms from the earliest, but often still 
competitive, algorithms, to some of the most recent advances.
Inevitably, in a field as broad and rapidly developing as this, we have had to omit, or 
only briefly refer to, some aspects of structure learning. Fortunately, there are other recent 
survey papers that cover some of these aspects more completely. For example, the paper 
by Glymour et  al. (2019) provides more coverage of functional causal models where 

8723
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
assumptions about the functional form of the effect, causes and noise relationships can be 
used to deduce causal relationships. Vowels et al. (2021) concentrate on approaches which 
treat structure learning as a continuous optimisation problem, optimising an objective 
function and handling the acyclicity constraint as a continuous function, and Zanga et al. 
(2022) cover algorithms which learn from mixed observational and experimental data, and 
those which learn cyclic graphs. Moraffah et al. (2020) and Noguiera et al. (2022) deal 
with structure learning from time-series data which we do not cover in this paper.
The paper is structured as follows: the next section covers some preliminaries about 
BNs, Sect. 3 covers constraint-based learning, Sect. 4 score-based learning, and Sect. 5 
hybrid learning and some non-combinatorial approaches. Figure 6 provides an overview 
of the evolution of structure learning algorithms that are covered in this paper, and will be 
referenced in subsequent sections. Section 6 covers various practical considerations when 
applying these algorithms to synthetic and real data, including how to evaluate their output, 
as well as a discussion of comparative reviews of algorithm performance. Section 6 also 
discusses some of the main approaches these algorithms may incorporate to handle noise 
in the data, methods for incorporating expert knowledge into the structure learning process, 
some open-source software packages, and some guidelines on choosing algorithms. Lastly, 
we provide our concluding remarks in Sect. 7.
2  Preliminaries
A Bayesian Network, B , is defined by a tuple consisting of a Directed Acyclic Graph 
(DAG) G , and a set of parameters 횯 , defining the strength and the shape of the relation-
ships between variables (we shall denote sets in boldface throughout):
The DAG, G , consists of a set of nodes (also known as vertices) X , each of which cor-
responds to one of the n variables under consideration, X = {X1, … , Xn} , and a set of 
directed edges (or arcs) E , so that:
We will use plain capital letters to represent individual variables or nodes, e.g. A, Y, Xi . 
A directed edge, for example A →B , represents a direct conditional relationship between A 
and B , or under a causal assumption, means that A is a direct cause of B . The BN may sim-
ply be considered as a compact representation of the conditional independence relations in 
observational data, and in this non-casual interpretation, it may be used to infer conditional 
and marginal distributions in the observational data to provide predictive analysis. How-
ever, if we interpret the BN to be a causal BN, then the BN is a unique DAG that enables 
us to reason about intervention and understand the system being modelled at a deeper level. 
Where we have a directed edge A →B in a graph, we say that A is a parent of B , or equiva-
lently, B is a child of A.
Figure 1 shows a DAG representing a simple model of two causes of (lung) cancer and 
two effects of cancer. It encapsulates the relationships between the variables, in particu-
lar the conditional dependence and independence relations between the variables. Condi-
tional probability tells us, for example, the probability that the person will have a cloudy 
B = (G, 횯)
G = (X, E)

8724
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
X-ray given that we know they have Cancer, written as P(XRay|Cancer)1 where “|” means 
“given”. Conditional independence tells us which variables are irrelevant to that probabil-
ity. For example, 
tells us that the probability of a cloudy X-Ray is independent of whether Smoker is true 
given that we know the person has Cancer. The symbol “ ⟂ ” means “is independent of” and 
so this is written as:
Figure 2 shows the three causal classes possible with three variables, together with all 
the conditional independence or dependence relations between A and C given B that they 
entail. The DAGs in Fig. 2a and b entail the same conditional independence relationship 
which means they cannot be distinguished by their conditional independence relations 
solely from observational data. When this is the case, we say that they belong to the same 
Markov Equivalence Class (MEC, but simply referred to as equivalence class from now 
on). However, in Fig. 2c, A and C are independent but become dependent given B (indi-
cated by the symbol “ ̸⟂”). This kind of relationship is known as explaining away and can-
not be represented in undirected probabilistic graphs. A node which has multiple parents is 
known as a collider. The configuration shown in Fig. 2c, where B is a collider, and there is 
no edge between A and C , will be referred to here as a v-structure, although other authors 
use the term unshielded collider.
Probabilistic graphical models represent conditional independence through the notion 
of graphical separation. For example, Cancer “separates” Smoker from XRay in the 
graph in Fig. 1. DAGs use a special form of graphical separation known as d-separation 
P(XRay|Cancer, Smoker) = P(XRay|Cancer)
XRay ⟂Smoker|Cancer.
Fig. 1   Hypothetical DAG on 
Cancer
Fig. 2   Causal classes containing three variables, and their corresponding conditional independence rela-
tionships
1  We use P(XRay|Cancer) as a shorthand for the conditional probability distribution over all values of 
XRay and Cancer , that is, P(XRay = cloudy|Cancer = true) , P(XRay = clear|Cancer = true) etc.

8725
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
to represent conditional independence relationships. D-separation is defined as follows 
(Pearl 1988): If X and Y are nodes in DAG G , a subset of the remaining nodes, S, d-sep-
arates X from Y if S blocks all paths between X and Y . Each path between X and Y is 
blocked by S if at least one of the nodes between X and Y on that path meets one of the 
following conditions, either:
•	 it is a collider and neither it, nor any of its descendants, are in S;
•	 or, it is not a collider and it is in S
If S does d-separate X and Y , we say that S is a Sepset (also referred to as cut-set or 
separating set) for X and Y . Figure 3 presents four examples of applying the d-separa-
tion rules to examine whether X and Y are d-separated, where the different conditioning 
sets are indicated by shaded nodes. Paths which are not blocked are known as active 
paths and are shown by green arrows, and conditioning sets which are minimal Sepsets 
are shaded in pink; otherwise, they are shaded in grey.
The BN represents the set of conditional independence relationships (and implicitly 
therefore, the dependence relationships too) in the joint probability distribution over all 
the variables, P(X) . Two assumptions about the DAG in a BN are made:
•	 Markov Condition every variable X in G is conditionally independent of its non-
descendants given its parents. This is equivalent to saying that every conditional 
independence implied by d-separation in the DAG is present in the joint probability 
distribution P(X) . Importantly, this condition means that the joint probability distri-
bution P(X) can be decomposed as follows (where Pa(Xi
) are the parents of Xi):
•	 Minimality Condition we cannot remove any of the edges in the DAG without the 
graph implying a conditional independence relationship that is not present in P(X).
Pearl (1988) expresses these two conditions by saying that G is a minimal Independ-
ence-Map (I-map) of P(X) . If the DAG represents the causal structure of the variables, 
P(X) =
n
∏
i=1
P(Xi||퐏퐚(Xi))
Fig. 3   Examples illustrating the application of d-separation. (Color figure online)

8726
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
the Markov Condition is referred to as the Causal Markov Condition since it links the 
probabilistic and causal interpretations of the DAG.
We wish to learn the BN from a set of data D , which consists of N data instances 
D = {d1, … , dN} , each of which defines the value of each of the variables X1..Xn , that is 
d = {x1, … , xn} (lower case letters denote values or states of a variable). Discrete BNs 
allow variables which take discrete values each having a defined probability of occurring 
dependent upon the value of the parents. For example, in Fig. 1, the probability of Dysp-
noea occurring might be 0.9 if Cancer were true, but only 0.05 if Cancer were false. This 
set of conditional probabilities for a discrete variable is known as the Conditional Prob-
ability Table (CPT).
Linear Gaussian BNs are based on continuous variables which are assumed to follow 
Gaussian distributions. Each value of a child variable is a linear combination of its parents’ 
values plus a local noise component. These networks are parameterised with Conditional 
Probability Distributions (CPDs), as opposed to CPTs. Unless stated otherwise, we will 
assume linear relationships when we use the term Gaussian BN. Hybrid BNs support both 
discrete and continuous distributions. The most common form of hybrid BN is a Condi-
tional Linear Gaussian BN (CLGBN) which allows discrete variables to be parents of a 
continuous variable, with a separate Gaussian Linear Model with different weighting coef-
ficients for each set of discrete parent values (Geiger and Heckerman 1994). While CLG-
BNs do not generally allow continuous variables to be parents of discrete ones, works such 
as those by Andrews et al. (2018) describe hybrid BNs which remove this restriction.
Constructing a BN involves two main phases: (a) determining the graphical structure 
and (b) determining the parameters 횯 . The graph and the parameters of a BN model can 
be determined by expert knowledge, learnt from data, or a combination of both. This paper 
focuses on the problem of learning the structure of BNs from data, or from both data and 
expert knowledge.
Learning the structure of a BN represents an NP-hard problem partly because the solu-
tion space of graphs grows super-exponentially with the number of variables. Robinson 
(1973) showed that the recurrence relation:
|Gn| =
n
∑
i=1
(−1)i−1(n
i
)
2i(n−i)|Gn−i|
Table 1   Number of directed graphs, directed acyclic graphs, and the percentage of directed graphs which 
are acyclic for different number of variables
This calculation assumes that the directed graph has at most one arc between each pair of nodes
Number of vari-
ables,n
Number of directed 
graphs
(3n(n−1)∕2)
Number of DAGs,|Gn|
Percentage of directed 
graphs which are acyclic 
(%)
2
3
3
100.0
3
27
25
92.59
4
729
543
74.49
5
59,049
29,281
49.59
6
1.4349 × ­107
3.7815 × ­106
26.35
7
1.0460 × ­1010
1.1388 × ­109
10.89
8
2.2877 × ­1013
7.8730 × ­1011
3.42

8727
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
computes the number of possible DAGs for n variables, |Gn| , with |G0| defined as 1. Using 
this recurrence formula, Table 1 illustrates how the number of possible DAGs grows super-
exponentially as n increases. Clearly, a naïve exhaustive search is not a solution for any 
problem with a reasonable number of variables.
In general, structure learning algorithms fall into two main classes. The first class is 
constraint-based methods that eliminate and orientate edges based on a series of condi-
tional independence (CI) tests. The second class, score-based methods, represent a tradi-
tional machine learning approach where the aim is to search over different graphs maximis-
ing an objective function. The graph that maximises the objective function is returned as 
the preferred graph. Additionally, hybrid algorithms that combine score-based and con-
straint-based approaches are often viewed as a third class of structure learning. Chickering 
et al. (1994) demonstrate that score-based learning is NP-hard, and Chickering et al. (2004) 
show that constraint-based learning is as well. This is true even under favourable condi-
tions such as limiting the number of parents to three and having a constant time method of 
computing scores from the data.
3  Constraint‑based learning
Constraint-based learning uses CI tests on the data to determine the conditional independ-
ence relationships between the variables under investigation, and hence construct a graph 
consistent with the data. Constraint-based learning is often assumed to discover causal 
relationships under the assumptions of causal faithfulness and causal sufficiency which we 
cover later in this section. As the simple examples in Fig. 2 have already shown, a set of 
independence relationships may be consistent with multiple DAGs. Hence, rather than pro-
ducing a single DAG, constraint-based algorithms return the set of DAGs consistent with 
the independence relationships in the data. That is, the equivalence class referred to in 
Sect. 1.
Verma and Pearl (1990) show that two DAGs belong to the same equivalence class if 
they have the same adjacencies (same skeleton) and the same set of v-structures. The adja-
cencies and v-structures are represented by a Partially Directed Acyclic Graph (PDAG) 
which has a mixture of directed and undirected edges, with the directed edges indicating 
the v-structures. Figure 4a shows three DAGs which entail the same set of independence 
relationships even though the arrow orientations vary between A, B and C . Figure 4b shows 
Fig. 4   Illustration of the equivalence classes, PDAGs and CPDAGs, based on an example in Verma and 
Pearl (1990)

8728
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
the corresponding PDAG, with directed edges indicating the v-structure B →D ←C . 
Implicit in that PDAG is that B −D −E and C −D −E are not v-structures, so we can 
deduce that there must be a directed edge D →E , and filling in all the additional implicit 
directed arrows such as this one creates a Complete PDAG (CPDAG), as shown inFig. 4c.2 
The CPDAG represents the equivalence class. A directed edge in the CPDAG means that 
all the equivalent DAGs must have that same directed edge, but undirected edges in the 
CPDAG indicate that the equivalent DAGs can have a directed edge in either direction.
We noted in the Preliminaries that two assumptions are made when formally defining a 
Bayesian Network: the Markov and Minimality Conditions. To recap, this means that all 
conditional independence relationships implied from the DAG by d-separation are present 
in the probability distribution. In general, however the converse is not necessarily true, in 
that there may be conditional independence relationships present in the probability distri-
bution that are not reflected by the DAG. If this is the case, we say that the DAG and the 
probability distribution are unfaithful to one another.
Figure 5 shows an example in which the network is unfaithful. Applying d-separation 
rules to the DAG would indicate that A and C are not independent. However, the particu-
lar values chosen for the CPTs shown give rise to a probability distribution where A and 
C are independent. Thus, there is an independence in the probability distribution which is 
not reflected by the DAG, and so it is unfaithful. In other words, this example shows that 
it is possible to have causation without association. Note that constraint-based algorithms 
do often make the additional assumption that all independence relationships present in the 
distribution are reflected in the DAG. In this case, we say that the DAG and distribution are 
faithful to each other, or that the DAG is a perfect map (P-map) of the distribution.
Fig. 5   Example unfaithful 
network
2  PDAGs are also referred to as rudimentary patterns (Verma and Pearl 1990), and CPDAGs are referred to 
as completed patterns (Verma and Pearl 1990), sometimes simply patterns (Spirtes and Glymour 1991), or 
even essential graphs (Andersson et al. 1997) or maximally orientated graphs (Meek 1995).

8729
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
The next subsection of this section describes the CI tests used to determine the set of 
independence relationships, and the remaining three subsections each discuss a group 
of constraint-based algorithms. Section  3.2 describes the prototypical constraint-based 
algorithms that learn the graph structure globally and make the assumption of causal suf-
ficiency which is also explained there. Section  3.3 describes local learning algorithms 
which learn the graph structure local to each variable which can then be merged to produce 
the overall graph. Finally, Section 3.4 describes algorithms which assume the existence 
of latent variables (i.e., causal insufficiency) and which are represented by a new kind of 
graph covered in that subsection. The main constraint-based algorithms covered in these 
subsections are shown in red hues in Fig. 6, which also illustrates the evolution of structure 
learning algorithms covered in this review. Lastly, Table 2 summarises the constraint-based 
algorithms covered in terms of whether they are global or local, the type of output3 they 
produce, and the key assumptions the algorithms make. Note that faithfulness assumptions 
that are stronger than the normal are marked in red text, and those that are weaker marked 
in blue text.
Fig. 6   The evolution of BN structure learning algorithms across all classes of learning. (Color figure 
online)
3  Table 2 reports the type of output produced by the algorithm in the original paper cited as the refer-
ence in the table. For most of the local learning algorithms, this output was a set of local structures such 
as Markov Blankets, rather than a whole integrated graph. However, when these algorithms have subse-
quently been incorporated into software packages, for example, Inter-IAMB in the bnlearn software pack-
age (Scutari 2021) these local structures may be merged, and the output would then be a whole graph, typi-
cally a CPDAG.

8730
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Table 2   Characteristics of the constraint-based algorithms reviewed, ordered chronologically
Abbreviation
Algorithm name/description
Reference
Global or local
Type of output
Faithfulness 
assumptions
Causal suffi-
ciency assumed
SGS
Spirtes-Glymour-Scheines
Spirtes et al. (1990)
Global
CPDAG
Complete
Yes
PC
Peter and Clark
Spirtes and Glymour (1991)
Global
CPDAG
Complete
Yes
FCI
Fast Causal Inference
Sprites et al.  (1995)
Global
PAG
Complete
No
GS
Grow-Shrink
Margaritis and Thrun (1999)
Local
CPDAG
Complete
Yes
TPDA
Three Phase Dependency Algorithm
Cheng et al. (2002)
Global
CPDAG
Monotonic
Yes
HITON
Hiton (Greek for blanket or cover)
Aliferis et al. (2003a, b)
Local
Parents and children
Complete
Yes
IAMB
Incremental Association Markov 
Blanket
Tsamardinos et al. (2003)
Local
Markov Blankets
Complete
Yes
Inter-IAMB
Interleaved-IAMB
Tsamardinos et al. (2003)
Local
Markov Blankets
Complete
Yes
MMPC
Max–Min Parents Children
Tsamardinos et al. (2003)
Local
Parents and children
Complete
Yes
MMMB
Max–Min Markov Blanket
Tsamardinos et al. (2003)
Local
Markov Blankets
Complete
Yes
Fast-IAMB
Fast IAMB
Yaramakala and Margaritis (2005)
Local
Markov Blankets
Complete
Yes
CPC
Conservative PC
Ramsey et al. (2006)
Global
CPDAG with unfaithful triples marked
Adjacency
Yes
RAI
Recursive Autonomy Identification
Yehezkel and Lerner (2009)
Global
CPDAG
Complete
Yes
SI-HITON-PC
Semi-interleaved Hiton 
Parents&Children
Aliferis et al. (2010)
Local
Parents and children
Complete
Yes
RFCI
Really Fast Causal Inference
Colombo et al. (2012)
Global
PAG
Complete
No
CFCI
Conservative Fast Causal Inference
Colombo et al. (2012)
Global
PAG
Adjacency
No
FCI+
Fast Causal Inference + 
Claassen et al. (2013)
Global
PAG
Complete
No
PC-Stable
Peter and Clark—Stable
Colombo and Maathuis (2014)
Global
CPDAG with conflicting v-structures 
marked
Complete
Yes
FCI-Stable
Fast Causal Inference Stable
Colombo and Maathuis (2014)
Global
PAG
Complete
No
VCSGS
Very Conservative SGS
Spirtes and Zhang (2014)
Global
Not implemented
Triangle
Yes
PC-Max
Peter and Clark—MAX
Ramsey (2016)
Global
CPDAG
Complete
Yes
MGM-FCI-MAX
Mixed Graphical Model—FCI—MAX
Raghu et al. (2018)
Global
PAG
Complete
No
PC-CS
PC—Complex Surveys
Marella and Vicard (2022)
Global
CPDAG
Complete
No

8731
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
3.1  Determining conditional independence
CI tests check whether nodes A and B are conditionally independent given a conditioning 
set of nodes S = {S1, … , Sq} where q ranges over the number of nodes in the conditioning 
set. In other words, it decides whether S will be a Sepset for A and B in the learnt graph. 
Although we generically describe these as tests of conditional independence, the same 
tests are also used when S = ∅ ; that is, testing whether A and B are unconditionally inde-
pendent. These tests rely on setting an arbitrary threshold used to determine conditional 
independence, and can only identify conditional independence relationships present in 
the dataset which may not necessarily reflect those present in the true distribution. There-
fore, we must recognise that these CI tests can make “mistakes”, and that these errors are 
more likely to occur with smaller sample sizes. Minimising the effects of these errors is an 
important consideration when designing constraint-based algorithms because if an edge is 
mistakenly removed from the graph at an early stage in the discovery process, this is likely 
to cause the discovery of incorrect edges at a later stage.
The most commonly used CI tests for discrete BNs are the G2 and 휒2 statistical tests and 
mutual information (MI), whereas for Gaussian BNs, Fisher’s z-test is frequently used. CI 
tests such as G2 and 휒2 assume a null hypothesis that A and B are conditionally independ-
ent given S . The tests produce a test statistic which can then be used to estimate how likely, 
defined by a p-value, that the observed data is, given the null hypothesis. If the p-value is 
below a predefined significance level, 훼, typically chosen as 0.05, the null hypothesis is 
rejected and it is assumed A and B are conditionally dependent given S . Conversely, if the 
p-value is above 훼 , the null hypothesis cannot be rejected and we assume A and B are con-
ditionally independent given S . The general form of the G2 test statistic is:
which when applied to test the conditional independence of discrete variables A and B 
given conditioning set S = {S1, … , Sq} becomes (Spirtes et al. 2000):
where a, b range over the values of A, B respectively, and s ranges over all the combinations 
of values of the conditioning set S . Nabs is the number of data cases with specific values 
A = a, B = b, S = {s1, … , sq} . Nbs is the marginal count over all values of a for data cases 
with B = b, S = {s1, … , sq} , with Nas and Ns being analogous marginal counts over b and 
a, b respectively. The degrees of freedom, df , which is required to determine the p-value 
from the test statistic is dependent upon the cardinality of the variables and is given by:
where |A|, |B|, ||Si|| are the number of distinct values that nodes A, B, Si can take respec-
tively. df is defined here under the assumption that none of the values of Nabs is zero, that 
is, every possible combination of values is present in the data. However, it is likely that 
some combinations of values will be absent with limited sample sizes, and so Sprites et al. 
G2 = 2 ⋅
∑
Observed ⋅ln
[
Observed
Expected
]
Observed = Nabs, and Expected = Nbs ⋅Nas
Ns
, so G2 = 2
∑
a,b,s
Nabsln
[NabsNs
NbsNas
]
df = (|A| −1)(|B| −1)
q
∏
i=1
|Si|

8732
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
(2000) suggest a heuristic of reducing df by 1 for every combination of values where Nabs 
is zero. The 휒2 CI test is similar, but with the test statistic defined as:
Another CI test for discrete BNs is mutual information (MI) which measures the amount 
of information shared between two variables (Cheng et al. 1997). The mutual information 
between two variables A and B is:
where P(a, b) is shorthand for P(A = a, B = b) , and similarly for P(a) , and P(b) . Condi-
tional mutual information is defined as:
where P(a, b|s) is shorthand forP(A = a, B = b|{S1 = s1, … , Sq = sq
}) , and similarly for 
P(a|s) andP(b|s) . A value of 0 for MI(A, B|S) indicates that there is no information flow 
between A and B when conditioned onS , that is, they are conditionally independent. In 
practice a threshold value 휖 is chosen so that if MI(A, B|S) < 𝜖 , conditional independence 
is assumed. Variable 휖 may be given an arbitrary small value such as 0.01 (Cheng et al. 
1997) or it may be estimated by comparing the predictive accuracy using different values 
(Cheng and Greiner 1999). If we rewrite the frequencies used in the definition of the G2 
test statistic as probabilities, we see that it only differs from mutual information by a scal-
ing factor:
In the case of Gaussian BNs, Fisher’s Z-test is commonly used to test the null 
hypothesis that the partial correlation coefficient is zero. Fisher’s Z-test uses Fisher’s 
Z-transformation which is defined as:
where ̂휌ab|s is the partial correlation coefficient between values a of node A and values b 
of node B , given values s of the conditioning set S. The value ̂휌ab|s can be computed recur-
sively with conditioning sets of increasing size (Anderson 1962; de la Fuente et al. 2004). 
This transformed version of the partial correlation ̂Z , follows a normal distribution with:
휒2 = 2 ⋅
∑(Observed −Expected)2
Expected
MI(A, B) =
∑
a,b
P(a, b) ⋅ln
[ P(a, b)
P(a)P(b)
]
MI(A, B|S) =
∑
a,b,s
P(a, b|s) ⋅ln
[
P(a, b|s)
P(a|s) ⋅P(b|s)
]
G2 = 2 ⋅
∑
a,b,s
Nabs ⋅ln
[Nabs ⋅Ns
Nas ⋅Nbs
]
G2 = 2 ⋅
∑
a,b,s
N ⋅P(a, b, s) ⋅ln
[
Nabs∕Ns
Nas∕Ns ⋅Nbs∕Ns
]
G2 = 2 ⋅N ⋅
∑
a,b,s
P(a, b, s) ⋅ln
[
P(a, b|s)
P(a|s) ⋅P(b|s)
]
= 2 ⋅N ⋅MI(A, B|S)
̂Z = 1
2ln
1 + ̂휌ab|s
1 −̂휌ab∣s
,

8733
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
 where q is the number of variables in the conditioning set. We can, therefore, use a normal 
distribution Z-score to compute the p-value of obtaining the computed partial correlation 
coefficient given the null hypothesis of zero partial correlation ( Z0 = 0):
The test statistics and associated p-values described in this section are usually used 
in a binary decision to decide whether variables are conditionally independent or not. 
However, some algorithms also use them as a measure of the degree of association, or 
dependence or independence between variables. For example, a high mutual informa-
tion value indicates that two variables are strongly associated with each other.
3.2  Global discovery algorithms
This group of constraint-based algorithms are known as global discovery algorithms since 
they attempt to learn the graph structure as a whole rather than first learning the local 
structure relating to each variable separately as the local constraint-based algorithms do 
(see Sect. 3.3). Both these global and the local constraint-based algorithms make one fur-
ther assumption known as causal sufficiency, which is of importance if we wish to interpret 
the BNs causally. This assumption means there are no latent (unmeasured) variables that 
would affect the causal relationships. For example, variables that are a common cause of 
two or more of the measured variables X , which are widely known as latent confounders.
3.2.1  SGS algorithm
The SGS algorithm (Spirtes et al. 1990) is rather inefficient but is of interest since many 
constraint-based algorithms build upon its approach. SGS relies on two key theorems 
derived from the definition of Bayesian Networks (Verma and Pearl 1990) that apply to 
faithful and causally sufficient BNs:
1.	 if A ̸⟂B|S for every subset S ⊆X ⧵{A, B} then A and B are adjacent in the graph 
(“X{A, B} ” means set X with elements A and B removed);
2.	 if A and B , and B and C are adjacent in the graph, but A and C are not adjacent, and if 
A  ⟂C|S ∪B for any subset S ⊆X ⧵{A, B, C} in the DAG, then A, B, C form a v-structure 
A →B ←C
SGS starts from a complete (i.e., there is an edge between every pair of nodes) undi-
rected graph on the node set X and learns the Markov equivalence class in three phases:
1.	 Adjacency phase: making use of rule 1 above, for each pair of nodes A, B this phase 
performs a CI test on A and B conditional on every possible subset S of the remaining 
a mean of 1
2ln
1 + ̂휌ab∣퐬
1 −̂휌ab퐬
and standard deviation휎, of
1
√
N −q −3
,
Z =
̂Ztran −Z0
휎
= 1
2
√
N −q −3 ln
1 + ̂휌abs
1 −̂휌abs

8734
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
nodes. If conditional independence occurs for any set S, the edge between A and B is 
removed. This phase produces the graph skeleton.
2.	 V-structure phase: using rule 2 above, for every triple A, B, C in the skeleton where A, B 
and B, C are adjacent pairs, and A and C are not adjacent, perform CI tests on A and C 
conditional on every possible subset S , of the remaining nodes where S contains B . If 
A and C are conditionally dependent given for every subset S , then mark A −B −C as 
a v-structure A →B ←C . This phase produces the PDAG.
3.	 Orientation propagation phase: for every undirected edge in the PDAG, check if one of 
the orientations would:
a.	 introduce a cycle into the graph, or
b.	 create a new v-structure.
	
  If so, then that orientation is forbidden and so the opposite orientation can be assumed. 
These rules are applied repeatedly until no more edges can be orientated, producing the 
CPDAG.
The first phase in the SGS algorithm is particularly expensive. In the worst case, it 
requires n(n −1) ⋅2n−3 CI tests, which makes it exponential in n and therefore infeasible for 
a reasonable number of variables. However, SGS is relatively stable (Spirtes et al. 2000), 
in that errors made in CI tests tend not to be highly amplified by subsequent steps. A CI 
mistake in phase 1 may result in an extraneous or missing edge, but this would not affect 
other decisions made in that phase. However, these adjacency errors and further errors in 
identifying v-structures may propagate out to cause further orientation errors.
3.2.2  The PC algorithm
The adjacency phase in SGS exhaustively tests every possible conditioning set for each 
pair of nodes. This is computationally expensive and also means that many high order CI 
tests (CI tests applied to large parent-sets) are performed which are unreliable because the 
individual elements of the CI test are based on relatively few data instances. To counter 
these issues, the PC algorithm by Spirtes and Glymour (1991) performs the adjacency 
phase with conditioning sets of increasing size—checking all pairs of nodes A, B at a par-
ticular conditioning set size and removing edges A −B if a Sepset is found before moving 
to higher conditioning sets. Moreover, the PC adjacency phase makes use of the result that 
the minimum conditioning set that d-separates two nodes must be a subset of the union 
of the parents of those nodes under the assumptions of faithfulness and causal sufficiency 
(Verma and Pearl 1990). Thus, the algorithm need only consider conditioning sets of nodes 
which are adjacent to A and B . This condition has no benefit initially since PC starts from 
a complete graph, but it reduces the number and order of the CI tests that are performed as 
the adjacency phase progresses and edges are removed.
To improve computational efficiency, the v-structure phase makes use of the Sepsets 
identified in the adjacency phase; if the Sepset for A and C identified in the adjacency 
phase for an unshielded triple A −B −C does not contain B , then this identifies it as the 
v-structure A →B ←C . The PC algorithm then performs orientation propagation using 
the “Meek Rules” (Meek 1995). The complexity of the PC algorithm is bounded by 
(Spirtes et al. 2000):

8735
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
where smax is the maximum size of any Sepset. This complexity bound is hard to quantify, 
but PC is polynomial given a limit on node degree (Claassen et al. 2013). Although far 
more efficient, the PC algorithm is less stable than SGS. For example, edges mistakenly 
removed in the adjacency phase can result in other edges being mistakenly retained later on 
in the adjacency phase.
3.2.3  The conservative PC (CPC) algorithm
The PC and SGS algorithms assume complete faithfulness, and one direction in which 
constraint-based algorithms have developed is to weaken this assumption. The Conserva-
tive PC (CPC) algorithm (Ramsey et al. 2006) does this by considering how faithfulness is 
assumed in the adjacency and orientation phases of the PC algorithm separately, using the 
terms adjacency-faithfulness and orientation-faithfulness respectively. It is shown that if 
only adjacency-faithfulness is assumed, the v-structure phase can detect and mark unfaith-
ful v-structures. To do this, CPC considers all Sepsets of A and C to determine if A −B −C 
is a v-structure—marking it as such only if none of the Sepsets contain B . Moreover, unless 
the “vote” is unanimous, the triple is marked as unfaithful. Thus, CPC is more cautious 
about orientating edges than PC, hence the name “conservative”. Simulations on a dataset 
of sample size 1,000 showed CPC to be only slightly slower than PC, but generating fewer 
erroneous edge orientations.
3.2.4  The very conservative SGS (VCSGS) algorithm
Zhang and Spirtes (2008) showed that a restricted assumption of faithfulness could be 
applied to the adjacency phase too. This weakened faithfulness condition is a combina-
tion of the minimality condition described in the Introduction, and triangle faithfulness 
which only assumes faithfulness on fully connected triples. With this weakened faithful-
ness assumption alone, it is possible to identify all other faithfulness violations. Spirtes and 
Zhang (2014) describe a version of SGS, the Very Conservative SGS, which would imple-
ment this weaker faithfulness assumption, though it was left as an open question whether it 
could be made efficient enough to be viable. It does not seem as though this algorithm has 
been implemented.
3.2.5  The PC‑stable algorithm
Colombo and Maathuis (2014) considered the effect of mistaken CI test decisions arising 
from limited sample sizes and, in particular, their interaction with the order in which the CI 
tests are performed. They showed that the output from all three phases of the original PC 
algorithm (including related algorithms such as FCI and RFCI which we discuss below) 
is sensitive to the order in which CI tests are performed. The order in which CI tests are 
performed is generally an artefact of the way the algorithm is implemented; e.g., it may 
be related to the lexicographic ordering of the node names, or in the order the variables 
appear in the data. They proposed modifications to each phase of the original PC algorithm 
n2(n −1)smax−1
(smax −1)!

8736
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
(Sect. 3.2.2) to remove this order dependence. Figure 7 presents the pseudo-code for the 
PC-Stable algorithm which has the following three phases:
•	 Adjacency: in the original PC algorithm, mistaken deletions of edges propagate by 
erroneously reducing the conditioning sets available in subsequent CI tests at a given 
conditioning set size. This was remedied by only recomputing adjacencies before 
processing all the CI tests at each conditioning set size, in contrast to the original 
PC algorithm where edges are removed and adjacencies adjusted as soon as an inde-
pendence relationship is detected. This is accomplished by taking a copy of the adja-
cencies at lines 5 and 6 of the pseudo-code and using this stable copy to determine 
possible conditioning sets ignoring the fact that edges might have been deleted in 
lines 8 to 10.
•	 V-structure: the original PC algorithm re-uses the Sepset used to determine that the 
triple is unshielded, to also decide whether that triple is a v-structure. Given that the 
original algorithm can use invalid Sepsets in the adjacency phase, this also means its 
sensitivity to node ordering can adversely affect v-structure orientation. PC-Stable fol-
lows the approach adopted by CPC (Sect. 3.2.3) by considering all the Sepsets of A and 
C in triple A −B −C to decide where it is a v-structure. However, PC-Stable takes a 
less conservative approach than CPC, which they term majority rule, whereby the triple 
is marked as a v-structure if a majority of the Sepsets do not contain the middle node 
B . Orientation conflicts are identified during this phase and marked by bi-directional 
edges, as shown in line 13 to 19 in the pseudo-code.
•	 Orientation propagation: mistaken CI tests mean that situations like that shown in Fig. 8 
can occur; i.e., the two v-structures imply conflicting orientations for edge B −E . The 
original PC algorithm would arbitrarily choose one orientation based on node process-
ing order. PC-Stable instead marks this conflicted edge with a bidirectional arrow.
The authors compared PC-Stable to PC in a low-dimensional simulation with 50 vari-
ables, an average neighbourhood size of 2 or 4 and 1000 rows, and in a high-dimensional 
simulation with 1000 variables, an average neighbourhood size of 2 and 50 rows. 250 ran-
dom graphs were generated in each setting. Synthetic Gaussian variable datasets were pro-
duced for each graph, and twenty random orderings of variables used with each dataset. 
The CI test threshold was also varied.
The behaviour of PC and PC-Stable was very similar in the low-dimensional simulation. 
However, in the high-dimensional one, PC-Stable learnt graphs with lower SHD from the 
true graph, and with a much smaller variance in SHD across the different dataset orderings. 
This demonstrated the improved accuracy and stability of PC-Stable over PC. PC-Stable 
was between three and 13 percent slower than PC due to performing more CI tests. Most 
recent implementations of algorithms in the PC (and FCI) family employ the order-inde-
pendence strategies used by PC-Stable.
Marella and Vicard (2022) provide a variant of PC, PC-CS, which addresses selection 
biases introduced by complex survey designs by using modified independence tests based 
on resampling techniques. The algorithm was evaluated using synthetic discrete variable 
datasets generated from random graphs. However, rows with particular values for some 
variables were preferentially included in the dataset in order to simulate the complex selec-
tion biases often found in survey data. The simulation then compared PC-Stable’s and PC-
CS’s ability to learn the random graph. PC-CS produced better SHD scores than PC-Stable, 

8737
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
but it should be noted that the simulations had at most 10 variables and so were somewhat 
limited.
3.2.6  PC‑MAX algorithm
Whereas PC uses the Sepset identified in the adjacency phase, and CPC and PC-Stable 
use a voting scheme, to determine whether an unshielded triple is a v-structure, PC-MAX 
(Ramsey 2016) uses the Sepset with the highest p-value to determine this. The intuition 
here is that the Sepset with the highest p-value is the one which most strongly separates 
the end nodes of the triple, and so should be used to decide whether it is a v-structure or 
not. Similarly, when two overlapping v-structures would give rise to a bidirectional edge 
as shown in Fig. 8, PC-MAX avoids that conflict by only retaining the v-structure with 
the highest p-value. PC-MAX also parallelises the adjacency and v-structure phases and 
Fig. 7   Pseudo-code for PC-Stable algorithm. Program code keywords are coloured blue, comments in grey, 
key variables in red, and application-specific complex operations or conditions in black. Note, that for clar-
ity, this variant does not identify orientation conflicts in the orientation propagation phase. (Color figure 
online)

8738
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
adopts the strategies used in PC-Stable to avoid sensitivity to the order of node processing. 
The authors evaluated performance on Gaussian BNs with PC-MAX obtaining better arc 
orientation than both PC and PC-Stable on a BN with 1000 variables. They demonstrated 
scalability by learning graphs with 20,000 variables and sample size 1000 on a powerful 
laptop with four dual-core processors in less than 5 min (Ramsey 2016), though observed 
that the score-based Fast Greedy Equivalence Search described in Sect. 4.2.2 was faster 
still and more accurate.
3.2.7  Three‑phase dependency algorithm (TPDA)
The Three-Phase Dependency Algorithm (TPDA) by Cheng et al. (2002) focuses on reduc-
ing the number of statistical tests required, performing at most O(n4) of them. TPDA adopts 
an information flow perspective to learn the graph adjacencies and differs from most con-
straint-based algorithms in that it uses MI tests quantitatively as a measure of information 
flow along paths, as well as a basis for conditional independence decisions.
Figure 9, based on an example from Cheng et al. (2002), illustrates a subgraph of a 
true network to demonstrate the basic principles behind TPDA. In particular, it shows 
how TPDA determines if a new edge is required between X and Y during its adjacency 
phase. We consider a point in time in the adjacency phase where TPDA has discovered that 
{A, B, C, D} are the only shared neighbours of X andY . Note at this point, TPDA has not 
determined the edge orientations. It checks whether X and Y are conditionally independent 
by testing if MI(X, Y|S} < 𝜖 , where 휖 represents a threshold negligible information flow. 
It starts by setting S = {A, B, C, D} and progressively removes one node at a time from S 
so that each time MI(X, Y|S} is reduced by the greatest amount. It repeats this until either 
a Sepset is found (in this example, it would find Sepset{A, B} ), or no Sepset is found. The 
latter situation means that the current graph is not sufficient to explain the information flow 
between X andY , and hence a direct edge is required between X andY.
In this way, the skeleton of the graph is built up, but with a reduced bound on the num-
ber of CI tests. In order for this approach to be sound, a stronger form of faithfulness called 
monotone-faithfulness must be assumed which corresponds to saying that blocking a path 
between two nodes never increases the information flow between them. In more detail, 
TPDA builds the skeleton in three phases:
1.	 Drafting: starts with an empty graph and progressively adds undirected edges between 
pairs of nodes with the highest MI scores, if there is not currently an undirected path 
between the pair. This creates a maximum spanning tree. That is, where there is one, and 
Fig. 8   Orientation conflict

8739
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
only one, path between every pair of variables and the sum of edge scores is a maximum. 
This tree is used as a good starting point for the next phase.
2.	 Thickening: adds edges between non-adjacent nodes if there is no Sepset in the set of 
shared neighbours between the two nodes, as described above.
3.	 Thinning: the thickening phase adds edges greedily, and so it can happen that an edge 
addition can render a previous edge addition superfluous by providing an alternative 
information flow route. The thinning phase identifies these superfluous edges by looking 
for direct edges which have parallel indirect routes that can carry the required informa-
tion flow, and then removes the superfluous direct edge.
TPDA then orientates edges using the v-structure and orientation phases described in 
the SGS algorithm. Notwithstanding the reduced bound on the number of CI tests required, 
Cheng et al. (2002) reported similar accuracy and efficiency results to the PC algorithm.
3.2.8  Recursive autonomy identification (RAI) algorithm
Yehezkel and Lerner (2009) also concentrated on reducing the number of CI tests, although 
they focussed on the costly and unreliable high-order tests. Their Recursive Autonomy 
Identification (RAI) algorithm assumes discrete variables and faithfulness, and starts with 
a complete undirected graph. Like the PC algorithm, RAI uses CI tests of increasing order. 
However, edge orientation is undertaken after edge removal at each conditioning set size, 
and this can allow RAI to identify autonomous subgraphs. These can be learnt indepen-
dently of each other through recursive calls of the algorithm.
Figure 10, based on the example given in their paper, illustrates these concepts. It shows 
the state of the graph whilst learning the DAG shown in the inset. In particular, it shows 
the state after CI tests of order 0 have removed some edges and an orientation step has 
been performed. At this point, RAI is able to decompose this particular graph into two 
autonomous ancestor subgraphs marked in green, and a descendant autonomous subgraph 
marked in orange, which can all then be further refined independently by recursive calls to 
RAI. The black arrows show the edges which have been orientated after CI tests of order 0, 
and the red edges are undirected edges within the subgraphs which may be orientated after 
higher-order CI tests remove more edges. This decomposition allows the overall structure 
of the graph to appear early on in the learning process, and tends to avoid the higher cost 
and less reliable high-order CI tests. Whether this decomposition is possible depends upon 
the independence relationships in the data. If it is not possible, then RAI behaves like the 
PC algorithm. Nonetheless, the authors reported that RAI demonstrated higher structural 
and predictive accuracy than contemporaneous algorithms including PC, over a range of 
Fig. 9   A graphical illustration 
of the process TPDA follows to 
determine whether to assign an 
edge between X and Y

8740
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
commonly evaluated BNs (Yehezkel and Lerner 2009). They also reported that RAI con-
ducts fewer CI tests and therefore has shorter runtimes.
3.3  Local discovery algorithms
In contrast to the global algorithms described in the previous subsection, the algorithms 
covered in this subsection learn the local skeleton relating to each variable separately. The 
local structure learnt can either be the parent and children (i.e., neighbours) of each node, 
T say, denoted PC(T) , or the Markov Blanket of T , denoted MB(T) . The Markov Blanket 
of node T is defined as the minimal conditioning set for which T is independent of all other 
nodes besides those in MB(T) . Thus, MB(T) shields T from the influence of all other vari-
ables. Assuming faithfulness, it can be shown that MB(T) consists of the parents, children, 
and parents of children (also known as spouses) of T.
In some contexts, the individual local structure of a particular variable can be useful in 
its own right. In particular, determining the Markov Blanket of a variable provides a prin-
cipled causal approach to feature selection, and much of the motivation for, and evaluation 
of, these local discovery algorithms has been around this use in classification problems 
(Aliferis et al. 2010). However, within BN structure learning, the local skeletons are learnt 
for every node and then merged to form the whole skeleton. As we discuss here, this may 
be done as part of overall constraint-based learning algorithm, with subsequent v-structure 
and orientation phases producing a CPDAG. Local discovery algorithms may also be part 
of hybrid approaches which are discussed in Sect. 5.
These 
local 
structures 
should 
be 
symmetric. 
That 
is, 
for 
example, 
A ∈PC(B) ⟺B ∈PC(A) where PC(B) denotes the parents and children of node B . 
However, errors made by CI tests can mean that local structures may not be symmetric in 
practice. Algorithms usually resolve these conflicts by applying the “AND-rule”, where 
an edge will only be included in the global skeleton if the two nodes are in each other’s 
parent-and-child sets. More sophisticated symmetry correction approaches can be used 
however—see, for example, Sect. 5.1.5.
Fig. 10   Illustration of autono-
mous subgraphs within the RAI 
algorithm (based on figure in 
Yehezkel and Lerner 2009). 
(Color figure online)

8741
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
3.3.1  Markov Blanket algorithms
The Grow-Shrink (GS) algorithm (Margaritis and Thrun 1999) was the first to exploit the 
concept of a Markov Blanket to reduce the number of CI tests in the adjacency phase. It 
consists of two steps:
1.	 Grow: for each node X in X{T} , GS tests whether X ⟂T|MB(T) . If not, X is immedi-
ately added to MB(T) which grows dynamically throughout this step. Nodes are tested 
for inclusion in MB(T) in decreasing order of the strength of the association between 
the node X and T , which is calculated in a pre-processing step.
2.	 Shrink: the grow step may add unnecessary nodes in the Markov blankets, which this 
step removes. It checks if X ⟂T|MB(T){X} for all X ∈MB(T) . If yes, X is removed 
from MB(T).
Having constructed the Markov Blanket of all nodes in G , GS performs the following 
steps:
1.	 Completes the adjacency determination by removing parents of children of T in each 
Markov Blanket MB(T) . These are identified by having the condition X ⟂T|S for some 
S ⊆MB(T){X}.
2.	 v-structure and orientation phases similar to SGS and PC.
Margaritis (2003) reported an overall complexity for GS of O(n2 + nb22b) CI tests, 
where b = maxX(|MB(X)|) is the size of the largest Markov Blanket. For dense networks 
where b ≈n , this means the GS algorithm has exponential complexity, although for the 
more usual sparse networks b can be considered a small constant and in those cases the 
complexity decreases to O(n2). Margaritis (2003) reported similar adjacency performance 
to PC, although GS is said to produce better edge orientation.
The Incremental Association Markov Blanket (IAMB) algorithm optimises Markov 
Blanket discovery so that it can handle thousands of nodes (Tsamardinos et al. 2003). The 
authors argue that GS’s Markov Blanket grow phase is suboptimal because it is slow to dis-
cover spouses in the Markov Blanket MB(T) since these often have weak association with 
T . This in turn leads to more CI tests in the grow and shrink phases. Instead, they propose 
using conditional mutual information MI(X, T | MB(T)) to determine the order in which a 
node X is considered for inclusion into MB(T) during the grow phase. They also propose a 
variant on IAMB, called Inter-IAMB, which interleaves the grow and shrink phases. IAMB 
and Inter-IAMB were able to handle synthetic networks with up to 1,000 nodes, offering 
better accuracy in Markov Blanket discovery than GS.
Yaramakala and Margaritis (2005) suggested a further variant, Fast-IAMB. They pro-
posed using the 휒2 test statistic as the metric for deciding which nodes to add to MB(T) 
during the grow phase. Furthermore, they argued that recomputing the statistic each time 
a node is added to MB(T) is expensive and so proposed adding groups of nodes to MB(T) 
before the test statistics are recomputed. They demonstrated similar accuracy in Markov 
Blanket identification to IAMB and Inter-IAMB, but with savings in execution time of 
18–32% over the former, and 28–48% over the latter, together with a reduction in high-
order CI tests.

8742
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
3.3.2  Parents‑and‑children algorithms
The parents and children of node T , PC(T) is more directly useful for skeleton learn-
ing than MB(T) , and can be obtained by removing the spouses from MB(T) . However, 
Max–Min Parents Children (MMPC), HITON-PC and SI-HITON-PC algorithms learn 
PC(T) directly (Tsamardinos et al. 2003: Aliferis et al. 2003a, b; and, Aliferis et al. 2010, 
respectively). Aliferis et al. (2010) defined a sound generic framework for learning PC(T) 
into which these three specific algorithms fit, and which consists of:
•	 a strategy for inclusion of a node X in PC(T) , heuristically prioritised, for instance, 
based on the strength of association between X and T;
•	 an elimination strategy for removal from PC(T) , for example, removing X from PC(T) 
if X ⟂T|S for some S ⊆PC(T){X};
•	 an approach for interleaving inclusion and elimination. For example, all candidate vari-
ables can first be included in PC(T) , and then extraneous variables can be eliminated, 
or variables can be added one at a time to in PC(T) , with the elimination step per-
formed each time a new variable is added.
3.4  Algorithms assuming the existence of latent variables
The algorithms considered so far have assumed causal sufficiency, which is unreasonable 
in many real-world situations. We now consider algorithms where this assumption is not 
made. Explicitly including latent confounders into the DAG might be one approach to 
avoiding this assumption, but since these confounders are unmeasured and often unknown, 
this is formidably difficult. It also risks increasing the number of variables so that learning 
becomes intractable.
Instead, the most common approach is to learn a graph consisting of only the observed 
variables, while at the same time taking into account the potential existence of latent vari-
ables or confounders that might explain part of the effects or relationships between the 
observed variables. However, the semantics of DAGs are not detailed enough to represent 
this information. Figure 11a illustrates this issue using a causal graph of four observed 
variables {A, B, C, D} , and a latent confounder L which would entail the dependence rela-
tionships A ⟂D|B , A ⟂D|C , and A ̸⟂D|B, C . If we attempt to represent this with a DAG 
of just the four observable variables, then there is no orientation of a directed edge between 
B and C that could entail these dependence relationships. Figure 11b presents an ancestral 
graph which, unlike DAGs, captures relationships due to latent confounders, and which we 
describe in the subsection that follows below.
3.4.1  Ancestral graphs
Richardson and Spirtes (2002) introduced a new class of graph called an ancestral graph4 
capable of capturing the relationships between observed variables in the presence of both 
latent confounders and selection bias. The latter is the situation where the probability of 
4  Earlier work by Spirtes et  al. 1995 and 2000 represented the effect of latent and selection variables 
through a similar kind of mixed graph called an inducing path graph (IPG). Ancestral graphs are a sub-
class of IPGs which reveal more causal information and are easier to parameterise (Zhang 2008a).

8743
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
inclusion of a data instance in the dataset depends upon one or more latent selection vari-
ables. An example might be where patients in a clinical trial do not complete the trial if 
they become seriously ill, and so are not present in the dataset. Crucially, DAGs are a spe-
cial case of an ancestral graph, and ancestral graphs are closed under conditioning and 
marginalisation. This means that an ancestral graph can be used to represent the probability 
distribution of a partially observed DAG. Ancestral graphs have three types of edge (Zhang 
2008b):
•	 directed, e.g. A →B : The mapping between edge types in the ancestral graph and 
relationships in the underlying DAG is given in Richardson and Spirtes (2002) but is 
somewhat complicated. We first define “ A is an ancestor of B ” to mean that there is a 
directed path from A to B with at least two directed edges. Directed edge A →B in the 
ancestral graph means that A is an ancestor or parent of B and/or a selection variable, 
and that B is not an ancestor or parent of A nor of a selection variable in the underlying 
DAG. Note, for example, that this edge type does not preclude a latent variable being 
the cause of both A and B as well (i.e., a latent confounder).
•	 bidirected, e.g. A ↔B : indicates that A is not an ancestor or parent of B , B is not an 
ancestor or parent of A , and neither are ancestors or parents of a selection variable. This 
edge type arises in the presence of latent confounders.
•	 undirected, e.g. A −B : A is an ancestor or parent of B or a selection variable and B is an 
ancestor or parent of A or a selection variable.
As the above shows, ancestral graphs primarily provide information about the ances-
tral and parental relationships in the underlying DAG, hence their name. Figure 11b shows 
the ancestral graph which represents the relationships between the observed variables in 
Fig. 11a. Richardson and Spirtes (2002) state two key conditions in the definition of an 
ancestral graph:
•	 there are no partially directed cycles. A partially directed cycle consists of an anterior 
path from A to B together with an edge B →A or B ↔A . An anterior path from A to B 
consists of edges with no arrows pointing towards A;
Fig. 11   Latent confounder

8744
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
•	 for any undirected edge A −B , A and B should have no incoming arrows.
Many properties of ancestral graphs flow from these two conditions. In particular, that 
there can be at most one edge between each pair of variables, and that marginalisation and 
conditioning are closed. It also follows that ancestral graphs encode conditional independ-
ence relationships through a graphical criterion called m-separation which is analogous to 
d-separation for DAGs. In an ancestral graph, S m-separates A from B if all paths between 
A and B are blocked by S . A path is blocked if at least one node on the path is either:
•	 a collider, defined in an ancestral graph as having two arrowheads incident to it, and 
neither it, nor any of its descendants, are in S;
•	 or, is not a collider and is in in S.
If two nodes are not adjacent in a DAG, this implies that there is a set of nodes which 
d-separates them. However, this does not follow for ancestral graphs. Figure 12a based on 
Zhang (2008b) illustrates this, since G and H are not adjacent, but there is no subset of the 
other nodes that m-separates them. Therefore, a sub-class of ancestral graphs known as 
Maximal Ancestral Graphs (MAG) is defined which does have the property that non-adja-
cent nodes can be m-separated. Equivalently, this means that every absent edge in a MAG 
corresponds to a conditional independence relationship. A MAG can always be constructed 
from an ancestral graph by adding bi-directional edges such as G ↔H in Fig. 12b.
In the same way that an equivalence class of DAGs may be consistent with a given 
set of independence relationships, the independence relationships with latent and selection 
variables present may be consistent with multiple MAGs. Analogously to a CPDAG, the 
equivalence class of MAGs is represented by a Partial Ancestral Graph (PAG). Constraint-
based algorithms which take account of latent confounders and selection variables gener-
ally produce a PAG. There are three types of endpoint possible at each end of an edge in a 
PAG:
•	 an invariant arrowhead, marked as “>”, indicating that all MAGs in the equivalence 
class have an arrowhead at that endpoint;
•	 an invariant tail, marked as “-”, indicating that all MAGs in the equivalence class have 
a tail at that endpoint;
•	 a variant endpoint, marked as “o”, indicating that some MAGs in the equivalence class 
have an arrowhead, and others a tail, at that endpoint.
So, for example, an edge ◦→ in a PAG indicates that MAGs in the equivalence class 
may have → or ↔ at that location, and similarly an edge ◦−◦ in the PAG indicates that 
MAGs in the equivalence class can have a → , ← , ↔ or − edge at that location. Note that the 
semantics of CPDAGs and PAGs are somewhat different. In particular, whereas a − edge in 
a CPDAG indicates that the edge in equivalent DAGs can be either → or ← , a − edge in a 
PAG indicates that the edge is − in all equivalent MAGs.
3.4.2  Fast causal inference (FCI) algorithm
Spirtes et  al. (1993, 2000) described the Fast Causal Inference (FCI) algorithm for 
structure learning without assuming causal sufficiency, though the causal Markov and 
causal faithfulness conditions are still assumed. FCI produces a Partially Orientated 

8745
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Inducing Path Graph (POIPG)—an earlier representation which is slightly less inform-
ative than a PAG. In broad overview, FCI is similar to PC in that it first determines the 
adjacencies in the POIPG, and then orientates edges. We recall that the PC adjacency 
phase is optimised by using conditioning sets of increasing size. The PC adjacency 
phase also makes use of the fact that, for a DAG, a Sepset must be a subset of the 
parents of A or B , and so it need only consider conditioning sets which are subsets 
of the neighbours of A and B. The FCI adjacency phase also uses conditioning sets 
of increasing size. However, Sepsets in a MAG are a subset of D-Sep(A, B) (Spirtes 
et al. 2000, p. 134) which in general contains nodes which are not adjacent to A or B , 
as well as those that are. This necessitates a more complex strategy for determining 
adjacencies:
1.	 Firstly, an initial skeleton is estimated considering conditioning sets that are subsets of 
the neighbours of A or B . In general, this skeleton will have some extraneous adjacen-
cies.
2.	 Secondly, a v-structure phase is performed to orientate some edges. The resulting graph 
allows us to identify nodes that are definitely not in D-Sep(A, B) and so conversely define 
a superset of D-Sep(A, B) , denoted Possible-D-Sep(A, B).
3.	 Further edges may then be removed using subsets of Possible-D-Sep(A, B) as condition-
ing sets.
V-structure identification is then repeated on this new skeleton, followed by an ori-
entation phase which is much more complex in POIPGs (and PAGs) than in PDAGs. 
Zhang (2008b) augmented the process of Spirtes et. al (2000) by defining eleven ori-
entation rules that are said to produce a sound and complete PAG as the sample size 
N →∞ ; i.e., all arrowheads and edge tails are said to be correct and the maximum 
possible number of them are determined. Colombo and Maathuis (2014) applied the 
same techniques used in PC-Stable to amend FCI to produce the FCI-Stable algorithm, 
which removes the dependence of the result on node lexicographical ordering. FCI-
Stable is often used as the benchmark when assessing learning in the presence of latent 
and selection variables.
Fig. 12   Maximal Ancestral 
Graphs (Zhang 2008b)

8746
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
3.4.3  Really fast causal inference (RFCI) algorithm
Despite the presence of “Fast” in FCI’s name, its adjacency determination is typically 
far more resource intensive than in the PC algorithm. Really Fast Causal Inference 
(Colombo et al. 2012) seeks to address this by reverting back to considering only con-
ditioning sets that are the parents of nodes in the adjacency phase as PC does, and hav-
ing just one adjacency phase instead of two as in FCI. The v-structure phase and one 
of the eleven orientation rules are also modified to avoid orientation errors that might 
occur due to the fact that the PC adjacency step is used rather than the more accurate 
FCI one. The authors showed that for a large class of graphs being learnt, this pro-
duced the same PAG that FCI would have. Moreover, when FCI and RFCI do produce 
different results, RFCI produces PAGs with extra edges, thus slightly weakening the 
meaning of an edge. On the other hand, the consequent reduction in CI tests, particu-
larly high-order ones, meant that RFCI was around 250 times faster for some synthetic, 
sparse, high-dimensional graphs (n = 500) with latent variables. It should be noted that 
all structural accuracy evaluations given in Colombo et al. (2012) were done against 
PAGs produced by FCI rather than against ‘ground-truth’ graphs.
3.4.4  Conservative fast causal inference (CFCI) algorithm
As well as developing the RFCI algorithm, Colombo et al. (2012) also investigated modify-
ing FCI by weakening the faithfulness assumption used to identify v-structures as Ramsey 
et al. (2006) had done in the Conservative PC algorithm. They identified v-structures as either 
ambiguous or unambiguous, and only used the latter in subsequent stages. This resulted in 
fewer arrowheads, smaller possible conditioning sets, and hence extra edges in the resultant 
PAG compared to FCI. The overall effect was to produce similar numbers of additional edges 
compared to FCI as RFCI had produced, though with edge orientation closer to FCI.
3.4.5  Fast causal inference plus (FCI+) algorithm
Fast Causal Inference Plus (FCI+) centers around another approach to speeding up the adja-
cency phase of FCI (Claassen et al. 2013). It retains FCI’s approach of using conditioning 
sets for A, B that incorporate ancestors as well as just parents of A and B , but focuses on effi-
ciently identifying those cases where ancestors rather than just direct parents are in the Sepset. 
In doing so, they demonstrate that learning sparse causal graphs can be performed in poly-
nomial time if a limit is placed on the node degree. In particular, in the worst case, FCI+ 
requires O(n2(d+2)) CI tests, where n is the number of observed variables, and d the maximum 
node degree. This complexity is O(PC2) , that is the square of what the PC algorithm requires. 
Although detailed performance results are not given, the authors suggested that cases where 
Sepsets do include non-parents are relatively rare, and so performance may in practice be rela-
tively close to PC.
3.4.6  Mixed variable types—MGM‑FCI‑MAX algorithm
Raghu et al. (2018) extended FCI to support a mixture of continuous and discrete variable 
types in their MGM-FCI-MAX variant of FCI. They introduced regression-based tests to 
detect conditional independence across different variable types. Orientation accuracy is also 
improved using the Sepsets with the highest p-value to identify v-structures as described in the 

8747
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
PC-MAX algorithm (see Sect. 3.2.6). This produces higher numbers of CI tests compared to 
FCI, and so the adjacency and v-structure phases are parallelised to counteract this efficiency 
drawback. The code parallelisation resulted in modest time savings of the order of 30% using 
six processor cores instead of one core. The algorithm achieves more substantial savings by 
another innovation of using a Mixed Graphical Model (MGM) undirected graph as input to 
the adjacency phases rather than a complete undirected graph as is customary. An MGM is an 
undirected graph which can represent conditional independence relationships between mixed 
variable types and was generated by the algorithm described by Lee and Hastie (2015). Com-
bining all these innovations, MGM-FCI-MAX was said to achieve a better balance between 
precision and recall than CFCI and FCI, as well as significantly reduced runtimes when 
applied to networks consisting of 500 variables.
4  Score‑based learning
Score-based learning represents the other main class of BN structure learning and con-
sists of two elements: (a) a search strategy that determines which path to follow in the 
search space of possible graphs, and (b) an objective function that can be used to eval-
uate each graph explored in the search space of graphs. The overriding challenge for 
score-based learning is to find high, or ideally the highest, scoring graphs amongst the 
vast number of possible graphs. As we have seen in the Introduction, a naïve exhaustive 
search where every possible graph is considered and scored is only feasible in problems 
with a handful of variables.
We first describe the objective function, which is pertinent to all score-based algo-
rithms, in Sect. 4.1, followed by the algorithms themselves. Score-based algorithms are 
the most diverse type of structure learning algorithms, and there are different ways one 
might choose to categorise them. Here, we opt to primarily organise them according to 
those which do not guarantee to return the highest scoring graph, known as approximate 
algorithms and described in Sect. 4.2, and those which do offer that guarantee, known 
as exact algorithms and described in Sect. 4.3. These different groups of score-based 
algorithms, and their evolution, are shown in different shades of blue in Fig. 6.
The other defining characteristic of score-based algorithms is the search strategy. 
This is a combination of what search space is used, how the algorithm traverses that 
search space, and how that search space might be pruned (reduced). Perhaps the sim-
plest score-based algorithm one might imagine is one that starts with an empty graph 
and greedily adds the arc which most increases the score subject to the restriction that 
it does not create a cycle in the graph. This process continues until it is no longer pos-
sible to find an arc addition that increases the score. The search space in this simple case 
would be DAG space (sometimes referred to as structure or graph space), and the tra-
versal method is add arc. Since the algorithm greedily adds arcs, there is no guarantee it 
will find the highest scoring graph, and so it is an approximate algorithm.
Approximate algorithms which search DAG space are described in Sect.  4.2.1. 
However, other kinds of search space have also been adopted. For example, Sect. 4.2.2 
describes approximate algorithms which explore equivalence class space, and Sect. 4.2.3 
covers those which explore node-ordering space. Node ordering is a topological order-
ing of the nodes in the DAG such that a node can only have parents which are higher up 
the ordering than it. Note that a node ordering exists for a directed graph if and only if it 

8748
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
is acyclic, and that in general a DAG may be consistent with multiple orderings as well 
as an ordering may be consistent with multiple DAGs.
This categorisation by search space is also followed for the exact algorithms. Prun-
ing the search space is particularly important for exact algorithms where the pruning 
rules must be sound so as to guarantee that the pruned space still contains the optimal 
solution, whereas heuristic pruning does not offer this guarantee. Table 3 describes the 
search space and the search space traversal method used by the score-based algorithms 
covered in this paper, as well as whether they are approximate or exact algorithms. It 
also includes the objective function used in the original paper proposing the algorithm. 
Note that Scutari et  al. (2019a) argued that the choice of algorithm and score used 
should be independent, and indeed, many BN tools support using different score func-
tions for each algorithm. Thus, this column does not necessarily indicate a fundamental 
restriction on the scores that can be used with each algorithm, rather it gives a histori-
cal view on preferred scores at the time of their introduction. Finally, Table 3 describes 
the output graph type each algorithm produces. Approximate algorithms will typically 
produce a single DAG with a locally optimum score, whereas exact search algorithms 
will return a DAG with the globally optimum (that is, highest possible) score. Lastly, 
algorithms searching in equivalence class space will return a CPDAG.
4.1  Objective functions
Objective functions fall under two categories: the Bayesian scores which generally focus 
on the goodness of fit and allow the incorporation of prior knowledge, and information-
theoretic scores which explicitly consider model complexity in addition to the goodness 
of fit, aiming to avoid model overfitting. Importantly, a score is said to be decomposable if 
the score of a graph can be decomposed into a sum of scores each associated with a node 
in the graph. Decomposable scores mean that only the scores for nodes affected by a graph 
change in a search process need to be re-computed, rather than re-computing the score of 
the whole graph for every single graph modification. As a result, a decomposable score 
greatly improves computational efficiency and virtually all algorithms employ them.
As noted in the Introduction, all the DAGs in an equivalence class entail the same con-
ditional independence relationships, and therefore there is no reason for preferring one of 
them above the others on the basis of the observational data alone.5 Therefore, the objec-
tive function is usually specified so it gives the same score to all DAGs in an equivalence 
class—a property known as score equivalence. Most commonly used scores do have this 
property. However, it is worth noting that approximate and exact algorithms that use 
score equivalent objective functions often just return a single result DAG. In that case, we 
should regard the output DAG as being a representative of the equivalence class to which it 
belongs. Indeed, the particular DAG within an equivalence class that the algorithm returns 
is usually just an artefact of the dataset (Constantinou et al. 2021b). It may depend on the 
lexicographical ordering of the variable names, or the order in which the variables in the 
dataset are encountered.
5  Note that if we have data that includes the effects of interventions then we may be able to orientate some 
of the undirected edges in the equivalence class, and come closer to fully specifying the causal DAG.

8749
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Table 3   Characteristics of score-based algorithms reviewed, ordered chronologically (note that K2 is a type of Bayesian Dirichlet score). “Optimal DAG” in the final column 
refers to the DAG with the highest score over all possible DAGs with the dataset used to learn the DAG
Algorithm
Algorithm name or descrip-
tion
Reference
Exact
Search space
Search space traversal
Scores used
Type of output
K2
K2
Cooper and Herskovits 
(1992)
No
DAG
Add arc
K2
DAG
HC-Bouckaert
Hill Climbing by adding 
arcs
Bouckaert (1994)
No
DAG
Add arc
K2 & MDL
DAG
TABU
Hill Climbing with Tabu list Bouchaert (1995)
No
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
K2 & BIC
DAG
HC
Hill Climbing
Heckerman et al. 
(1995)
No
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
BDe
DAG
MC3
Structure Monte Carlo 
Markov Chain
Madigan et al. (1995)
No
DAG
Add/remove arc
Posterior prob-
ability
DAG distribution
GA
Genetic algorithm
Larranaga et al. 
(1996a, b)
No
Node ordering
Crossover and mutation 
operators
K2
DAG
K2SN
K2 for Sorting Nodes
de Campos and Puerta 
(2001)
No
Node ordering
Randomly generate ordering
K2
DAG
VNS
Variable Neighbourhood 
Search
de Campos and Puerta 
(2001)
No
DAG
Add/remove/reverse up to 
n arcs
K2
DAG
GES
Greedy Equivalence Search
Chickering (2002)
No
Equivalence class
Insert/Delete operations (see 
Sect. 4.2.2)
BDeu
CPDAG
Order-MCMC
Order Monte-Carlo Markov 
Chain
Friedman and Koller 
(2003)
No
Node ordering
Swap adjacent nodes
Posterior prob-
ability
Feature probability
OptOrd
Dynamic Programming
Singh and Moore 
(2005)
Yes
Node ordering
Add/remove first node in 
order
BDeu
Optimal DAG
OBS
Ordering Based Search
Teyssier and Koller 
(2005)
No
Node ordering
Swap adjacent nodes
BDeu
DAG
Hybrid MCMC
Hybrid Monte Carlo 
Markov Chain
Eaton and Murphy 
(2007)
No
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
BDeu
Feature probability
B&B
Branch and Bound
De Campos et al. 
(2009)
Yes
Directed Graph
Split graph at cycles
AIC or BIC
Optimal DAG

8750
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Algorithm
Algorithm name or descrip-
tion
Reference
Exact
Search space
Search space traversal
Scores used
Type of output
GOBNILP
Globally Optimal BN using 
ILP
Cussens (2011)
Yes
Directed Graph
Integer Linear Programming
BDe
Optimal DAG
GIES
Greedy Interventional 
Equivalence Search
Hauser and Bühlmann 
(2012)
No
Equivalence class
Insert/Delete operations (see 
Sect. 4.2.2)
BIC
CPDAG
BCO
Bee Colony Optimisation
Ji et al. (2013)
No
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc or 
swap parents
K2
DAG
A*
A* Search
Yuan and Malone 
(2013)
Yes
Node ordering
Add/remove first node in 
order
BIC
Optimal DAG
CPBayes
Constraint Programming
Van Beek and Hoff-
man (2015)
Yes
Node ordering
Swap adjacent nodes
BDeu & BIC
Optimal DAG
ASOBS
Acyclic Selection OBS
Scanagatta et al (2015)
No
Node ordering
Swap adjacent nodes
BIC*
DAG
GSMAG
Greedy Search for MAGs
Triantafillou and Tsa-
mardinos (2016)
No
MAG
Add/remove/reverse/convert 
bi/directed edges
BIC for MAG
MAG
Partition MCMC
Partition Monte Carlo 
Markov Chain
Scanagatta et al. 
(2017)
No
Order partitions
Split/merge partition
BGe
DAG
INOBS
Insert Neighbourhood OBS
Lee and van Beek 
(2017)
No
Node ordering
Insert/swap adjacent nodes
BDeu & BIC
DAG
MINOBS
Memetic Insert Neighbour-
hood OBS
Lee and van Beek 
(2017)
No
Node ordering
Insert/swap adjacent 
nodes + mutation/crossover
BDeu & BIC
DAG
FGES
Fast Greedy Equivalence 
Search
Ramsey et al. (2017)
No
Equivalence class
Insert/Delete operations (see 
Sect. 4.2.2)
BDeu & BIC
CPDAG
WINASOBS
Window Acyclic Selection 
OBS
Scanagatta et al. 
(2017)
No
Node ordering
Move blocks of nodes
BIC
DAG
GOBNILP-DEV
Globally Optimal BN using 
ILP
Liao et al. (2019)
Yes
Directed Graph
Integer Linear Programming
BDeu & BIC
Highest scoring DAGs
K2-Improved
K2 with improved ordering
Behjati and Beigy 
(2020)
No
DAG
Node order, then add arc
BIC
DAG

8751
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Algorithm
Algorithm name or descrip-
tion
Reference
Exact
Search space
Search space traversal
Scores used
Type of output
FGES-Merge
Merge sub-graphs learnt 
with FGES
Bernaola et al. (2020)
No
Equivalence class
Insert/Delete operations (see 
Sect. 4.2.2)
BIC
CPDAG
ELSA
Improved acyclicity checks 
in CPBayes
Trösser et al. (2021)
Yes
Node ordering
Swap adjacent nodes
BDeu & BIC
Optimal DAG
MAHC
Model Averaging Hill 
Climbing
Constantinou et al. 
(2022)
No
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
BIC
DAG

8752
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
4.1.1  Bayesian scores
Bayesian scoring functions return a relative posterior probability for a graph conditioned on 
the data, taking into account prior beliefs about the graphical structure and/or dependence rela-
tionship parameters. The approach provides a theoretical underpinning to assign a posterior 
probability to each possible structure, something that constraint-based approaches do not offer. 
This in turn allows Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) where, for instance, the posterior prob-
ability of a given feature such as a specific arc can be averaged across a set of likely structures.
Most commonly, one assumes that all graph structures are equally probable a priori. For 
discrete data, we generally assume a Dirichlet prior for the parameters which gives rise to 
the well-established general Bayesian Dirichlet (BD) score which, in its general form, is 
not score equivalent (Heckerman et al. 1995). Formally, the general BD score is defined as:
where Γ is the Gamma function, i is the index over the n variables, j is the index over 
the qi combinations of values of the parents of the node Xi , and k is the index over the ri 
possible values (states) of node Xi . Further, Nijk is the number of instances in the data D 
where node Xi has the kth value, and its parents have the jth combination of values, and 
Nij = ∑ri
k=1 Nijk representing the total number of instances in the data D where the par-
ents of node Xi have the jth combination of values. Lastly, N′
ijk and N
ij = ∑ri
k=1 N
ijk are 
defined analogously based on prior beliefs of these values. P(G) is the prior probability 
of a particular graph structure which is generally assumed to be the same for all graphs 
and so can be ignored.
A drawback of the general BD score is that it requires the user to specify the values 
of N′
ijk individually, which renders it impractical. The K2 score is the BD score where 
N
ijk = 1 , (Cooper and Herskovits 1992) and simplifies the general BD score to:
The K2 score also is not score equivalent. Heckerman et al. (1995) introduced the 
score equivalent BDe score, defined as
 Here 휃′
ijk is the prior conditional probability of node Xi having the kth value given the 
parents have the jth combination of values in the prior distribution. N′ is the equivalent 
sample size (ESS, also sometimes known as the imaginary sample size, ISS) and expresses 
our confidence in the prior parameters.
The most commonly used Bayesian score is the BDeu score (Buntine 1991; Hecker-
man et al. 1995) which is a special case of BDe where the prior parameters are set to 
휃
ijk = 1∕riqi for all i, j, k leading to the following definition:
SBD(G, D) = 푙표푔P(G) +
n
∑
i=1
qi
∑
j=1
[
푙표푔
Γ(N
ij
)
Γ(Nij + Nij
) +
ri
∑
k=1
푙표푔
Γ(Nijk + N
ijk
)
Γ(Nijk
)
]
SK2(G, D) = 푙표푔P(G) +
n
∑
i=1
qi
∑
j=1
[
푙표푔
(ri −1)!
(Nij + ri −1)!
+
ri
∑
k=1
푙표푔(Nijk!)
]
SBDe(G, D) = 푙표푔P(G) +
n

i=1
qi

j=1
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
푙표푔
Γ

N
ri∑
k=1
휃
ijk

Γ

Nij + N
ri∑
k=1
휃ijk
 +
ri

k=1
푙표푔
ΓNijk + N휃
ijk

ΓN휃ijk

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦

8753
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Cooper and Yoo (1999) define a variant of BDeu which is suitable for a mix of obser-
vational and interventional data where the terms that express the likelihood of the data 
given a particular structure are left out for nodes that are intervened on. They showed 
that using this approach, a combination of observational and experimental data was the 
most effective at identifying causally-related nodes.
BDeu is score equivalent but requires the user to choose a suitable value for ESS 
(i.e., N′ ). Unfortunately, BDeu, and hence the graphs learnt using it, are sensitive to the 
value of ESS chosen, and it is difficult to decide what value to use for ESS. As might 
be expected, large values of ESS will tend to regularise the parameter values (Hecker-
man et al. 1995). What is rather more surprising is the effect of ESS on the learnt graph 
structure. Steck and Jaakkola (2002) found that as ESS tends to zero, arc deletion is 
favoured producing sparser graphs. Similarly, Silander and Myllimaki (2006) observed 
that the number of arcs rose as ESS was increased. Ueno (2010) provided a detailed 
asymptotic analysis of BDeu supported by empirical experiments. This work showed 
that different elements of BDeu responded differently to ESS, with the complex behav-
iour heavily influenced by sample size and the skewness of the parameters. This work 
also showed that the K2 score approximates the BIC asymptotically as the sample size 
tends to infinity. The author recommended that ESS be set to 1 for small sample sizes.
Correia et al. (2019) introduced the concept of a robustness interval defined as the 
ESS range over which all the graphs generated are members of the same equivalence 
class. They found that this range increased with sample size, but that large amounts of 
data were required to achieve a reasonably wide robustness interval for ESS of [0.1, 
4.0]. All 15 real-world datasets examined did not have sufficient data to achieve this 
robustness interval, leading them to conclude that “almost every real-world dataset 
might be too sparse for BDeu”. The robust interval calculated did not include the widely 
adopted value of ESS = 1 in 11/15 datasets.
Scutari (2016) introduced a new BD score, BDs, aiming to produce better results with 
sparse datasets where some possible combinations of parental values are not present in the 
dataset. BDs has the same algebraic form as BDeu given above, the difference being the 
way qi , the number of parental value combinations, is calculated. As an illustration, sup-
pose node C has parents A and B, and A can take three possible values, and B two possible 
values, giving 6 possible combinations of parental values, but suppose only 4 of these com-
binations are actually present in the data. BDs will use qi = 4 , and BDeu will use qi = 6 . 
This paper also showed that the uniform structural prior usually used with BDeu favoured 
the inclusion of arcs, and suggested a new structural prior named marginal uniform which 
weighted arc addition and deletion equally. The combination of BDs and the marginal uni-
form prior outperformed the traditional BDeu and structural uniform prior combination in 
terms of structural accuracy and the likelihood of the observed data given the learnt struc-
ture in all sixty combinations of BN and sample size tested. The improved structural accu-
racy resulting from using the combination of BDs and the marginal uniform prior instead 
of BDeu was more pronounced at lower sample sizes. It should be noted that a disadvan-
tage of BDs is that it is not score equivalent when there are missing parental value combi-
nations, a situation likely to occur in all but very large sample sizes.
SBDeu(G, D) = 푙표푔P(G) +
n

i=1
qi

j=1
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
푙표푔
Γ( N

qi )
Γ

Nij + N
qi
 +
ri

k=1
푙표푔
Γ

Nijk + N

riqi

Γ

N
riqi

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦

8754
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
The analogous score to the Bayesian Discrete equivalent scores for continuous variables 
is the Bayesian Gaussian equivalent score (BGe) defined in Geiger and Heckerman (2002) 
and subsequently corrected in Kuipers et al. (2014). The prior beliefs of the parameter val-
ues are encapsulated as the parameters of a Normal-Wishart distribution in an analogous 
fashion to the Dirichlet prior for discrete Bayesian scores.
4.1.2  Information‑theoretic scores
Information-theoretic scores aim to avoid over-fitting by balancing the goodness of fit with 
model dimensionality given the available data. The most commonly used scores include 
the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) which is also known as the Minimum Descrip-
tion Length (MDL) (Suzuki 1993, 1999), the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) (Akaike 
1974), the Mutual Information Test (MIT) (de Campos 2006), the Normalised Maximum 
Likelihood (NML) (Rissanen 1996), the factorized Normalised Maximum Likelihood 
(fNML)) (Silander et al. 2008), and the quotient Normalised Maximum Likelihood (qNML) 
(Silander et al. 2018). The general form of these scores can be expressed as:
where log[̂p(D|G)
] denotes the goodness of fit as measured by the log likelihood of the 
data given the graph, in the case where the distribution parameters, 횯 , take their Maximum 
Likelihood Estimation (MLE) values, and Δ(D, G) is a function which penalises graph 
complexity. The detailed expression of log[̂p(D|G)
] for discrete variables is
Setting Δ(D, G) = 0 removes the dimensionality penalty and makes the score equivalent to 
the Log-likelihood score SLL(G, D) . Since each arc addition increases SLL(G, D) , this score 
will favour denser graphs.
In the AIC score, the complexity penalty is just the number of free parameters in the 
model, F , defined as:
so that
The AIC score represents a rather soft penalty in terms of the number of free parameters. 
As a result, the AIC score tends to favour networks with a higher number of free param-
eters compared to BIC which is represented by
where N is the sample size. Note that in BIC, and even more so AIC, the relative influence 
of the complexity penalty decreases as N grows, implying that increasing sample size will 
eventually allow LL to dominate the score. The BIC score is widely popular and has been 
S(G, D) = log[̂p(D|G)
] −Δ(D, G)
log[̂p(D|G)
]
=
n
∑
i=1
qi
∑
j=1
ri
∑
k=1
Nijklog
Nijk
Nij
= SLL(G, D)
F =
n
∑
i=1
(ri −1)qi,
SAIC(G, D) = SLL(G, D) −F
SBIC(G, D) = SLL(G, D) −logN
2
⋅F

8755
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
found to be able to learn the true network faster than other scoring functions such as AIC, 
BDeu and fNML (Liu et al. 2012).
While both the AIC and BIC scores can recover the underlying network when the sam-
ple size is sufficiently high, they are suboptimal with limited sample sizes. To that end, 
Silander et al. (2010) proposed the factorized Normalized Maximum Likelihood (fNML) 
score. fNML is based on the Normalised Maximum Likelihood (NML) distribution which 
gives the probability of every possible dataset of sample size N for a specific graph G . An 
NML-based score is not decomposable, so Silander et al. (2008) define a decomposable 
variant:
where 휁ri
Nij is the stochastic complexity which reflects the amount of information required to 
encode all possible combinations of Nij values of a multinomial variable with ri different 
possible values, where 휁r
N is defined:
This stochastic complexity can be computed in linear time using a recursive formula 
(Kontkanen and Myllymäki 2007):
fNML was shown to perform well on small datasets (Silander et al. 2010; Liu et al. 
2012). fNML is not score equivalent, and Silander et al. (2018) proposed another variant 
of a NML-based score, quotient Normalised Maximum Likelihood (qNML) which is score 
equivalent.
Finally, the MIT score was proposed by de Campos (2006) and is expressed as
 where MI(Xi, 휋i
) is the mutual information between variable Xi and its parents Pa(Xi) . 휖훼,lij 
is a threshold value for the mutual information between a parent and the variable Xi below 
which we assume independence between that parent and the variable conditional on the 
remaining parents. 휖훼,lij depends on the statistical significance level 훼 chosen and lij which is 
the number of degrees of freedom based on the number of states of the parents. Thus, this 
score might be regarded as a “hybrid” score since it involves considerations of conditional 
independence. Furthermore, the summation of 2N ⋅MI(Xi, Pa(Xi
)) results in an expression 
proportional to the log likelihood, so the MIT score is another example of a penalised log 
likelihood score. Using a simple hill-climbing score-based algorithm (see Sect. 4.2.1), de 
Campos (2006) showed that, according to their empirical experiments, MIT achieves better 
structural accuracy and data fitting than K2, BIC and BDeu scores. Notice that, MIT score 
is decomposable but not score equivalent.
SfNML(G, D) = SLL(G, D) −
n
∑
i=1
qi
∑
j=1
휁ri
Nij,
휁r
N =
∑
k1+k2+⋯+kr=N
N!
k1!k2! … kr!
r
∏
j=1
(kj
N
)kj
,
휁r
N = 휁r−1
N
+
N
r −2 ⋅휁r−2
N
SMIT(G, D) =
n

i = 1
Pa(Xi) ≠
⎛
⎜
⎜⎝
2N ⋅MIXi, PaXi
 −
Pa(Xi)

j=1
휀훼, lij
⎞
⎟
⎟⎠

8756
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Compared with Bayesian scoring functions, information-theoretic scoring functions 
(excluding MIT score which requires the significance level α ) are objective and feature no 
prior parameters, which avoids the sensitivity problems. Therefore, when users have little 
background knowledge about the target network, information-theoretic scoring functions 
may be preferred.
4.2  Approximate score‑based algorithms
This section describes algorithms which do not guarantee to return the highest possi-
ble scoring graph. Instead, they tend to return a graph with a locally maximum score, 
although it is still possible that they will return a graph with the globally maximum 
score. It should also be noted that some approximate algorithms do offer a guarantee 
to return the optimal graph with probability →1 as the sample size N →∞ , which is 
known as (classical) consistency - or as the algorithm being asymptotically correct. 
Furthermore, some algorithms also offer high-dimensional consistency which is where 
they will return the optimal graph with probability →1 , as both the sample size and 
number of variables grow N →∞, n →∞.
4.2.1  Approximate search of DAG space
One of the earliest BN structure learning algorithms was the K2 algorithm by Cooper and 
Herskovits (1992), which assumes that a node ordering is already known. The algorithm 
works down the ordered list of nodes and greedily adds arcs from the candidate parents 
higher up the list to increase the K2 score maximally. Note that K2 does not consider all 
possible parent sets for each node and therefore cannot guarantee to find the highest scor-
ing DAG for a particular node ordering.
Bouckaert (1994) removed the restriction of having a predefined node ordering and 
describes a general hill-climbing (HC) greedy search algorithm over the space of DAGs. 
This is perhaps the simplest and the most commonly used search strategy. Pseudo-code 
for HC is shown in Fig. 13. At each iteration, HC explores all the neighbouring DAGs G′ 
of the current DAG G which can be formed by adding an arc to G , or (in later variants) 
removing or reversing an arc in G . The change in score corresponding to each G′ is stored 
in the delta variable in the pseudo-code in Fig. 13, and the graph modification with the 
largest delta applied. If no neighbouring DAGs increase the score, then we have reached a 
local, or occasionally a global, maximum and the DAG is returned as the result. The start-
ing point for HC search can be any DAG such as a random one, one produced by another 
structure learning algorithm, or even one based on expert knowledge. However, it typically 
starts from the empty graph. HC is a very efficient algorithm, however it may ‘get stuck’ on 
a poor local maximum score.
Several techniques are adopted to escape local maxima. Heckerman et al. (1995) used 
local restarts where random perturbations are made to the DAG at the local maximum, and 
hill-climbing restarted from the perturbed DAG. Bouchaert (1995) employs a tabu list to 
prevent returning to DAGs recently visited, and permits some changes to the graph where 
the score is allowed to decrease. Figure 14 shows the pseudo-code for the Tabu algorithm, 
the key differences from HC being a tabu_list structure which maintains a list of the most 
recently visited DAGs on line 9, and the fact that possible changes to a graph cannot result 
in a DAG in tabu_list on line 4. This approach encourages moving into new regions that 

8757
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
may contain an improved local maximum. The tabu approach can make runtime less pre-
dictable and may be more susceptible to noise than plain hill climbing (Constantinou et al. 
2021b). Despite its simplicity, HC remains a very competitive algorithm (Scutari et  al. 
2019a).
De Campos and Puerta (2001) used variable neighbourhood search (VNS) which wid-
ens the local neighbourhood explored by considering graphs resulting from changing sev-
eral arcs in the current graph. Thus, each iteration of the graph may contain multiple dif-
ferences from the previous iteration, whereas classic hill-climbing makes one change at a 
time. De Campos and Puerta (2001) found that this approach achieved better results than 
plain hill-climbing and hill-climbing with random restarts, although the results were based 
on a small set of experiments learning the Alarm network (Beinlich et al. 1989). Model 
Averaging Hill Climbing, MAHC (Constantinou et al. 2022) is a recent algorithm which 
also considers the scores of graphs beyond one move ahead. However, it does so in a way 
that averages scores across these more distant graphs, and makes a single change to move 
to the neighbouring graph where the mean score of its neighbours is the highest.
Recognising the importance of providing a good node ordering to K2, Behjati and 
Beigy (2020) focus on determining such an ordering. To do this, their improved K2 algo-
rithm first determines the highest scoring set of parents for each node separately and con-
structs the directed graph using these parent sets. This directed graph is generally cyclic, 
and if so, it is decomposed into strongly connected components (SCCs). The graph of these 
SCCs is itself a DAG of SCCs which defines an ordering of SCCs. This approach is used 
recursively on SCCs until a node ordering is produced which is then used with the original 
K2 algorithm. The authors evaluated this improved K2 algorithm against the original K2, 
HC, GES (see Sect. 4.2.2), and an exact score-based algorithm, GOBNILP (Sect. 4.3.2). 
The evaluation learnt well-known networks from the bnlearn repository (Scutari 2021) 
with between 5 and 441 variables. GOBNILP is guaranteed to return the highest scoring 
graph, but the enhanced K2 algorithm nearly always produced the highest scoring graphs 
amongst the other algorithms and was generally the fastest algorithm. The authors did not 
report the structural accuracy of the learnt graphs, however.
Fig. 13   Pseudo-code for hill-climbing (HC) algorithm. Program code keywords are coloured blue, com-
ments in grey, key variables in red, and application-specific complex operations or conditions in black. 
(Color figure online)

8758
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
The approximate score-based algorithms considered so far have focussed on learning a 
single high-scoring graph. This can be a reasonable approach for small networks with large 
amounts of data where the highest scoring DAG may be much more likely than any other 
model (Heckerman et al. 1997). However, it is less appropriate for complex models with 
small amounts of data. Friedman and Koller (2003) argued that for the gene expression 
data they studied, there might be many models with similar high scores, and that any single 
model selected might be very sensitive to the actual data instances used for learning. In this 
circumstance, an approach which generates a sample of plausible DAGs, and which reflects 
the posterior probability distribution across all possible DAGs, may be more appropriate. 
This might also show how “peaked” the distribution is, and so offer some insight into how 
confident one might be in any particular DAG.
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a well-established technique for sampling from 
complex high-dimensional probability distributions, such as the posterior distribution of 
DAGs. In the context of structure learning, each state in the Markov chain represents a 
different model, such as a DAG or node ordering. The Metropolis–Hastings (MH) algo-
rithm is the most common MCMC variant used. MH has a proposal distribution which 
defines the probability of specific state changes such as a particular edge addition or node 
order swap at each step in the chain. A change is randomly selected according to the pro-
posal distribution and then accepted or not using a stochastic acceptance condition. The 
proposal distribution and acceptance condition are chosen so that models with high pos-
terior probabilities are preferred. Provided certain conditions are met, the states generated 
by the Markov chain stabilise to a stationary distribution of models which represents a 
sample of the true posterior distribution. These conditions include that the chain must be 
irreducible such that every model is reachable from every other model in a finite number 
of steps. Madigan et al. (1995) used MH to sample DAGs in the ­MC3 algorithm. The pro-
posal distribution used gives the same non-zero probability for each possible single edge 
addition or deletion, and one of these changes is randomly selected. The acceptance condi-
tion always accepts a change that increases the posterior probability of the DAG, but may 
Fig. 14   Pseudo-code for Tabu algorithm. Program code keywords are coloured blue, comments in grey, key 
variables in red, and application-specific complex operations or conditions in black. (Color figure online)

8759
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
reject the change if it decreases the posterior probability. The more the posterior probabil-
ity decreases, the more likely the change is to be rejected.
A concern with ­MC3 is slow convergence to the stationary distribution, a prob-
lem known as slow mixing. Eaton and Murphy (2007) therefore proposed a Hybrid 
MCMC6 algorithm that uses an exact score-based algorithm, Dynamic Programming (see 
Sect.4.3.1), to develop a global proposal distribution. They showed that the Hybrid MCMC 
method converges faster than both the ­MC3 and Order-MCMC methods (see Sect. 4.2.3). 
Grzegorczyk and Husmeier (2008) also improved the convergence of DAG sampling using 
the REV-MCMC algorithm that adds a new edge reversal proposal that re-samples all pos-
sible parents of the two endpoints of the reversed edge.
Goudie and Mukherjee (2016) used a special case of Metropolis–Hastings known as 
Gibbs Sampling, where proposed changes are always accepted. Gibbs sampling can lead 
to slow mixing which they counteracted with a broader proposal distribution that consid-
ers all possible changes made to the parents of a block of nodes. Experiments showed that 
this Gibbs sampling mixed better than ­MC3 and REV-MCMC, as well as producing more 
accurate DAGs than both of them, and the constraint-based PC algorithm. Goudie and 
Mukherjee (2016) evaluated the DAG with the highest posterior probability, the Maximum 
A Posteriori (MAP) DAG, as being the single ‘best’ DAG from the sample. However, they 
also evaluated a single DAG constructed using arcs which have a marginal posterior edge 
probability above 0.5 across the sample, an example of model averaging whereby a single 
DAG is constructed from a collection of DAGs.
The Birth-and-Death algorithm (Jennings and Corcoran 2018) treats structure learning 
as a continuous time Markov chain process where the waiting times (intervals) between 
changes to the DAG follow exponential distributions. At any given point in the learning 
process there is a ‘birth’ rate for each possible edge addition, and a ‘death’ rate for deleting 
edges. The proportion of time each edge exists represents the posterior probability of that 
edge. The authors demonstrated superior mixing to Metropolis–Hastings approaches but 
did not report any accuracy evaluations.
Many approaches inspired by biological systems have also been proposed and include 
Genetic Algorithms (Larranaga 1996b), Ant Colony (de Campos et al. 2002), and Bacte-
rial Foraging (Yang et al. 2016). These explore multiple DAGs and therefore are similar to 
the sampling approaches in that respect. They employ methods adopted from biology, for 
example, genetic mixing, mutation, swarming, foraging and selection of the fittest, to gen-
erate and select a high scoring graph. Genetic mixing, in other words breeding, is typically 
implemented by a merge operation where edges are taken from two graphs to create a new 
graph. Mutation is implemented by making random changes to the graph edges. To take 
one biological inspired algorithm in a little more detail, Bee Colony Optimisation (Ji et al. 
2013) models the roles of real bees in a hive to search DAG space:
•	 employed bees perform local search in a DAG neighbourhood moving to the first neigh-
bour with an increased score using add, delete, and reverse arc, and swap parents opera-
tors;
•	 onlooker bees perform more knowledgeable searches by moving to the best scoring 
neighbour which can be viewed as a form of hill climbing;
6  Note that, following normal usage, we use “hybrid” in this paper to mean a combination of constraint-
based and score-based approaches, whereas, although this algorithm is named “Hybrid MCMC”, it uses a 
combination of exact and approximate score-based approaches.

8760
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
•	 if a bee gets stuck on a local maximum it becomes a scout bee and moves to a randomly 
generated DAG to begin searching in a new region, which is analogous to a random 
restart in hill climbing;
•	 pheromone is deposited on the best solution at each iteration to attract bees to high 
scoring regions.
4.2.2  Approximate search of equivalence class space
Chickering (2002) introduced the Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) algorithm which 
searches across the space of Markov equivalence classes rather than DAGs. A Markov 
equivalence class may contain several DAGs and hence the search space of Markov equiva-
lence graphs is always smaller than the corresponding DAG space. Although Gillispie and 
Perlman (2002) suggest that most equivalence classes contain few DAGs, this is still suf-
ficient to speed up search considerably.
GES has an insert and then a delete phase. In the first phase, each insert operation per-
forms a change equivalent to determining all the DAGs consistent with the current CPDAG 
(equivalence class), adding whichever arc increases their individual score the most, and 
then selecting the CPDAG corresponding to highest scoring DAG of all. This logic means 
that each insert operation on the CPDAG represents the addition of either a directed or 
an undirected edge, and may be accompanied by several other edge (re)orientations. Note 
that GES implements this process more efficiently than this explanatory description would 
suggest. The insert phase continues until there is no further insert operation which would 
increase the score. The delete phase then proceeds in an analogous fashion until a final 
maximum scoring CPDAG is produced. Importantly, and surprisingly for an approximate 
algorithm, GES offers a guarantee of classical consistency. That is, it is guaranteed to pro-
duce a CPDAG which perfectly matches the conditional independence relationships in the 
data as N →∞ . Ramsey et al. (2017) described fast GES (FGES) which optimises GES by 
parallelising operations and caching scores where possible.
Greedy Interventional Equivalence Search (GIES) by Hauser and Bühlmann (2012) is a 
generalisation of GES which supports learning from datasets7 which all have the same set 
of variables and an assumed common underlying causal model, but where interventions 
have been performed on different sets of variables in each dataset. One of the datasets may 
be observational, that is, have no intervention variables. Like GES, GIES searches equiva-
lence space in an addition and then deletion phase, but the equivalence graphs (which they 
term interventional essential graphs) are all consistent with the intervention targets across 
all datasets. The authors evaluate GIES against GES, learning random Gaussian graphs 
with number of variables, n = {10, 20, 30, 40} , and a sample size between 50 and 10,000, 
and using a modified SHD suitable for interventional settings (Kalisch and Bühlmann 
2007). The evaluation uses one, two or four intervention nodes, and varies the number of 
intervention datasets, each having a different randomly chosen set of intervention nodes. 
The authors find that GIES orientates more edges and has increasingly better accuracy 
7  In their paper, Hauser and Bühlmann (2012) describe the problem that GIES is tackling as structure 
learning from a single dataset, but where different intervention targets can be specified for different sets of 
rows. In this review, we prefer to describe this as learning from multiple datasets where each dataset has the 
same variables and assumed causal model, but with different intervention targets for each dataset. We do 
this so that the problem description is as common as possible across different algorithms.

8761
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
than GES as the number of different intervention datasets or number of intervention targets 
grows.
Bernaola et al. (2020) introduce FGES-Merge which is focussed on learning very large 
networks, with tens of thousands of variables, some with very large degree, typical of those 
encountered when modelling gene regulation networks. FGES-Merge uses FGES to learn 
sub-graphs around each node and then merges these to create the whole graph. The nodes 
chosen to be in each sub-graph learnt separately by FGES are those which have the largest 
BIC scores when treated as parents of the particular node. The number of nodes in each 
sub-graph is limited to a specified maximum, and so some edges for high degree nodes 
may be omitted, but they may be re-introduced from neighbouring nodes when the sub-
graphs are merged. The union of the sub-graphs forms the final graph, with cycles and 
weaker arcs being eliminated. FGES-Merge was found to be more accurate than all but 
one of the other BN structure learning algorithms evaluated in the DREAM5 gene network 
modelling challenge (Marbach et al. 2012).
Madigan et al. (1996) noted that MCMC sampling over DAG space may be inefficient 
since DAGs in the same equivalence class have the same posterior probability, and instead 
proposed using Metropolis–Hastings sampling over equivalence classes. In this case, the 
proposal distribution must include one and two edge changes so that the chain is irreduc-
ible and can therefore sample the whole equivalence class space.
4.2.3  Approximate search of node‑ordering space
Searching over a node ordering space offers some potential benefits (Teyssier and Koller 
2005):
•	 ordering-based space has complexity 2O(n logn) which is considerably smaller than 2Ω(n2) 
for DAG space;
•	 each change to the ordering represents a larger change to the current hypothesis than 
those typically performed in DAG space, and so may be better at avoiding local max-
ima;
•	 since node ordering imposes acyclicity, the algorithms can select the parents of one 
node independently of any other node.
Larranaga et al. (1996a) used a genetic algorithm where the individual’s chromosomes 
represented the node ordering. The fitness of an individual is assessed using the K2 algo-
rithm and score (see Sect.  4.2.1) to determine a high scoring DAG consistent with the 
ordering. An initial population of individuals is created which is then iterated through gen-
erations as follows:
1.	 pairs of high scoring parents are selected, and their children are created through a 
crossover operator which forms a new ordering from parts of each parent’s ordering;
2.	 children have a small probability of the node ordering mutating so that new regions are 
explored;
3.	 low scoring individuals are pruned from the population to return it to its original size.
The K2SN algorithm by de Campos and Puerta (2001) uses a very simple strategy to 
explore node-ordering space. It randomly generates orderings and then uses the K2 algo-
rithm to find a high scoring DAG consistent with that ordering. The Ordering Based Search 

8762
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
(OBS) algorithm employs a more systematic search of ordering space (Teyssier and Koller 
2005) and moves through ordering space by swapping adjacent nodes in the ordering. OBS 
uses an exhaustive approach to find the highest scoring DAG consistent with each order-
ing. At each iteration, all n −1 node swaps are scored, and the ordering that has the highest 
scoring DAG is adopted for the next iteration. This process is repeated until a local maxi-
mum is reached. Note that the swap adjacent operator only changes the possible parents of 
two nodes and so the score of the new ordering can be computed cheaply. OBS used a sim-
ple sound pruning rule based on the observation that if Pa(Xi) and Pa′(Xi) are two possible 
sets of parents of node Xi and Pa(Xi) ⊂Pa′(Xi) and score(Xi|Pa(Xi)) ≥score(Xi|Pa′(Xi)) , 
then Pa′(Xi) cannot possibly be the best set of parents of Xi and can be removed (pruned) 
from further consideration in any ordering.
The pruning rule used in OBS is applicable to any decomposable score, but has the 
drawback that it is necessary to compute the score for the superset Pa′(Xi) before it can be 
discounted. Other rules, typically specific to a particular score such as BIC or BDeu, are 
more powerful in that conditions applying for a set of parents can be used to prune super-
sets of parents without having to score these supersets. This makes the algorithm more 
efficient, and these scores often remove large portions of the search space. The ASOBS 
algorithm (Scanagatta et al. 2015) uses the BIC* score which approximates BIC to accom-
plish this. Like OBS, ASOBS uses a primary search over node orderings using the swap 
adjacent operator. However, when generating a DAG from the ordering, ASOBS relaxes 
the restriction that a node can only have parents earlier in the ordering, whilst continuing to 
ensure the DAG is acyclic. Figure 15 illustrates a situation that might occur when learning 
the DAG shown in Fig. 15a. OBS would select parent sets for node ordering “ABCED” that 
are strictly consistent with the ordering as shown in Fig. 15b. In contrast, ASOBS allows 
some ‘back-links’, shown in red in Fig. 15c, where nodes “C” and “E” have parent “D” 
from lower down the ordering. ASOBS will find a DAG with a score at least as high as 
OBS would find for any given ordering. The authors used ASOBS to model networks with 
more than 1,000 nodes and removed the restriction on the number of parents for a node.
The fact that the swap adjacent operator changes few parents makes it relatively inex-
pensive, but it does mean that there may be many relatively weak local maxima close to 
one another. The INOBS algorithm introduces an insert operator which causes larger steps 
in changing the order of a node in the node ordering input to address this (Lee and van 
Beek 2017). The authors also investigated a variant of INOBS, called IINOBS, which 
employs iterated local search. This is an extension to hill-climbing that adds a perturbation 
operator of swapping nodes in the ordering so that when a local maximum is reached, hill-
climbing is restarted in a relatively close neighbourhood. The perturbation operator chosen 
Fig. 15   Example illustrating the relaxed node ordering consistency used by the ASOBS algorithm. (Color 
figure online)

8763
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
should not be so weak that restarted hill-climbing just finds the same local maximum, and 
nor should it be so strong that hill-climbing is starting all over again in a completely new 
region. Iterated local search is based on the intuition that local maxima may occur in clus-
ters. Similarly, Lee and van Beek (2017) combined INOBS with genetic algorithm tech-
niques to create the memetic algorithm, MINOBS. Hill-climbing search is performed on 
an initial population of orderings to get a population of locally maxima orderings. Crosso-
ver, mutation and population pruning genetic techniques then operate on this population of 
locally optimum orderings to produce a new population to perform hill-climbing on.
WINASOBS (Scanagatta et al. 2017) employs a yet more impactful window operator 
which changes the position of a group of nodes in the node ordering, and uses the same 
relaxation as ASOBS when generating a DAG from the ordering. The authors evaluated 
WINASOBS against IINOBS and MINOBS when learning from 24 real-world datasets 
with between 16 and 1556 variables and synthetic networks with up to 10,000 variables. 
The learnt graphs were evaluated only on the basis of their BIC score. WINASOBS pro-
duced higher scoring graphs than the other algorithms except for being on par with MIN-
OBS when execution time was limited to 1 h.
Sampling in node-ordering space can be implemented using MCMC approaches. This 
seeks to counter the slow convergence to a stationary distribution, also known as slow mix-
ing, that can be encountered when sampling DAG space, for example, in the ­MC3 algo-
rithm. Friedman and Koller (2003) sampled ordering space in the Order-MCMC algorithm. 
They derived a closed-form expression for the probability of specific graph features, such 
as an individual edge, occurring with a particular ordering. They then used MCMC to 
sample over the space of orderings and hence obtain the overall probability of a particu-
lar feature occurring. A DAG can then be constructed using only edges with a probability 
above a specified threshold in another example of model averaging. Niinimäki et al. (2011) 
proposed the Partial Order-MCMC method, where nodes are grouped into ordered buck-
ets which demonstrated better mixing than Order-MCMC. A disadvantage of order-based 
MCMC approaches arises because a given DAG may be consistent with many node orders 
and different DAGs will be consistent with different numbers of node orders. It is there-
fore difficult to define priors on node orders which do not bias the posterior distribution of 
DAGs. This problem is more pronounced with small sample sizes where the priors have 
more influence.
Kuipers and Moffa (2017) introduce Partition-MCMC to address the bias issue dis-
cussed in the previous paragraph. It searches in the space of partitions, illustrated as the 
set of light blue ellipses in Fig. 16b, which is the partial topological ordering of the nodes 
of the DAG shown in Fig. 16a. The algorithm assigns a score to each partition which is 
the sum of scores over all DAGs consistent with that partition, thus taking into account 
the number of DAGs in the partition and therefore removing the bias discussed previously. 
Partition-MCMC samples the partitions using operators which split or merge an element 
within the partition as illustrated in Fig. 16c and d. They also assess the more impactful 
reverse operator proposed by Grzegorczyk and Husmeier (2008).
4.2.4  Approximate search of ancestral graph space
The majority of algorithms that assume the presence of latent variables are constraint-
based, some of which were discussed in Sect. 3.4. However, Triantafillou and Tsamardinos 
(2016) proposed the Global Search for Maximal Ancestral Graphs (GSMAG) algorithm 

8764
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
which searches in the space of ancestral graphs containing directed or bidirected edges. 
That is, it allows latent, but not selection variables. It explores the search space using 
greedy search in which directed and bidirected edges are added, removed, reversed or 
converted between each other. A BIC score is defined based on the probability distribu-
tion factorisation for Gaussian MAGs described in Richardson (2009), which allows the 
score to be decomposed into a likelihood for each c-component in the MAG given the data. 
C-components are the fragments connected by bidirected edges that result from remov-
ing all directed edges in a MAG. Thus, only scores for the c-components affected by any 
edge change need to be recomputed. The authors evaluated GSMAG against FCI and CFCI 
constraint-based algorithms on synthetic random Gaussian networks of up to 50 variables, 
10% of which are latent variables. They found that GSMAG had better recall (see Sect. 6.1 
for explanation of recall and precision) than FCI and CFCI (slightly), but worse precision 
than CFCI. It was also considerably slower than both FCI and CFCI.
4.3  Exact score‑based algorithms
In contrast to the algorithms considered so far, exact algorithms guarantee to return the 
highest scoring DAG. Note that whilst some approximate algorithms can guarantee to 
return the highest scoring graph as N →∞ (Chickering 2002; Chickering and Meek 2002), 
exact algorithms guarantee to return the highest scoring graph for the input dataset, how-
ever small the sample size might be. They usually make use of sound pruning rules to avoid 
searching over the whole search space. Whilst these algorithms produce the DAG with the 
highest score, this may not be the graph which best matches the underlying ground-truth 
for reasons such as:
•	 limitations in the data learnt from, particularly sample size and any form of noise;
•	 biases introduced by the score used, for example, towards sparser or denser graphs.
Note that some authors refer to exact algorithms as global algorithms since they guaran-
tee to return the graph with the globally maximum score. However, in this paper, we apply 
the term “global” to constraint-based algorithms that consider the global structure, and so 
we prefer “exact” to “global” here. Exact algorithms typically treat structure learning as a 
constrained combinatorial optimisation problem which involves determining the optimally 
scoring combination of parents for each node subject to the constraint that the graph is 
acyclic.
Fig. 16   Partitions used in Partition-MCMC (adapted from figure in Kuipers and Moffa 2017). Note that 
other authors refer to this partitioning of the nodes as a (topological) partial ordering. (Color figure online)

8765
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
4.3.1  Exact search of node‑ordering space
Dynamic programming was an early technique used in exact algorithms (Koivisto and 
Sood 2004; Ott et al. 2003) searching in node-ordering space. Dynamic programming is 
an algorithm paradigm which solves small sub-problems first and uses these results to 
solve larger problems built on them. Singh and Moore (2005) and Silander and Myllymaki 
(2006) applied this paradigm to structure learning using the insight that every DAG must 
have at least one sink node (a node with no children, also referred to as a leaf node). So, any 
DAG with nodes X can be constructed from a sink node Xsink and a sub-DAG with nodes 
X −{Xsink} . The maximum graph score can thus be expressed as a recurrence relation:
Note that which nodes in the sub-DAG are chosen to be the parents of the sink node, 
Pa(Xsink) , does not affect the score of the sub-DAG itself, and so this element of the score 
can be maximised independently. Also, since the end of a node ordering is always a sink 
node, recursively finding sink nodes represents a way of traversing node ordering space.
Figure 17 based on Singh and Moore (2005) shows how dynamic programming exploits 
this recurrence relationship. Each box in this ordering lattice represents one of the possible 
sub-DAGs in a small network with nodes {1, 2, 3, 4}. The optimal DAG is determined by a 
depth first search of this lattice. Starting at the top with the DAG containing all nodes, the 
search moves down the first blue arrow to sub-DAG {1, 2, 3} with node 4 left behind as the 
sink node. The highest scoring parents for node 4 in sub-DAG {1, 2, 3} are determined, in 
this illustration assumed to be {1, 2} with a score of 4. The search continues down the blue 
arrows, determining the highest scoring parents for each local sink node until we reach the 
bottom sub-DAG on the blue path, {1}. This blue search path represents node ordering 
{1, 2, 3, 4} , and the DAG corresponding to the path is shown to the left of the lattice, where 
the concentric dashed ellipses represent the sub-DAGs encountered, and arcs showing the 
highest-scoring parents determined for each sink node. Having reached the bottom, the 
search backtracks to sub-DAG {1, 2} to then score the purple path. At this point, all search 
paths below {1, 2} have been followed, so a maximum score can be assigned to sub-DAG 
{1, 2} and the paths below {1, 2} never need to be revisited, illustrating the ‘self-pruning’ 
scoremax(X) = scoremax
(X −{Xsink}) + scoremax(Xsink|Pa(Xsink))
Fig. 17   Lattice of all sub-DAGs for a hypothetical four node network based on Singh and Moore (2005), 
illustrating the dynamic programming approach using sink nodes. (Color figure online)

8766
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
nature of this approach. The search is guaranteed to find the highest scoring DAG, illus-
trated in this example by the red search path.
Yuan and Malone (2011) noted that dynamic programming is inefficient because it 
needed to fully evaluate the exponential solution space and that, by ignoring acyclic con-
straints, Branch and Bound (covered below in Sect. 4.3.2) made the search space unneces-
sarily large. They proposed that navigating the lattice in Fig. 17 be performed by the gen-
eral-purpose graph algorithm A* which finds optimal weighted paths. As with the dynamic 
programming technique explained above, the algorithm maintains a current best score 
down to the current sub-DAG reached in the lattice, but it also estimates the best score 
obtainable down the currently unexplored paths below the sub-DAG. At any one time, A* 
explores the paths which have the highest estimated score from top to bottom, a so-called 
‘best-first’ approach. As long as the estimated score is admissible (i.e., never underesti-
mates the score obtainable), A* guarantees to find the highest-scoring path and the hence 
highest-scoring DAG. Their approach proved to be several times faster than dynamic pro-
gramming and much faster than Branch & Bound which we cover later in Sect. 4.3.2.
Another recent exact score-based algorithm called CPBayes (Van Beek and Hoffman 
2015) adopts the constraint programming paradigm. In this paradigm, constraints are 
defined across the variables and a domain of possible values maintained for each variable. 
Note that these are not conditional independence constraints, and so this approach should 
not be confused with the constraint-based structure learning described in Sect. 2. As the 
algorithm explores possible solutions by changing one variable, the constraints mean that 
the possible values of other variables are altered; a process known as constraint propaga-
tion. A simple application of constraint programming to the Sudoko game may serve to 
illustrate the concept. The domains for each square are the numbers 1 to 9, but as a number 
is chosen for one square, this reduces the domains of possible values for other squares, 
according to the constraints of the game that each number can only occur in one row, col-
umn or 3 × 3 block.
For application to BN structure learning, CPBayes defines three classes of variables 
describing: the node ordering; the parent set of each node; and depth, defined as the longest 
path of any source vertex to the node. Several types of constraints are defined, and the ones 
that relate the three classes of variables include acyclicity constraints, symmetry breaking 
constraints which avoid redundant solutions which belong to the same equivalence class 
or node ordering, for example, and dominance constraints which apply cost-based prun-
ing. CPBayes is a depth-first branch-and-bound algorithm that explores the node-ordering 
space by swapping nodes in the order, with the constraints and score bounds used to reduce 
the search space. The authors argued that the inclusion of the depth variable together with 
the extensive set of constraints reduces the search space compared to other exact algo-
rithms, though without quantifying this. Results obtained at the time showed that runt-
imes were comparable to the Integer Linear Programming approach in GOBNILP (refer to 
Sect. 4.3.2).
Troser et al. (2021) introduce the ELSA algorithm which enhances CPBayes by includ-
ing linear programming techniques similar to GOBNILP to provide more efficient acy-
clicity checking. It uses a more specialised greedy, and therefore efficient, algorithm than 
GOBNILP to solve the linear programming problem. ELSA is able to find the optimal 
graph within a time limit of 10 h (for datasets with between 61 and 111 variables) in con-
siderably more cases than either GOBNILP and CPBayes. Note that this time limit applies 
to the graph search only; it does not include the pre-computation of parent set scores.
Tan et al. (2022) propose two variable partitioning approaches which they demonstrate 
can improve learning times in algorithms such as A*, often by orders of magnitude. The 

8767
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
first heuristic is ancestral partitioning which assumes a partial ordering as illustrated in 
Fig. 16 to greatly prune the number of nodes in the order graph. Note that, with this heuris-
tic, the structure learning algorithm can only guarantee to return the optimal scoring graph 
if the partial ordering that is assumed is consistent with the ordering of the true graph. The 
second heuristic, heuristic partitioning, splits the variables into partitions in such a way 
that more paths in the order graph can be ruled out during the search phase. This heuristic 
does not invalidate the guarantee of returning the highest scoring graph.
4.3.2  Exact search of DAG space
The Branch & Bound algorithm uses another recursive approach but starting from a larger 
problem which it decomposes (de Campos et al. 2009). The algorithm first creates a cache 
of the highest scoring parents for each node. As the algorithm proceeds, it maintains a 
queue of candidate graphs ordered by score, and a record of the highest scoring DAG found 
so far. Initially, the queue is populated with the graph where each variable is assigned its 
optimally scoring parents without regard to acyclicity. The algorithm proceeds by consid-
ering the top scoring graph on the queue. If it is a DAG, it checks its score and updates the 
best scoring DAG if needed. If the graph contains a cycle, it breaks the cycle at each arc 
in the cycle creating several sub-graphs which it places back on the queue. The algorithm 
continues until the queue is empty by which time the globally optimal DAG will have been 
identified.
Most exact search algorithms, including Branch & Bound, maintain a cache of possi-
ble parent sets for each node together with their associated score. If done for every par-
ent set this cache would have 2n(n−1) entries which quickly becomes prohibitive. Research 
into pruning (Cussens 2012; Suzuki 2017; de Campos et al. 2018; Correia et al. 2020) 
which can reduce the size of this cache whilst maintaining the guarantee of optimality has 
been important to the development of exact search. Most of the later pruning approaches 
are specific to a particular score (e.g. BIC or BDeu) and can have a dramatic effect on 
the cache size and search space considered. De Campos and Ji (2010) reported cache size 
being reduced by between approximately 102 and 107 times depending upon the network 
and specific score considered. In the most dramatic cases, this resulted in a reduction of the 
search space by hundreds of orders of magnitude. Guo and Constantinou (2020) show that 
pruning candidate parent sets simply by removing those with low scores can offer consider-
able runtime saving, particularly for larger networks. This type of pruning means that pre-
viously exact algorithms no longer guarantee to return the graph with the highest possible 
score, that is, they become approximate algorithms. Nonetheless, this often does not reduce 
the accuracy of the learnt graph by very much.
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) approaches treat structure learning as a constrained 
integer programming problem (Jaakkola et al. 2010; Bartlett and Cussens 2017). Figure 18 
illustrates some of the concepts of integer linear programming with reference to a sim-
ple optimisation problem. Suppose we wish to maximise y where the following constraints 
apply: 3y ≤2x + 6 , 3y ≤15 −5x , x ≥0.5 , and y ≥0.5 . This is a linear programming (LP) 
problem, and the shaded space in the figure shows the feasible solutions which meet the 
constraints. With three variables the feasible solutions would be bounded by a polyhedron, 
and with n variables they are bounded by an n-polytope. The LP solutions are always at 
vertices of the polytope, in this case at x = 9∕7, y = 20∕7 . However, if we restrict the solu-
tions to integer values then the problem becomes an integer linear programming (ILP) 
problem. The feasible integer solutions are shown as the black circles in the figure.

8768
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
The ILP problem is tackled by first using the well-established simplex algorithm 
(Dantzig 2016) to solve the LP problem, which is referred to as solving the linear relax-
ation of the ILP program. The problem is then split into two by looking at the two solu-
tion spaces either side of one of the non-integer solution values; for example, either side 
of the dashed blue line in the figure. This branching is repeated, forming a branch-and-
bound search of the solution space. The search can be made more efficient by including 
extra constraints at each step so that the search becomes branch-and-cut. These extra 
constraints cut off part of the polytope between the LP solution and the integer solu-
tions and are therefore known as cutting planes, illustrated by the dashed red line in the 
figure.
The GOBNILP algorithm (Cussens 2011) represents a DAG by binary integer vari-
ables, called family variables denoted I(Pa(X) →X) , each family variable representing 
a possible parent set Pa(X) for node X where Pa(X) ⊆X{X} . I(Pa(X) →X) = 1 for a 
particular value of Pa(X) indicates that X has that set of parents in the DAG. Learning 
the optimal DAG can be cast as an ILP problem in the family variable space where we 
wish to maximise the DAG score, given by:
Convexity constraints are imposed to ensure that each variable can only have one of 
the possible parent sets:
and cluster constraints to enforce acyclicity, where any subset X′ of all the nodes X 
must contain at least one node that has no parent in the subset:
∑
X,Pa(X)
score(X|Pa(X)) ⋅I(Pa(X) →X)
∀X ∶
∑
Pa(X)
I(Pa(X) →X) = 1,
Fig. 18   Simple Integer Linear 
Programming Example. (Color 
figure online)

8769
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
GOBNILP employs an off-the-shelf optimisation program such as SCIP (Achterberg 
et al. 2008) to solve this ILP problem. GOBNILP uses whether a particular family varia-
ble is 0 or 1, that is, whether a node has a particular parent set, as its branching strategy. 
There are a huge number of cluster constraints possible for reasonably sized networks, 
and so these are only applied where necessary as the search progresses. Even so, it is 
usually necessary to place a limit on the maximum number of parents for any node in 
most applications.
The exact algorithms discussed in these subsections also naturally support BMA 
where the probability of specific features such as arcs, ancestral relations and Markov 
Blankets can be calculated by summing their posterior probability over all graph struc-
tures. This capability is explored by Koivisto and Sood (2004), Tian and He (2009) and 
Pensar et al. (2020). The latter two search over DAG structures and so avoid the bias 
that can arise because different numbers of DAGs are associated with each node-order-
ing, for example. Recently, Liao et al. (2019) proposed an adaption of the GOBNILP 
algorithm called GOBNILP-DEV which rather than returning a single highest scoring 
DAG, returns all the DAGs which have score(G) meeting the condition that:
where GOPT is the DAG with the highest possible score; i.e., all DAGs within a frac-
tion 휀 of optimal. This provides a principled algorithm for obtaining a set of plausible 
graphs.
4.3.3  Exact search of equivalence class space
Chen et al. (2016a) proposed an exact algorithm for searching equivalence class space by 
defining an Equivalence Class Tree (EC Tree) where each node represents a CPDAG, and 
which has a unique path to each CPDAG. The algorithm uses A* search to explore the 
EC Tree efficiently. Chen et al. (2016a) compared this algorithm with an earlier dynamic 
programming based approach proposed by Chen and Tian (2014) aimed to find the k-best 
equivalence classes. They found the EC Tree search to be always faster than the dynamic 
programming approach, and occasionally orders of magnitude faster. Interestingly, they 
also found that the highest scoring equivalence classes represented very different numbers 
of DAGs in the eleven networks studied which had between 14 and 23 variables. Whilst 
some networks had values around the 3.7 DAGs per CPDAG (Gillispie and Perlman 2002) 
often quoted in the literature, others had hundreds or even thousands of DAGS in the high-
est scoring equivalence classes.
5  Hybrid learning and other approaches
Hybrid algorithms combine constraint-based and score-based approaches in an attempt 
to offer the best characteristics of each. Perhaps the most common way of combining the 
approaches is to use a constraint-based approach to restrict the search space in which a 
subsequent score-based approach finds a graph with a local or globally maximum score. 
∀X
 ∶
∑
X∈X

∑
Pa(X)∶Pa(X)∩X
 =∅
I(Pa(X) →X) ≥1
(1 −휀) ⋅score(GOPT
) ≤score(G) ≤score(GOPT)

8770
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
We refer to these as Restrict/Maximise hybrid algorithms and discuss them in Sect. 5.1. A 
diverse set of other hybrid approaches is described in Sect. 5.2. We then further group the 
algorithms according to which space they search in, to provide some commonality with the 
score-based section of this paper. Figure 6 shows the evolution of hybrid algorithms which 
are shown in yellow colours, and in particular how developments in score and constraint-
based algorithms have informed that evolution. Table 4 presents the key characteristics of 
the hybrid algorithms reviewed here.
5.1  Restrict/maximise algorithms
5.1.1  Restrict/maximise in DAG space
Early hybrid algorithms tended to have a constraint (restrict) and score-based (maximise) 
step in each iteration. For example, each iteration of the Constraint-Bayesian (CB) algo-
rithm (Singh and Valtorta 1993) had a restrict step in which the PC algorithm learnt a 
CPDAG, but only using conditioning sets up to a specified size for that iteration. The max-
imise step then firstly orientates undirected edges so that the product of the K2 score asso-
ciated with the two endpoints is maximised, producing a DAG. The maximise step then 
uses the score-based K2 algorithm to construct the optimum-scoring DAG consistent with 
that DAG’s ordering. The restrict and maximise steps are then repeated at increasing con-
ditioning set size until the resulting DAG’s score no longer improves.
Similarly, each iteration of the Sparse Candidate (SC) algorithm (Friedman et al. 1999) 
had a restrict step which used Mutual Information Independence tests to determine can-
didate parents for each node, followed by a maximise step using the Tabu algorithm con-
strained by those parent sets. The parent sets of the DAG produced in one iteration were 
always included as candidate parents for the next iteration, ensuring that each iteration 
would find a DAG with at least as high a score as the previous iteration.
Wong and Leung (2004) also interleaved score and constraint-based operations, 
although in the context of an evolutionary algorithm. Their Hybrid Evolutionary Algo-
rithm (HEA) begins by using low-order CI tests to evaluate the possible parents of each 
node, maintaining a record of the p-value indicating the likelihood of each CI relationship, 
and then creates a population of random DAGs. At each iteration, new DAGs are generated 
through genetic mutation and merge operations (see Sect. 4.2.1), and then the population 
reduced back to its original size by removing the lowest scoring DAGs. Each individual 
DAG is assigned its own, dynamic, conditional independence significance level which is 
used in conjunction with the CI test p-values to restrict parent sets in individual creation, 
mutation and merge operations. This individualised significance level helps maintain popu-
lation diversity.
However, most Restrict/Maximise approaches do not interleave restrict and maxim-
ise operations. Rather, they use a constraint-based algorithm to define a restricted search 
space, and then a score-based algorithm operates within that restricted space. Max–Min 
Hill Climbing (MMHC) proposed by Tsamardinos et al. (2006) is a widely-used example 
of this. In the restrict phase, MMHC uses the MMPC local constraint-based algorithm (see 
Sect. 3.3.2) to construct the graph skeleton. The subsequent maximise phase uses Tabu 
hill-climbing (see Sect. 4.2.1) to learn the output DAG, but is constrained to only use edges 
in the graph skeleton produced in the restrict phase. The author conducted a detailed evalu-
ation of MMHC against leading constraint and score algorithms at the time with MMHC 

8771
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Table 4   Characteristics of hybrid algorithms reviewed, ordered chronologically
Algorithm abbreviation
Algorithm name or 
description
Reference
Algorithm group
Search space
Search space traversal
Causal 
sufficiency 
assumed
Type of output
CB
Constraint Bayesian
Singh and Valtorta 
(1993)
Restrict/Maximise
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
Yes
DAG
SC
Sparse Candidate
Friedman et al. (1999)
Restrict/Maximise
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
Yes
DAG
HEA
Hybrid Evolutionary 
Algorithm
Wong and Leung (2004)
Restrict/Mamimise
DAG
Merge, mutate, select DAG
Yes
DAG
MMHC
Max–min Parents and 
Children and Hill 
Climbing
Tsamardinos et al. (2006)
Restrict/Maximise
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
Yes
DAG
COS
Constrained Optimal 
Search
Perrier et al. (2008)
Restrict/Maximise
DAG
Add/remove sink node
Yes
DAG
PCB
Partial Correlation 
Bayesian
Yang et al. (2011)
Restrict/Maximise
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
Yes
DAG
BCCD
Bayesian Constraint-
based Causal Dis-
covery
Claassen and Heskes 
(2012)
Other
DAG
n/a
No
PAG
H2PC
Hybrid HPC (HPC is 
Hybrid Parents and 
Children)
Gasse et al. (2014)
Restrict/Maximise
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
Yes
DAG
ASP
Weighted CI constraints 
optimised with Answer 
Set Programming
Hyttinen et al. (2014)
Other
CI constraints
n/a
No
Cyclic mixed graph
COmbINE
Causal Discovery from 
Overlapping Interven-
tions
Triantafillou and Tsamar-
dinos (2015)
Other
CI constraints
n/a
No
PAG
GFCI
Greedy Fast Causal 
Inference
Ogarrio et al. (2016)
Other
Equivalence class
Insert/Delete operations (see 
Sect. 4.2.2)
No
PAG
GSP
Greedy Sparsest Permu-
tation
Solus et al. (2017)
Other
Node ordering
Reverse covered arc in 
associated DAG
Yes
DAG
ARGES
Adaptively Restricted 
Greedy Equivalence 
Search
Nandy et al. (2018)
Restrict/Maximise
Equivalence class
Add/remove edge + orient 
edges
Yes
CPDAG

8772
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Table 4   (continued)
Algorithm abbreviation
Algorithm name or 
description
Reference
Algorithm group
Search space
Search space traversal
Causal 
sufficiency 
assumed
Type of output
M3HC
MAG Max–Min Parents 
and Children and Hill 
Climbing
Tsirlis et al. (2018)
Restrict/Maximise
MAG
Add/remove + orient 
directed/undirected edges
No
MAG
GSPo
Greedy Sparsest Poset
Bernstein et al. (2020)
Other
Node Ordering
Directed/bidirected switch in 
associated DMAG
No
MAG
SaiyanH
Saiyan Hybrid
Constantinou (2020)
Other
DAG
Add/remove/reverse arc
Yes
DAG
RFCI-BSC
RFCI with Bayesian 
Scoring of Constraints
Jabbari et al. (2017)
Other
MAG
n/a
No
PAG
CCHM
Conservative rule and 
Causal effect Hill-
climbing for MAG
Chobtham and Constan-
tinou (2020)
Restrict/Maximise
MAG
Add/remove + orient directed
No
MAG
PC + MCMC
PC restricts search space 
used by Order or Parti-
tion MCMC
Kuipers et al. (2022)
Restrict/Maximise
DAG
Swap adjacent nodes or split/
merge partitions
Yes
DAG
mFGS-BS
Majority rule with FGS 
and Bayesian Scoring
Chobtham et al. (2022)
Other
Weighted arcs
n/a
No
PAG

8773
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
producing more accurate graphs than GES, PC and TPDA, and demonstrating the ability 
to learn networks with 1,000 variables. Gasse et al. (2014) proposed Hybrid HPC (H2PC) 
which uses a Hybrid Parents and Children (HPC) algorithm to create a skeleton in the 
restrict phase with a focus on avoiding false missing edges. HPC uses an ensemble of weak 
parent-and-children algorithms to achieve this, and the maximise phase of H2PC uses Tabu 
hill-climbing. H2PC produced graphs with better structural accuracy and data fitting than 
MMHC across 10 networks with up to 1836 variables. However, H2PC was considerably 
slower than MMHC, being around 10 times slower at large sample sizes.
Whilst most hybrid algorithms use an approximate score-based approach, Perrier et al. 
(2008) proposed Constrained Optimal Search (COS) which used an exact score-based 
dynamic programming approach (see Sect. 4.3.1) in the maximise phase operating within a 
reduced search space defined by the skeleton returned by the restrict phase. Like MMHC, 
COS uses the MMPC algorithm to generate the skeleton, but uses a deliberatively high 
CI significance level so that the skeleton is denser than usual to increase the chances of 
the restricted search space including the globally optimal graph. COS was compared with 
MMHC and produced more accurate structures and data fitting scores, although compari-
sons were limited to n = 20 due to runtime constraints of dynamic programming at that 
time. It is noteworthy that the authors found that using the output from either MMHC or 
COS as the initial graph for a further score-based hill-climbing phase improved graph qual-
ity for both algorithms.
The papers introducing the hybrid algorithms discussed so far focussed on discrete vari-
ables, but Yang et al. (2011) described the Partial Correlation Bayesian (PCB) algorithm 
which considers continuous variables. The restrict phase uses partial correlation CI tests 
to determine the graph skeleton, followed by a hill-climbing maximise phase. The authors 
showed that their approach is applicable whenever a continuous variable is a linear func-
tion of its parents, not just the usual special case when the variables follow a Gaussian 
distribution. PCB produced more accurate graphs than Sparse Candidate, MMHC, PC and 
TPDA.
5.1.2  Restrict/maximise in equivalence class space
Nandy et al. (2018) proposed Adaptively Restricted GES (ARGES) for continuous vari-
ables which uses MMPC for the restrict step and then a modified GES (see Sect. 4.2.2) for 
the maximise step. As is usual in restrict/maximise algorithms, they generally restrict GES 
to the skeleton produced in the restrict phase. However, they relax this restriction slightly 
to allow it to add shielding edges on v-structures whilst the CPDAG is being learnt. These 
extra shielding edges automatically disappear as the algorithm progresses, and so do not 
appear in the final CPDAG, hence why the algorithm is known as “adaptively restricted”. 
The authors provide theoretical arguments showing that temporarily allowing these extra 
edges means that the ARGES algorithm can offer both classical and high-dimensional 
consistency.
5.1.3  Restrict/sampling in ordering space
Kuipers et al. (2022) describe a hybrid MCMC algorithm which creates a restricted search 
space using the PC constraint-based algorithm (see Sect.  3.2.2) followed by MCMC 
sampling in the node ordering space (see the Order-MCMC algorithm in Sect. 4.2.3), or 

8774
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
sampling in the partition space (see the Partition-MCMC algorithm in Sect. 4.2.3). The 
sampling is done in a space that initially corresponds to that identified by the PC algo-
rithm, but each node is allowed an additional parent outside the initial space, so that the 
restriction is relaxed. The authors claim a large improvement in efficiency with the com-
plexity to find the Maximum A-Posteriori (MAP) DAG reduced from nk to 2k where n is 
the number of variables, and k the maximum in-degree, making the algorithm suitable for 
high-dimensional problems. The authors find that accuracy is improved by allowing the 
sampling phase to add another parent node to the parent sets found during the constraint 
phase. Using PC in combination with Order-MCMC, the authors demonstrate considerably 
better SHD scores than GES or PC on random graphs with n = {20, 80, 140, 200} and sam-
ple size N = {2n, 10n}.
Viinikka et al. (2020) build upon the approach described in Kuipers and Moffa (2017) 
and Kuipers et  al. (2022) but reduce time and memory requirements to support much 
higher maximum in-degrees. They also improve the selection of candidate parent sets 
which they formulate as an optimisation problem which they solve exactly for smaller net-
works and heuristically for larger networks. The authors evaluated accuracy in predicting 
pairwise ancestral relationships and found improved accuracy over Partition-MCMC.
5.1.4  Restrict/maximise in ancestral graph space
The MAG Max–Min Hill Climbing ­(M3HC) algorithm proposed by Tsirlis et al. (2018) 
uses MMPC in its restrict phase, and GSMAG (see Sect. 4.2.4) in the maximise phase so 
that causal sufficiency is not assumed. MMPC produces a superset of the true adjacencies 
in the presence of latent variables and so is a suitable candidate for the restrict phase in 
causally insufficient settings. The empirical results of ­M3HC outperform GSMAG, FCI, 
CFCI and GFCI on standard BNs with up to 1041 variables (Tsirlis et al. 2018).
CCHM (Chobtham and Constantinou 2020) follows the approach used by the CFCI 
constraint-based algorithm (see Sect.3.4.4) to learn the skeleton and classify unshielded tri-
ples of nodes as either definitely a v-structure, definitely not a v-structure, or an ambiguous 
triple. It then uses a greedy hill-climbing search to further orientate edges in the MAG to 
maximise the BIC score for MAGs which is employed by ­M3HC and GSMAG. Since this 
score is score equivalent, some edges remain un-orientated, and so CCHM applies Pearl’s 
do-calculus to orientate the remaining edges. Chobtham and Constantinou (2020) found 
that CCHM is generally more accurate than ­M3HC, FCI, CFCI and GFCI on both ran-
dom and well-known BNs. Both ­M3HC and CCHM were generally slower than FCI and 
GFCI while ­M3HC was faster than GSMAG, and CCHM is faster than CFCI. Note that 
GSMAG, ­M3HC and CCHM currently assume linear GBNs and so the data must be con-
tinuous values.
5.1.5  Symmetry correction
As noted in Sect. 3.3, skeletons produced by local discovery constraint algorithms, such 
as MMPC, are subject to errors arising from asymmetries in local structures where one 
node is in another’s local structure but not vice versa, making it unclear whether there 
should be an edge between the two nodes. In this situation, Zhao and Ho (2019) proposed 
Symmetry Correction which involves relearning the combined local structure of the two 
nodes using a score-based algorithm, and deciding whether to include the questionable 
edge dependent upon whether the local score-based search generates a graph including 

8775
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
that edge. Incorporating Symmetry Correction, itself a hybrid approach, can improve the 
results of both constraint-based local discovery algorithms, and hybrid algorithms which 
use them. The paper evaluated the technique across 16 BNs with the number of variables 
up to n = 724 , discovering that local structure asymmetries were commonly produced by 
MMPC, SI-HITON-PC, IAMB and GS algorithms. In the majority of cases, Symmetry 
Correction produced structurally more accurate and better fitting graphs, particularly when 
used in the restrict phase of a hybrid algorithm.
5.2  Other hybrid approaches
5.2.1  Other hybrid approaches which search in DAG space
Structure learning algorithms often produce graphs with several isolated components with 
no edges between them. Constantinou (2020) argued that this is undesirable in real-world 
settings since it prevents the propagation of evidence between the variables in the different 
components if the learnt graph is subsequently parameterised and used for inference. The 
author therefore proposed the SaiyanH hybrid algorithm which guarantees to produce a 
DAG with a connected skeleton not containing independent components. SaiyanH begins 
by creating a connected undirected graph containing edges between pairs of nodes which 
have the strongest relationships between them according to a novel associational score. A 
second phase orientates all the edges in three steps: firstly, using a sequence of CI tests; 
secondly, using a score-based orientation heuristic; and thirdly, seeing which orientation 
maximises the effect of interventions. The resultant DAG is used as the initial graph for 
a third Tabu hill-climbing phase which is constrained to not violate independence rela-
tionships discovered in the first two phases, nor generate isolated components. Hence, the 
final DAG skeleton is guaranteed to be connected. SaiyanH ranked ­4th when evaluated for 
structural accuracy against 12 other leading constraint, score and hybrid algorithms when 
learning six BNs with up to n = 109 variables, whilst always achieving its aim of produc-
ing a connected skeleton.
5.2.2  Other hybrid approaches which search in node‑ordering space
The Greedy Sparsest Permutation (GSP) algorithm (Solus et al. 2017) is an approximate 
algorithm building upon the exact Sparsest Permutation (SP) algorithm (Raskutti and 
Uhler 2013, 2018) which was only viable up to 10 variables. Both are hybrid algorithms 
which search node ordering (which the authors referred to as a permutation) space and 
use a constraint-based approach within the overall algorithm to generate a minimal I-MAP 
DAG associated with each node ordering encountered. This constraint-based approach 
generates a DAG, denoted G≺ , associated with node ordering ≺= (≺1, ≺2, … , ≺i, … , ≺n) , 
using the following rule to generate the edges in G≺:
 where X≺i is the node at position i in the node ordering. That is to say, it generates an arc 
A →B in the associated DAG if B is lower down the ordering than A , and if A is depend-
ent on B conditional on any subset of the nodes higher up the ordering than B . Pearl (1998) 
showed that this creates a minimal I-MAP DAG for that node ordering.
j < k and X≺j  ⟂X≺k|{X≺1, … , X≺k−1
}
{
X≺j
}
⇔arc X≺j →X≺k in G≺

8776
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Solus et al. (2017) proposed the Triangle Sparsest Permutation (TSP) algorithm which 
traverses ordering space in a depth-first search, by flipping a covered arc in the associ-
ated DAG and then moving to the new ordering associated with that DAG. A covered arc 
is one where the two endpoint nodes have the same set of parents (ignoring the endpoint 
node that is the parent of the other endpoint). Solus et al. (2017) demonstrated that TSP is 
asymptotically consistent, the first ordering space algorithm to offer this guarantee. GSP 
limits the depth of the search but restarts the search, and so offers shorter runtimes than 
TSP. Comparisons showed GSP was on par with GES and PC in high sample size set-
tings ( n = 10, N = 10, 000) and produced more accurate graphs in low sample size settings 
( n = 100, N = 300).
Bernstein et  al. (2020) applied a similar approach to GSP but their Greedy Sparsest 
Poset (GSPo) algorithm targets causally insufficient problems. A poset is a partial node 
ordering associated with a directed MAG (DMAG), a MAG that has only directed and 
bidirected but no undirected edges, and so supports latent variables but not selection vari-
ables. Analogously to GSP, they provided a mapping from a poset to a minimal I-MAP 
DMAG and traverse poset space by making changes in the associated DMAG, mov-
ing to the poset associated with that new DMAG. In this case, the allowed change in the 
DMAG is changing a single bidirected edge into a directed one, or vice versa. Each of 
these moves in poset space results in a DMAG with the same or fewer edges. The authors 
conjectured, and supported with empirical evidence, that this algorithm produces a DMAG 
that is Markov equivalent to the true graph as N →∞ . Results on synthetic Gaussian net-
works with between 10 and 50 variables, three of which are latent, showed better structural 
accuracy than FCI and FCI+. Runtime is sensitive to the initial poset provided to GSPo, 
although provided a good starting poset is used (for instance using GSP to produce an ini-
tial DAG), GSPo is faster than FCI in all cases and slower than FCI+ when there are more 
than 30 − 40 variables.
5.2.3  Other hybrid approaches which search in equivalence class space
Ogarrio et al. (2016) also aimed to produce a hybrid algorithm that provides asymptotic 
guarantees of correctness in the presence of latent variables. They observed that constraint-
based algorithms for causally insufficient settings such as FCI, RFCI and FCI+ are asymp-
totically correct, but low sample size performance is poorer, especially returning graphs 
with too many bidirected edges. The score-based GES and FGES are asymptotically cor-
rect in causally sufficient situations, although they produce extra adjacencies and incorrect 
orientations when there are latent variables present. Thus, they proposed the Greedy Fast 
Causal Inference (GFCI) algorithm which first uses GES to produce a CPDAG. GFCI then 
employs CI tests to remove extraneous adjacencies in this skeleton, followed by modified 
FCI orientation rules to produce a PAG. The authors evaluated GFCI on synthetic Gauss-
ian BNs with number of variables, n = 100, 1, 000 with either 5% or 20% of those being 
latent variables. GFCI was shown to generally have better recall and precision on adjacen-
cies and arrow end marks than FCI, RFCI and FCI+, and in the cases where it was worse, 
it was only slightly worse. GFCI has worse recall of bidirected edges but much better preci-
sion of them, supporting the theoretical argument advanced that FCI, RFCI and FCI+ tend 
to produce too many adjacencies. GFCI was around 23% slower than RFCI and faster than 
FCI+ (comparisons were not provided for FCI).

8777
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
5.2.4  Other hybrid approaches which search in ancestral graph space
The Bayesian Constraint-based Causal Discovery (BCCD) algorithm (Claassen and Heskes 
2012) is a hybrid algorithm which does not assume causal sufficiency and produces a PAG. 
It assigns a Bayesian score to CI constraints to reflect the reliability of each constraint, 
rather than the binary true/false judgement made by most constraint-based approaches. The 
score is used to rank CI constraints, helping to prevent unreliable decisions being propa-
gated, and providing a principled means to resolve orientation conflicts.
BCCD follows the approach of PC and FCI and starts with a complete undirected graph 
and then uses conditioning sets of increasing size in the adjacency phase. The probability 
of CI constraints is incremented during this adjacency phase and if the probability exceeds 
a threshold the relevant edge is removed from the evolving skeleton. The ranked CI con-
straints are used to orientate unshielded triples and then further orientation rules applied 
using the CI constraint ranking to resolve conflicts. Claassen and Heskes (2012) evaluate 
BCCD on small random graphs with six or twelve variables and find that it is slightly more 
accurate than FCI and CFCI.
Hyttinen et al. (2014) use a similar approach that associates a cost with each independ-
ence and dependence constraint. However, the algorithm is targeted at learning a causal 
model from multiple datasets with different but overlapping sets of variables, with inter-
ventions on different sets of variables, in a causally insufficient setting. The problem is 
tackled as a constrained optimisation problem which is solved using an off-the-shelf 
Answer Set Programming approach. Performance is evaluated on small randomly gener-
ated graphs with six continuous variables and demonstrated better accuracy than PC and 
CPC for causally sufficient tests, and FCI and CFCI for causally insufficient tests.
The COmbINE algorithm (Triantafillou and Tsamardinos 2015) also assigns probabili-
ties to CI statements and is applied to the same causally insufficient setting with multiple 
interventional datasets with overlapping variables. COmbINE uses FCI to learn the PAG 
for each interventional dataset. It merges these using an open-source Boolean satisifiability 
application, MINISAT (Sorensson and Een 2005), to produce a summary graph showing 
the edges and orientations that are invariant across the individual PAGs.
Jabbarri et al. (2017) proposed a hybrid variant of the RFCI constraint-based algorithm 
which supports latent and selection variables, known as RFCI-BSC. It assigns a novel 
Bayesian Scoring of Constraints (BSC) score to each CI test which reflects the probability 
that the variables are indeed conditionally independent. The RFCI algorithm is then modi-
fied so that it stochastically decides whether each CI is true or not according to its BSC 
score. The algorithm is not deterministic because it uses a different random seed each time 
it runs.
The overall RFCI-BSC algorithm repeats this stochastic learning process to produce a 
series of PAGs. It then re-uses the BSC score concept to generate an overall BSC score 
for each PAG based on the BSC scores for the CI relationships used to generate that PAG. 
This BSC score is reflective of the posterior probability of that PAG. Finally, model aver-
aging produces a single, non-deterministic, output PAG by considering the probability of 
each edge across all the PAGs. Jabbarri et al. (2017) found that the structural accuracy 
of RFCI-BSC was generally better than RFCI, with up to n = 70 variables and relatively 
small sample sizes of N = {200, 2000} , though it had worse adjacency accuracy with the 
largest number of variables.
Chobtham et al. (2022) describe the mFGS-BS hybrid algorithm which learns a PAG 
from one observational dataset and one or more interventional datasets. The datasets must 

8778
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
all have the same variables, but causal sufficiency is not assumed. FGES is used to learn 
a CPDAG from each dataset, and probabilities are then assigned to individual arcs based 
on their frequency in the different CPDAGs, a majority-voting constraint-based approach 
to arc orientation in unshielded triples, and from do-calculus considerations around inter-
vened variables. A final arc orientation phase removes cycles and resolves any orientation 
conflicts to produce a single PAG. The authors find that mFGS-BS outperforms COmbINE, 
as well as GFCI and RFCI-BSC which are baselines that do not account for interventions.
5.3  Other structure learning approaches
We discuss some algorithms in this sub-section which take a different approach to the algo-
rithms already discussed.
5.3.1  Functional causal models
Functional Causal Models (FCMs) can be used to model causal systems where it is 
assumed that a variable’s value can be expressed as some deterministic function of its par-
ents plus a noise term that is independent of all the causes, that is:
where f is a deterministic function, and 휀 is a noise term which is independent of Pa(X) 
and all the other variables’ noise terms. This approach is mostly used with continuous vari-
ables, though it can be used to model, for example, noisy-OR relationships between dis-
crete variables. Given some assumptions about the form of f and 휀 , it is possible to learn 
the complete causal structure from observational data alone, including the case of identify-
ing the arc orientation with just two variables.
One set of assumptions is the Linear Non-Gaussian Acyclic Model (LiNGAM) (Shimizu 
et al. 2006) which assumes f is linear, 휀 is independent but non-Gaussian noise, and that 
the system is causally sufficient. With these assumptions, the authors show that structure 
learning can be undertaken by performing independent component analysis (ICA) on the 
data using well-established approaches (Hyvärinen and Oja 2000). Hoyer et al. (2008b) 
extend LiNGAM to support latent variables.
Zhang and Hyvärinen (2009) propose a more general type of FCM called the Post Non-
Linear (PNL) Causal Model which has the form:
where fnl defines the variable’s value as a non-linear function of its causes, fmes is a non-
linear function that can represent measurement error, and 휀 is the independent noise term. 
This more general formulation of FCMs incorporates LiNGAM and Additive Noise Mod-
els (Hoyer et al. 2008a; Gretton et al. 2009) as special cases. Zhang and Hyvärinen (2009) 
show that arc orientations are identifiable in the PNL model with five exceptions. The most 
important exception is when fmes is the identity function, fnl is linear, and ε is Gaussian. 
This is the linear Gaussian setting which is the usual assumption made by algorithms in 
the rest of this paper when modelling systems with continuous variables, and hence why, in 
that case, it is only possible to learn up to an equivalence class from observational data. We 
X = f(Pa(X), 휀)
X = fmes(fnl(Pa(X)) + ε)

8779
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
have only presented a brief overview of FCMs here and would encourage interested readers 
to read recent reviews of the area such as the one by Glymour et al. (2019).
5.3.2  Continuous optimisation
Another recent development in structure learning is the continuous optimisation approach. 
In the combinatoric approaches discussed so far, a DAG can be represented as an adja-
cency matrix where a 1 at a particular position (i, j) indicates the presence of an arc from 
node Xi to node Xj , whereas a 0 would indicate the absence of an arc. In contrast, continu-
ous optimisation treats the adjacency matrix as a real-valued matrix. As with non-continu-
ous score-based methods the goal of continuous optimisation is to maximise how well the 
DAG fits the data, but the requirement for acyclicity is expressed as an equality constraint 
on real values making the method an equality constrained problem (Vowels et al. 2021). 
One of the key advantages of this approach is that it is much closer to approaches used 
in mainstream machine learning and allows the use of powerful off-the-shelf optimisation 
approaches.
The Non-Combinatoric Optimization via Trace Augmented Lagrangian Structure 
(NOTEARS) (Zheng et al. 2018) algorithm was perhaps the first to use continuous optimi-
sation for structure learning. NOTEARs represents the DAG as a n × n weighted adjacency 
matrix W with elements wij so that the value of any variable Xi is given by:
where Xj iterates over the other variables, and zi is noise for the variable which can be non-
Gaussian. If wij is zero this indicates that there is no arc from Xj to Xi . Therefore, matrix W 
encapsulates both the DAG structure and the strength of relationships associated with each 
arc. This representation naturally fits where the variables take continuous values, but can 
be extended to discrete ordinal valued variables by using a logistic regression approach to 
obtain ordinal discrete values from continuous values. The objective function, F(W) , to be 
minimised is given by:
where X is the complete dataset over n variables and N instances, and therefore XW is the 
predicted data values derived from the weighted adjacency matrix and values of parent-
less variables. Thus, the first term in F(W) is the least square error of the predicted values 
minus actual data values and therefore a measure of data fitting. The second term is an L1 
regulariser with ‖W‖1 being the sum of the absolute weight values. Its inclusion therefore 
has the effect of penalising complex DAGs.
The key contribution of Zheng et al. (2018) is to formulate the acyclicity requirement as 
the following continuous function constraint h(W):
where ○ is Hadamard matrix multiplication, ematrix is matrix exponentiation which may be 
expressed as a power series of matrix products, and tr(matrix) is the matrix trace operation 
which is the sum of the diagonal elements. The derivation of this expression relies on the 
Xi =
∑
j≠i
wij ⋅Xj + zi
F(W) = 1
2N ‖X −XW‖2 + 휆‖W‖1
h(W) = tr(eW◦W) −n

8780
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
fact that the trace of a normal binary adjacency matrix raised to power q equals the number 
of cycles of length q in a directed graph, and this must be zero for all q for a DAG. The 
constraint h(W) has desirable properties such as being zero for a DAG, with lower values 
being closer to a DAG, and it is continuous and differentiable. This means that the problem 
can be solved by off-the-shelf optimisers, with NOTEARS using an augmented Lagrangian 
approach. Note that the problem is non-convex meaning that it has local minima so that 
NOTEARS is an approximate algorithm.
The authors compare NOTEARS with PC, LiNGAM and FGES in learning both Erdos-
Rényi (Erdos and Rényi 1960) and scale-free8 random graphs (Barabási and Albert 1999) 
which the authors argue can be more representative of real-world networks. They use 
n ∈{10, 20, 50, 100} variables and N = 20 as a low sample size, and N = 1000 as a high 
sample size, and simulate Gaussian, Exponential and Gumbel noise. FGES and NOTEARS 
had comparable accuracy on sparser graphs, but NOTEARS was more accurate on denser 
networks across all noise types. We recommend that interested readers consult the review 
by Vowels et al. (2021) which covers continuous optimisation methods much more broadly.
6  Practical considerations
This section deals with some of the practical considerations when using BN structure 
learning algorithms in real world applications. The first subsection discusses some of 
the methods used to evaluate BN structure learning algorithms, and the second subsec-
tion describes the performance of these algorithms in terms of the quality of the networks 
they produce and their computational efficiency, and how their real performance compares 
to the theoretical or synthetic performance. The third subsection discusses how various 
forms of noise in the data can affect the quality of the learnt graph including some tech-
niques which can mitigate those effects. Section 6.4 considers how expert knowledge can 
be incorporated into the learning process to improve the learnt networks, Sect. 6.5 provides 
details of open-source packages and datasets relevant to structure learning, and the final 
subsection provides some guidelines for choosing and using algorithms.
6.1  Algorithm evaluation
Evaluating structure learning algorithms can be a straightforward or a complicated pro-
cess, depending on the selected evaluation approach. Indeed, it is fair to say there is no 
agreed process to determine the effectiveness of these algorithms (Korb and Nicholson 
2011), partly because of the different types and aims of the algorithms. The relevant lit-
erature consists of various evaluation criteria and, whilst many are similar, others represent 
entirely different concepts. In the absence of an agreed evaluation method, it is difficult to 
reach a consensus on the effectiveness of an algorithm. As a result, it is not infrequent to 
observe conflicting conclusions about which algorithm is ‘best’.
8  Scale-free graphs have a power law probability distribution for the node degree, d , of the form P(d) ∝d−훾 
where 훾 is typically between 2 and 3. The resulting network has a small number of nodes with many tens 
or more of neighbours which are known as hubs. Biological networks such as gene regulation or metabolic 
networks are often scale-free, for example.

8781
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Two main factors that tend to determine the evaluation criteria involve (a) the learn-
ing class of the algorithm, each of which is described in Sects. 2 to 4, and (b) the data 
generation process. As shown in Table 5, there are two main types of evaluation, each of 
which is largely determined by the two above factors. Graphical evaluations correspond to 
scoring metrics that measure the differences between the learnt and ground truth graphs, 
whereas inference-based evaluations generally focus on how well the learnt distributions fit 
the observed distributions.
When the algorithms are applied to real data, the evaluation is generally not based on 
graph comparisons since the true graph is unknown. However, graphical-based evaluations 
are occasionally used when a knowledge-based graph is produced that can be compared to 
a learnt graph, as in (Kitson and Constantinou 2021). As a result, most real-world applica-
tions of BN structure learning are evaluated in terms of inference.
Constraint-based learning tends not to be assessed with inference-based scores, at least 
in the case of synthetic experiments, because this learning class focuses on causal discov-
ery which can only be effectively measured by means of graphical structure. On the other 
hand, inference-based evaluation is predominantly based on functions that only score-
based algorithms employ. Therefore, while it makes sense to judge score-based algorithms 
in terms of the highest scoring graph achieved, it might be less appropriate to judge con-
straint-based algorithms by the same standards since they are based on a learning process 
that does not aim to maximise the global score of the learnt graph.
Metrics that focus on measuring the relationship between two graphical structures can 
be viewed as variants, often with modifications, of a confusion matrix that consists of:
(a)	 True Positives (TP), corresponding to the number of true edges/arcs present in the 
learnt graph; i.e., number of corrects edges/arcs discovered,
(b)	 False Positives (FP), corresponding to the number of false edges/arcs present in the 
learnt graph; i.e., number of incorrect edges/arcs discovered,
(c)	 True Negatives (TN), corresponding to the number of true absent edges in the learnt 
graph; i.e., number of correct independence relationships discovered, and
(d)	 False negatives (FN), corresponding to the number of false absent edges in the learnt 
graph; i.e., number of incorrect independence relationships discovered.
Two of the most commonly used metrics are Precision (P) and Recall (R), defined as
respectively. Specifically, Precision represents the rate of correct edges discovered across 
all edges discovered, whereas Recall represents the rate of edges discovered across all true 
edges that could have been discovered. Independently, however, these metrics can be mis-
leading in judging the performance of an algorithm, which is why the F1 score is often 
preferred since it provides the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall. The F1 score is 
defined as:
A frequent alternative, or an additional, metric, is the Structural Hamming Distance 
(SHD) proposed by Tsamardinos et al. (2006). The SHD score represents the number of 
P =
TP
TP + FP and R =
IP
TP + FN
F1 = 2 P ⋅R
P + R

8782
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
edge insertions, deletions and arc reversals needed to convert the learnt graph into the true 
graph, and is defined as
Tsamardinos et al. (2006) originally proposed using SHD to compare CPDAGs (rep-
resenting equivalence classes) and this is the setting in which it is usually used, though it 
may also be applied to comparing DAGs. Variants of SHD are often applied and focus on 
assigning different penalty weights for edge insertion, deletions and arc reversals. The most 
frequent modification involves assigning a lower weight to arc reversals on the basis that an 
arc reversal corresponds to the discovery of an edge, albeit one with an incorrect direction 
(de Jongh and Druzdzel 2009; Constantinou 2019a).
Other structural metrics have focused on assessing the learnt graph in terms of causal 
effects, such as the Structural Intervention Distance (SID) by Peters and Buhlmann (2015) 
which measures the closeness of two DAGs in terms of their corresponding causal infer-
ence statements. More specifically, it is the number of ordered pairs of nodes (Xi, Xj) where 
an intervention on Xi produces a different intervention distribution in node Xj in the two 
graphs G1, G2 being compared. The SID of DAG G2 from DAG G1 , denoted SID(G1, G2) , is 
computed as the number of pairs of nodes (A, B) where:
B ∈PaG2(A) and B ∈DeG1(A)
 plus the number of pairs of nodes (A, B) where: 
B ∉PaG2(A) and PaG2(A) meets one or both of the following conditions:
•	 some Z ∈PaG2 is a descendant of any W ≠A on a directed path from A to B  
in G1
•	 PaG2(A) does not d-separate A and B in G1
where A and B represent nodes, PaG2(A) are the parents of node A in graph G2 and DeG1(A) 
are the descendants of node A in graph G1 . Peters and Buhlmann (2015) also proposed 
a variant of SID which can be used to compare CPDAGs which only considers those 
pairs of nodes where the intervention is identifiable in the CPDAG. They also note that 
the SID metric only takes account of interventions on single nodes and that, in general, 
SID(G1, G2) ≠SID(G2, G1).
Lastly, the Balanced Scoring Function (BSF) proposed by Constantinou (2019a) takes 
into consideration the complete confusion matrix to eliminate score imbalance by adjusting 
the reward function relative to the difficulty of discovering an edge, or the absence of an 
edge, proportional to their occurrence rate in the true graph. The BSF is defined as:
SHD = FN + FP
Table 5   The most common 
type of evaluation for different 
combinations of learning class 
and data generation process
Learning class
Data
Synthetic
Real
Constraint-based
Graphical
Inference
Score-based
Graphical,
Inference
Inference
Hybrid
Graphical,
Inference
Inference

8783
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
where |E| and |M| represent the number of edges present and the number of edges absent 
(compared to the complete graph) in the true graph respectively, and
On the other hand, the BD/e/u, Log-Likelihood, and BIC scores described in subsec-
tions 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 are the approaches most commonly used as an alternative to metrics 
of graphical discrepancy. Specifically, they are used to judge algorithms in terms of the 
highest scoring graph discovered with reference to the input data, according to the pre-
ferred scoring function. Although often less desirable than structural metrics, inference-
based approaches can be extended to include other types of evaluation, such as predictive 
accuracy as determined by the Area Under the Curve (AUC) of the Receiving Operating 
Characteristic (ROC) (Fawcett 2004).
In general, the BIC score is the most widely used metric across the various inference-
based approaches, especially in real-world applications of BN structure learning. A prob-
lem with BIC, however, and which applies to most inference-based scores, is that it is 
score-equivalent; implying that it will generate the same score for multiple DAGs that are 
part of the same Markov equivalence class (refer to Fig. 5). While this is not an issue when 
comparing CPDAGs, it is an issue when comparing DAGs which are generally required 
when applying structure learning to real problems.
An important limitation of inference-based scores is that a higher scoring graph, or 
higher predictive accuracy, do not necessarily reflect a more accurate causal structure 
(Constantinou et al. 2021b). For example, the highest BIC scoring graph across all pos-
sible graphs is often not the ground truth graph that generated the data. This limitation is 
exaggerated with limited and noisy data that distort the scores, and relaxed with big and 
clean data that increase our confidence in the scores generated. Despite their imperfections, 
inference-based evaluations are considered reasonably effective and represent an important 
metric for structure learning.
Lastly, a further limitation of most structural and inference metrics is that they scale 
with the number of variables in the graph, and in the case of inference metrics, with the 
sample size also. This makes comparisons between learning performance on different net-
works and datasets problematic. Several authors have attempted to address this by using 
scaled variants of the metrics. For example, Scutari et al. (2019a) used SHD divided by the 
number of arcs in the true graph in their comparative review of algorithms, and Malone 
et al. (2015) employed the Log-Likelihood divided by the product of the number of varia-
bles and sample size in their review of the generalisability of score-based algorithms. Note 
that BSF is one structural metric that has the advantage of not scaling with the number of 
variables.
6.2  Algorithm performance
In this subsection, we consider the quality of the graphs that the algorithms produce, as 
well as their computational efficiency. Table 6 summarises some of the noteworthy papers 
which provide insights into algorithmic performance, and the type and scale of the data and 
networks to which they have been applied. Most papers which introduce a new structure 
BSF =
(
TP
|E| + TN
|M| −FP
|M| −FN
|E|
)/
2
|M| = n × (n −1)
2
−|E|

8784
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
learning algorithm tend to only evaluate it against previous algorithms of the same type, 
making it hard to get a picture of how they perform against the broad range of algorithms 
available. For this reason, we focus on comparative studies which cover a decent range of 
different types of algorithms, either studied as an end-goal in itself, or as part of study into 
some aspect of structure learning such as the effect of the objective function (Scutari 2016) 
or noisy data (Constantinou et al. 2021b). Table 6 does include some papers which intro-
duced a new algorithm: MMHC (Tsamardinos et al. 2006); PC-Max (Ramsey 2016) and 
FGES (Ramsey et al. 2017) where this has extended the scale of problems that have been 
tackled.
6.2.1  Accuracy comparisons between algorithms
The wide range of algorithmic approaches discussed in Sects. 2,3 and 4 and the varied ways 
in which performance has been evaluated shown in Table 6, make it difficult to make defin-
itive statements about the optimal approach to use in a particular context. As Table 6 sug-
gests, the algorithms selected for comparison vary considerably between studies, though 
we note that most include an algorithm from the PC family, hill-climbing or Tabu, one 
from the GES family, and a hybrid algorithm, usually MMHC. These may thus be regarded 
as a ‘benchmark’ set of algorithms to which performance can be usefully compared. It 
seems rare for comparative studies to include sampling or genetic algorithms, presumably 
because they tend to be non-deterministic and produce a slightly different result each time 
they run, which makes it difficult to judge how these different kinds of approaches rank 
against the more established algorithms.
Comparisons between algorithms usually consider datasets with either discrete or con-
tinuous variables, though Scutari et al. (2019a) considered both discrete and continuous 
variable networks, and Raghu et al. (2018) is one of the few studies that examines algo-
rithms capable of learning networks containing a mixture of discrete and continuous vari-
ables. With discrete data, Scutari et al. (2019a) found that Tabu was the most accurate 
algorithm (14/20 cases) especially for large sample sizes (10/10 cases where sample size 
was equal to, or greater than, the number free parameters), and Constantinou et al. (2021b) 
similarly found that Tabu and hill-climbing ranked highest, overall. However, Scutari et al. 
(2019a) found that Tabu was less accurate than the constraint and hybrid algorithms stud-
ied when learning Gaussian BNs, tending to produce too dense a graph.
Within score-based algorithms, Scutari (2019a) found that Tabu is more accurate than 
FGES (lower SHD in 18/20 cases), a finding echoed by Constantinou et al. (2021b). The 
study by Scutari (2019a) included a variant of the Order-MCMC sampling algorithm 
referred to as Simulated Annealing which fared poorly in terms of accuracy being the least 
accurate in 11/20 cases. Constantinou et  al. (2021b) found that Tabu and hill-climbing 
ranked more highly in graphical accuracy than the exact GOBNILP algorithm, suggesting 
that the latter’s theoretical advantages may be diminished with realistic sample sizes and/or 
noisy data, and that the highest scoring graph will not necessarily be closer to the ground 
truth graph than some other lower scoring graph. However, Malone et al. (2015) found evi-
dence that exact algorithms (A* search and Integer Linear Programming) generalise better 
to unseen data than approximate algorithms do.
Scutari et al. (2019a) found that there was “no systematic difference in accuracy” when 
comparing constraint-based and hybrid algorithms, though they and Constantinou et al. 
(2021b) found that H2PC tended to perform better than other non-score-based algorithms. 
Many of the papers comparing constraint-based algorithms have considered only Gaussian 

8785
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Table 6   Sources and characteristics of performance information used
Principal 
area of 
investiga-
tion
Dataset characteristics
Algorithms evaluated
Type of evaluation
Ran-
dom 
Net-
works
Stand-
ard 
Net-
works
Real 
Data-
sets
Dis-
crete 
vari-
ables
Con-
tinu-
ous 
vari-
ables
Mixed 
vari-
ables
Number 
of vari-
ables
Sample Size
Aver-
age 
degree
Num-
ber of 
algo-
rithms
PC 
Fam-
ily
FCI 
Fam-
ily
HC/
Tabu
GES/
FGES/
FGS
Exact 
score-
based
Hybrid 
algo-
rithms
Struc-
tural
Inferen-
tial - fit-
ting
Inferen-
tial - causal
Effi-
ciency
Introduce 
MMHC 
Algo-
rithm
(Tsamardi-
nos et al. 
2006)
10
Y
20–801
500–20,000
1.17- 
2.08
7
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Generalisa-
tion of 
score-
based 
algo-
rithms 
(Malone 
et al. 
2015)
13
29
Y
17 –
60
31–20,000
n/a
5
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Scoring 
Func-
tion and 
Struc-
tural 
Priors 
(Scutari 
2016)
10
Y
8 –
442
 ~ 10–2.2 × ­106
1.00–
1.93
1
Y
Y
Y
Introduce 
PC-Max 
Algo-
rithm
(Ramsey 
2016)
20
Y
1000–
20,000
1000
2.00 –
4.00
4
Y
Y
Y
Y

8786
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Table 6   (continued)
Principal 
area of 
investiga-
tion
Dataset characteristics
Algorithms evaluated
Type of evaluation
Ran-
dom 
Net-
works
Stand-
ard 
Net-
works
Real 
Data-
sets
Dis-
crete 
vari-
ables
Con-
tinu-
ous 
vari-
ables
Mixed 
vari-
ables
Number 
of vari-
ables
Sample Size
Aver-
age 
degree
Num-
ber of 
algo-
rithms
PC 
Fam-
ily
FCI 
Fam-
ily
HC/
Tabu
GES/
FGES/
FGS
Exact 
score-
based
Hybrid 
algo-
rithms
Struc-
tural
Inferen-
tial - fit-
ting
Inferen-
tial - causal
Effi-
ciency
Algorithms 
support-
ing latent 
vari-
ables and 
cycles 
(Singh 
et al. 
2017)
1
2
Y
10 –
100
11–10,000
n/a
10
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Scalability 
learning 
con-
tinuous 
variable 
networks 
(Ramsey 
and 
Andrews 
2017)
270
Y
50–500
100–1000
2.00 –
6.00
18
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Introduce 
FGES 
Algo-
rithm
(Ramsey 
et al. 
2017)
443
Y
Y
1000–
106
1000
1.00 –
2.00
1
Y
Y
Y

8787
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Table 6   (continued)
Principal 
area of 
investiga-
tion
Dataset characteristics
Algorithms evaluated
Type of evaluation
Ran-
dom 
Net-
works
Stand-
ard 
Net-
works
Real 
Data-
sets
Dis-
crete 
vari-
ables
Con-
tinu-
ous 
vari-
ables
Mixed 
vari-
ables
Number 
of vari-
ables
Sample Size
Aver-
age 
degree
Num-
ber of 
algo-
rithms
PC 
Fam-
ily
FCI 
Fam-
ily
HC/
Tabu
GES/
FGES/
FGS
Exact 
score-
based
Hybrid 
algo-
rithms
Struc-
tural
Inferen-
tial - fit-
ting
Inferen-
tial - causal
Effi-
ciency
Investigate 
learning 
mixed 
vari-
able type 
networks 
(Raghu 
et al. 
2018)
13
Y
Y
50 –
100
100 –
5000
 ~ 3 –
 ~ 5
5
Y
Y
Y
Y
Learning 
globally 
optimal 
graphs 
with 
exact 
score-
based 
algo-
rithms 
(Liao 
et al. 
2019)
6
20
Y
10 –
57
32 –
58,265
n/a
3
Y
Y
Y

8788
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Table 6   (continued)
Principal 
area of 
investiga-
tion
Dataset characteristics
Algorithms evaluated
Type of evaluation
Ran-
dom 
Net-
works
Stand-
ard 
Net-
works
Real 
Data-
sets
Dis-
crete 
vari-
ables
Con-
tinu-
ous 
vari-
ables
Mixed 
vari-
ables
Number 
of vari-
ables
Sample Size
Aver-
age 
degree
Num-
ber of 
algo-
rithms
PC 
Fam-
ily
FCI 
Fam-
ily
HC/
Tabu
GES/
FGES/
FGS
Exact 
score-
based
Hybrid 
algo-
rithms
Struc-
tural
Inferen-
tial - fit-
ting
Inferen-
tial - causal
Effi-
ciency
Comparing 
score, 
con-
straint 
and 
hybrid 
algo-
rithms 
(Scutari 
et al. 
2019a)
14
Y
Y
20 –
442
23 –
3.9 × ­105
1.18 –
2.06
9
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Evaluating 
hill-
climbing 
algo-
rithm 
on large 
sample 
sizes 
(Scutari 
et al. 
2019b)
1
5
Y
19 –
37
106 –
5.4 × ­107
n/a
1
Y
Y
Y

8789
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Table 6   (continued)
Principal 
area of 
investiga-
tion
Dataset characteristics
Algorithms evaluated
Type of evaluation
Ran-
dom 
Net-
works
Stand-
ard 
Net-
works
Real 
Data-
sets
Dis-
crete 
vari-
ables
Con-
tinu-
ous 
vari-
ables
Mixed 
vari-
ables
Number 
of vari-
ables
Sample Size
Aver-
age 
degree
Num-
ber of 
algo-
rithms
PC 
Fam-
ily
FCI 
Fam-
ily
HC/
Tabu
GES/
FGES/
FGS
Exact 
score-
based
Hybrid 
algo-
rithms
Struc-
tural
Inferen-
tial - fit-
ting
Inferen-
tial - causal
Effi-
ciency
The impact 
of noisy 
data on 
different 
algo-
rithms 
(Con-
stantinou 
et al. 
2021b)
6
Y
8 –
109
100 –
106
2.00 –
3.58
15
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

8790
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
networks. Singh et al. (2017) noted that all the constraint-based algorithms they investi-
gated tended to learn a similar skeleton. Ramsey (2016), Ramsey and Andrews (2017) and 
Singh et al. (2017) all found that constraint-based algorithms obtained better edge preci-
sion than score-based approaches, but worse edge recall. The weaker faithfulness assump-
tions made by the CPC algorithm resulted in better arrowhead precision than the PC algo-
rithm achieved, but arrowhead recall was worse (Raghu et al. 2018; Ramsey and Andrews 
2017). Raghu et al. (2018) and Ramsey (2016) found that algorithms from the PC and FCI 
family performed better than score-based algorithms on real data sets suggesting that they 
may perform better in the presence of latent variables and other forms of noise. On the 
other hand, Constantinou et al. (2021b) found that the algorithms that accounted for latent 
variables (FCI, GFCI and RFCI-BSC) did not offer improved graphical accuracy relative to 
other algorithms, in experiments which incorporated latent variables.
6.2.2  Efficiency comparisons between algorithms
As with accuracy comparisons, the literature provides a complex picture as to which algo-
rithms are fastest. Tabu is found to be faster than both constraint-based and hybrid algo-
rithms by Scutari et al. (2019a) when learning discrete networks, whereas Constantinou 
et al. (2021b) found some hybrid (MMHC) and constraint (Grow-Shrink) algorithms have 
runtimes closer to Tabu than other constraint-based and hybrid algorithms. As might be 
expected, exact score-based algorithms are considerably slower than approximate score-
based algorithms (Constantinou et al. 2021b) and are generally limited to problems with 
less than 100 variables. In general, approximate score-based algorithms can tackle much 
higher dimensional problems, with Ramsey et al. (2017) using the FGES algorithm to learn 
both discrete and Gaussian BNs with 30,000 variables in a few minutes with parallel pro-
cessing on a powerful laptop, and learning a Gaussian network with one million variables 
on a supercomputer. Scutari et al. (2019a) found that FGES was always faster than Tabu in 
the 20 discrete BN cases considered, whereas Constantinou et al. (2021b) found that FGES 
was considerably slower than Tabu and hill-climbing over the cases they considered.
Considering Gaussian networks only, the study by Ramsey and Andrews (2017) pro-
vides evidence about the importance of the implementation of an algorithm, such as which 
programming language is used, showing an order of magnitude speed difference between 
two implementations of the CPC algorithm. Tsamardinos et al. (2006) reported clear effi-
ciency advantages of the MMHC algorithm being 41.35 and 10.09 times faster than the 
author’s implementation of PC and Tabu respectively, whereas subsequent studies such as 
by Scutari et al. (2019a) have not borne out these advantages.
6.2.3  Other factors affecting performance
Many other factors, beside the choice of algorithm, affect the accuracy and speed of the 
structure learning process. One factor where there seems to be consistency across the dif-
ferent studies is that increasing sample size improves the accuracy of the learnt graph. For 
example, Malone et al. (2015) find that increasing sample size both improves the predictive 
likelihood of test datasets and reduces the variability of the predicted likelihood between 
different test datasets for both Tabu and exact score-based algorithms. Similarly, Liao et al. 
(2019) used the exact GOBNILP-DEV algorithm to show that the number of graphs within 

8791
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
a certain factor of the global optimally scoring graph reduces as sample size increases; 
i.e., the highest scoring graphs become more differentiated as the sample size increases. 
Scutari et al. (2019b) investigated learning with very large sample sizes where a 24 vari-
able CLGBN is learnt accurately with sample sizes of 5 million cases and above, though it 
is not clear how accuracy behaves with sample size in the general case.
The objective function chosen for score-based algorithms, as well as the CI test used in 
constraint-based algorithms, can have a large effect on the accuracy of the learnt graphs. 
Scutari (2016) showed that the choice of scoring function and structural priors within the 
hill-climbing algorithm affects the accuracy of the learnt graph as described in Sect. 4.1.1. 
Indeed, Scutari et al. (2019a) argued that the choice of objective function and CI tests are 
confounding factors when comparing algorithms. Hence, they used equivalent objective 
functions and CI tests across all the algorithms they compared in their study. Raghu et al. 
(2018) showed that the choice of CI test had a large effect on structural accuracy when 
learning mixed variable type networks, and an even more dramatic effect on algorithm 
runtime with over three orders of magnitude difference in runtime of the CPC algorithm 
between using the fastest and slowest CI test. The choice of hyperparameters used, such as 
the ESS for Bayesian scoring functions (see Sect. 4.1.1) and the significance level chosen 
for CI tests (Sect. 3.1) affect performance too.
A further factor affecting performance is the dimensionality and quality of the data used. 
As Table 6 indicates, many studies make use of randomly generated networks or standard 
networks to provide a reference graph to which the learnt graph can be compared. In these 
cases, data is randomly generated synthetically to be consistent with the global probability 
distribution implied by the network parameters (e.g., the entries in the CPTs in discrete 
networks). Less commonly, real-world datasets are used but these generally suffer from 
having no reference ground-truth graph with which to compare the learnt graph. Structural 
learning has been investigated with a handful of variables right through to one million vari-
ables, with higher dimensionality studies generally using synthetically generated graphs 
and data. The sparsity of graphs used in structure learning tends to be much more consist-
ent, with most studies investigating graphs with an average degree between one and six. 
The preponderance of synthetic graphs and synthetic data in evaluation studies raises the 
concern that they may not reflect real world performance. This was the motivation behind 
Constantinou et al.’s (2021b) evaluation of algorithms in the presence of synthetically gen-
erated noise, which did indeed find that graph accuracy in the presence of different forms 
of synthetic noise could decrease by up to 37%.
Lastly, comparative performance is strongly affected by the metrics chosen to evaluate 
the learnt graph. This includes the choice of the broad class of metrics used which typically 
include structural comparisons with a reference graph or inferential metrics based upon the 
likelihood of the data being generated by the learnt BN. In the latter approach, the same 
data is generally used to evaluate the graph that was used to learn the graph. This does not 
capture how well the learnt graph might generalise to new data. Malone et al. (2015) are 
relatively unique in having tried to assess the generalisability of the learnt graph by report-
ing metrics on subsets of test data. Also, notable from Table 6, is the lack of evaluation 
of the causal inferential properties of the learnt graph, such as how well it can predict the 
effect of interventions, or perform counterfactual inferences. This is surprising given that 
presumably one often wishes to learn causal BNs from data for these kinds of purposes. It 
should also be noted that, even within the same broad type of metric, different metrics can 
alter the ranking of algorithms. For example, Constantinou et al. (2021b) report different 
rankings according to whether the SHD or F1 metric is used.

8792
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
6.3  Noise
The structural learning algorithms considered so far implicitly assume that the input data 
is a perfect sample from the underlying true distribution. However, there are often multiple 
types of noise in real-world observed data sets. For example, instrumental error or a survey 
respondents’ unwillingness to respond to a question may mean that some of the values in 
a data instance may be missing, which we refer to as missing data. Even if the value is 
recorded in the data set, it may not be exactly same as the true value which is known as 
measurement error. This section will describe these two main types of noise in observed 
data and introduce algorithms that aim to handle these forms of noise in structure learning 
with discrete or continuous variables.
6.3.1  Missing data
Missing data is a common and serious problem in many real-world scientific research areas 
such as medical research and gene analysis. Rubin (1976) categorised missing data into 
three types: Missing Completely At Random (MCAR), Missing At Random (MAR) and 
Missing Not At Random (MNAR). In the MCAR case, the missingness of data is a purely 
random process and is not dependent on any other substantive variables. This type of miss-
ing data pattern is often caused by instrumental failure and normally would not bias the 
learnt graph. In the MAR case, the probability of a particular data value being missing 
is dependent on observed values. For example, in an investigation between age and fre-
quency of smoking, data is MAR if younger respondents are more likely to not disclose 
their smoking frequency. Finally, data is MNAR if it is neither MCAR nor MAR. In this 
case, the probability of being missing may be related to missing values of other observed 
variables or even unobserved variables. In the above example, data is MNAR if the age 
variable also contains missing values.
One of the earliest algorithms which specifically deals with MAR missing data for 
structure learning is the structural EM algorithm (Friedman 1997). Structural EM is an 
iterative process making the MAR assumption, which consists of two steps: an Expectation 
(E) step and a Maximisation (M) step. In the E step, Structural EM infers the missing val-
ues to produce a complete data set based on the current learned graph. Then, in the M step, 
Structural EM applies a standard structure learning algorithm using the inferred complete 
dataset to update the learned graph. Although Structural EM has the advantage of being 
able to work with any standard structure learning algorithm, and with both discrete and 
continuous variables, it is computationally inefficient due to the inference process in the E 
step.
More recently, several algorithms based on constraint-based structure learning have 
been proposed for handling missing data for continuous variables. Strobl et  al. (2018) 
treated missing data as a type of selection bias and justified using test-wise deletion of the 
missing data in CI tests. Test-wise deletion is an approach which ignores data cases with 
missing values among the variables involved in a CI test. They showed that this a sound 
approach for handling missing data in the FCI and RFCI algorithms.
Gain and Shpitser (2018) proposed a modified version of PC called CBR-PC which uses 
the Inverse Probability Weighting (IPW) method (Horvitz and Thompson 1952) on test-
wise deleted data to construct an IPW-based CI test. IPW is an approach which allevi-
ates distributional bias in data by reweighting each data case. By replacing the original 
CI test with IPW-based CI tests, CBR-PC maintains the consistency offered by PC but 

8793
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
with missing data. However, IPW-based CI tests rely on knowing the causal relationships 
between observed variables and missing data, which is unlikely to be known in real-world 
problems. Tu et  al. (2019) tackled this issue by firstly detecting the causal relationship 
between variables and missing data with a constraint-based process, and then used IPW-
based CI tests in the PC algorithm.
Liu and Constantinou (2022) propose a modified version of HC called HC-aIPW 
which applies the test-wise deletion and IPW method to the score-based HC algorithm to 
deal with missing data in discrete variables. They utilised pairwise deletion and the IPW 
method with the HC algorithm, thus extending the approaches applied to constraint-based 
algorithms described in the previous paragraph to a greedy search score-based algorithm. 
The experimental results in their paper show that the HC-aIPW algorithm outperforms the 
commonly used Structural EM algorithm both when data are missing at random, and miss-
ing not at random.
6.3.2  Measurement error
Measurement error is the discrepancy between the measured value of a variable and its true 
value, which can be treated as a disturbance from its underlying distribution. For continu-
ous variables, the simplest way to model measurement error on measured variable Ym is 
to add a noise term 휖Y on its underlying error-free variable Y , i.e., Ym = Y + 휖Y . Under the 
presence of measurement error, the conditional independence relation detected from the 
measured variables may be different from the relation derived from their error-free vari-
ables. Consider the BN presented in Fig. 19 and suppose we can acquire the true values of 
variables X and Z , but only the measured values of variable Y with measurement error 휖Y . 
When 휖Y ≠0 , and assuming faithfulness, the underlying independence relation X ⟂Z|Y 
does not hold on the measured variables since the measured variable Ym does not d-sep-
arate X and Z . The following three approaches apply to measurement error in continuous 
variables.
Scheines and Ramsey (2016) studied the effect of Gaussian measurement error on the 
score-based FGES algorithm (Ramsey et al. 2017). They generated synthetic data based on 
Linear Gaussian models with additional random Gaussian noise to simulate the measure-
ment error. Their results indicate that minor levels of measurement error can considerably 
worsen the learning accuracy of FGES on small sample sizes. However, when the sample 
size is 5,000, the accuracy of FGES remains relatively high, even when 80% of the vari-
ance of each variable is due to the measurement error.
Zhang et al. (2018) investigated the identifiability conditions for Linear Non-Gaussian 
Models in the presence of measurement error. Their theoretical result shows that under cer-
tain assumptions, the causal DAG remains fully identifiable learnt from noisy data by uti-
lising overcomplete Independent Component Analysis (ICA) to learn the adjacency matrix. 
The assumptions used for their result include the causal Markov assumption, faithfulness 
assumption, non-linear noise assumption and two other assumptions that imply a sparse 
graphical structure.
Blom et al. (2018) proposed a method to detect the upper bound of the variance of ran-
dom measurement error in observed variables for linear Gaussian models. Their method 
is based on the tetrad constraints (Silva et al. 2006) which can identify sets of four vari-
ables that are mutually d-separated by a common latent variable. After obtaining the upper 
bound, the conditional independence can be corrected based on the minimal and maxi-
mal partial correlation that lie within that bound. The measurement error upper bound was 

8794
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
wrongly computed in just three cases and could not be detected in 39 cases in 200 simula-
tion experiments.
Liu et al. (2020) studied the measurement error in discrete BNs and proposed a method 
called Spurious Edge Detection (SED) to remove spurious edges from the learned graph 
caused by measurement error. As illustrated in Fig. 19, conditional independence relation-
ships between error-free variables may not exist for measured variables in the presence 
of measurement error. Therefore, structure learning algorithms may learn spurious edges 
representing dependence relationships that do not exist in the true distribution. The SED 
algorithm firstly detects the candidate spurious edges that could form a 3-vertex clique, 
then assesses each candidate edge for removal based on an EM process. Their experimental 
results show that post-processing by the SED algorithm is able to generally improve the F1 
and SHD performance of four different structure learning algorithms (HC, GOBNILP, PC-
stable and H2PC) in the presence of measurement error.
6.4  Knowledge
The fusion of expert knowledge into the structure learning process provides a promising 
approach for improving performance and counteracting the effects of noise discussed in 
the previous two subsections. We discuss those approaches which seek to influence the 
learning process, known as soft constraints, and those which enforce requirements that 
the learnt structure must conform to, known as hard constraints. In both these cases, the 
knowledge is provided by experts to the algorithm before it starts the learning process. We 
also discuss active learning where the algorithm interacts with a human expert during the 
learning process.
6.4.1  Soft constraints
Bayesian objective functions (see Sect.  4.1.1) for score-based algorithms explicitly 
include terms for both the prior beliefs of the BN parameters and for a prior belief of 
each possible graph structure. These priors provide a Bayesian approach to incorporat-
ing expert knowledge into the learning process as a soft constraint. However, the vast 
numbers of possible graphs and resulting configurations of parameters make it impracti-
cable to specify priors for individual parameters or graphs. As discussed in Sect. 4.1.1, 
a standard conjugate prior (e.g. Dirichlet prior for discrete variables) is assumed for 
parameter priors, typically with a single hyperparameter value ESS. Likewise, it is not 
practical to provide a prior for each possible DAG, and therefore several approaches 
Fig. 19   Example of measurement 
error

8795
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
have been proposed where the human expert can provide priors on selected features, 
such as the presence or absence of a particular arc.
Castelo and Siebes (2000) provided a mechanism for an expert to assign a prior to 
the presence or absence of an arc between any number of pairs of variables. The remain-
ing priors for the pair are assigned uniformly. For example, if an expert specifies a prior 
of 0.8 for arc A →B , then arc B →A and no arc between A and B are both assigned a 
prior of 0.1. This scheme defines priors over the space of directed graphs that allow 
cycles. This represents a bigger space than DAG space, and so the approach redistrib-
utes probability mass from cyclic graphs to DAGs to correct for this. The approach 
was validated by showing that these priors could recover the true graph from synthetic 
noisy data. Eggeling et al. (2019) evaluate more general structure priors which influence 
the overall characteristics of the learnt graph. This includes priors which are uniform 
across all DAGs, those which model each edge as having a defined uniform probability 
of existing, a prior which balances the probabilities for nodes with different in-degrees, 
and one which limits the maximum in-degree. The authors evaluate these priors with 
the GOBNILP algorithm for moderately sized networks, and Tabu for larger networks. 
The results show that priors which favour sparser graphs produce more accurate graphs 
especially at low sample sizes.
As well as constraints on particular arcs, it also possible to place constraints on the node 
ordering within the learnt structure. We have already encountered algorithms such as K2 
(in Sect. 3.2.1) where an ordering of all the nodes is specified. It is also possible to spec-
ify ordering constraints on a partial set of variables referred to as ancestral constraints, 
or since they are often derived from considerations of time and causality, temporal con-
straints. For example, Borboudakis and Tsamardinos (2013) allowed experts to specify a 
probability distribution over the possible ancestral relationships between a pair of variables 
( A is an ancestor or parent of B , B is an ancestor or parent of A , they have a common ances-
tor or parent, or they have no ancestral relationship). They combined the resulting joint 
prior probability distribution of ancestral relationships with an approximation of the num-
ber of DAGs consistent with each configuration of ancestral relationships to define a prior 
on DAGs. The authors incorporated this prior into a standard hill-climbing algorithm (see 
Sect. 3.2.1) and also augmented the standard add/remove/reverse arc operations with a new 
swap-equivalent operator which swaps the current DAG for one in the same equivalence 
class with the highest ancestral prior. Experiments showed that modest amounts of prior 
ancestral knowledge, involving 12 out of 37 nodes, and using the new swap-equivalent 
operator could reduce the SHD error by around 15 to 20%.
Amirkhani et al. (2016) modified the objective function to include an explicit extra 
component representing the opinion of several, possibly conflicting, expert views on the 
presence and direction of arcs. The accuracy of each expert can also be specified. An 
Expectation–Maximisation variant of hill-climbing is described with the Expectation 
step adding, removing or reversing an arc to increase the score as usual, and the Maxi-
misation step modifying the expert accuracy parameters to maximise the score of the 
current graph. The approach is evaluated using three synthetic sets of experts with their 
opinions generated from ground-truth graphs with three levels of accuracy: weak, medi-
ocre and good. Using the ‘good standard’, experts halved SHD on the Alarm network 
(Beinlich et al. 1989) commonly used in evaluations, although improvement was limited 
when the weak set of experts were used.
Specification of the initial graph used in score-based algorithms can also be considered 
a form of soft-constraint since it may well influence the final learnt graph whilst not rep-
resenting a hard constraint. Surprisingly, there seems to have been relatively little research 

8796
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
undertaken into the influence of the initial graph in general, though Constantinou et al. 
(2021a) do investigate it. This is despite several hybrid algorithms using one algorithm 
to create a good starting point for a subsequent algorithm. Examples of such algorithms 
include SaiyanH and GSPo described in Sects. 4.2.1 and 4.2.2, respectively.
6.4.2  Hard constraints
Early work with hard constraints involved specifying features (arcs or edges) that were 
either required or prohibited in the learnt graph, or specifying a topological ordering that 
the learnt graph must be consistent with. De Campos and Castellano (2007) modified the 
score-based hill-climbing algorithm and the constraint-based PC algorithm to produce 
graphs consistent with hard constraints. Simulations involved specifying between 10 and 
40% of possible required or prohibited features. In general, increasing the number of con-
straints improved all structural accuracies in graphs learnt by the modified hill-climbing 
algorithm. However, increasing the number of constraints, whilst improving most struc-
tural metrics, sometimes increased the number of extraneous arcs in the learnt graph with 
the PC algorithm. It was suggested this may have been because more constraints led to less 
CI tests being performed and hence less arcs being removed.
The Branch & Bound algorithm (de Campos et al. 2009) discussed in Sect. 4.2.1 sup-
ports hard constraints to represent expert knowledge. These include specifying arcs which 
must appear in the result, and ones which are prohibited, as well as being able to limit the 
number of parents on an individual node basis. More unusually, it also supports parameter 
constraints which place restrictions on how parental values influence child values. These 
restrictions affect structural learning by changing the best scores achievable by different 
sets of parents.
More recent work has supported ancestral relationships as hard constraints. Borbouda-
kis and Tsamardinos (2012) apply ancestral constraints to PDAGs and PAGs produced by, 
for example, the PC and FCI algorithms respectively. They developed a set of algorithms 
which can determine variant endpoints in PDAGs and PAGs, or identify when the ances-
tral constraints are not consistent with the learnt graph. They found that even small num-
bers (around 10) of ancestral constraints can orientate around 30% of variant endpoints. 
This orientation effect is generally larger in PDAGs than PAGs, since constraints propagate 
more in the absence of confounding variables.
Li and van Beek (2018) described the MINOBSx algorithm which supports arc and 
edge, as well as ancestral, constraints which they claimed to be the first approximate 
score-based algorithm to do so. It is based on the approximate MINOBS algorithm which 
searches in ordering-based space (see Sect. 4.2.3). They modified the parent set pruning 
rules and the approach used to determine a high-scoring DAG for each order, in order to 
take account of ancestral constraints. Li and van Beek (2018) compared MINOBSx with 
a MCMC approach which also supports constraints called CaMML (Korb and Nicholson 
2011), when learning well-known BNs of up to 48 variables. Li and van Beek (2018) found 
MINOBSx to be more robust than CaMML as it was always able to satisfy all the knowl-
edge constraints specified. They noted that ancestral constraints reduced the number of arcs 
erroneously missing or mis-orientated in the learnt graph. However, ancestral constraints 
tended to encourage additional extraneous edges in the learnt graph. Ancestral constraints 
were more effective than simple arc/edge constraints in obtaining correct causal paths as 
measured by the SID metric (discussed in Sect. 6.1).

8797
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Chen et al. (2016b) applied ancestral constraints to their exact score-based algorithm 
which searches an EC Tree (Chen et al. 2016a) described in Sect. 4.3.3. To do so, they 
pruned CPDAGs prohibited by the ancestral constraints from the EC Tree and converted 
ancestral constraints into decomposable edge constraints which can then be used by the 
A* search heuristic. They found that their constrained A* search was typically orders of 
magnitude faster than the GOBNILP integer linear programming approach described in 
subsection (Sect. 4.3.2), when it applied the same ancestral constraints to sub-graphs of 
well-known BNs with up to 20 variables.
Wang et al. (2021) have also implemented ancestral constraints in an exact score-based 
algorithm named ACOG from the space it searches, the Ancestral Constraint Order-
ing Graph (ACOG). The ACOG space is a modified version of the order graph shown in 
Sect. 4.3.1, but where nodes in the graph have multiple DAGs associated with them to 
account for the effect of ancestral constraints, and pruning is applied using a novel revenue 
function that accounts for the ancestral constraints.
Constantinou et al. (2021a) provided a review of the effect of different forms of soft 
and hard constraint knowledge on the graphs learnt by Hill climbing, Tabu and SaiyanH 
algorithms. They found that specifying required arcs had the greatest effect followed by 
specifying an initial graph with edges in common with the true graph. Conversely, prohib-
iting arcs seemed to have little effect. This may be because graphs tend to have many more 
edges absent than edges present, and this reduces the impact of prohibiting, compared to 
enforcing, a given number of edges.
6.4.3  Active learning
Active learning identifies relationships between the variables which the algorithm finds dif-
ficult to adjudicate on the basis of the data alone, and so where it may be advantageous to 
ask for human input during the learning process. This may require less human input than 
the normal approach of inputting expert knowledge before the algorithm begins, since it 
avoids supplying knowledge which merely duplicates something that the data also clearly 
implies.
Active learning was applied to an MCMC algorithm by Cano et  al. (2011). They 
assumed a node ordering was known, and used a MCMC approach to generate a prob-
ability distribution over all possible parent sets for each variable. The algorithm asks the 
human expert to specify whether arcs having a probability close to 0.5 actually existed or 
not in their opinion. Two variations were explored, one where the expert was consulted 
after the MCMC learning algorithm had completed, and another where the expert was con-
sulted during the MCMC learning process. Simulations were conducted on standard BNs 
containing between 23 and 56 variables with sample sizes N = {50, 100, 500, 1000} . Cano 
et al. (2011) found that expert specification of uncertain edges improved structural accu-
racy metrics, and to a lesser extent but perhaps more surprisingly, improved data fitting. 
The algorithm identified relatively few edges as uncertain, so that typically between 10 and 
16 queries were directed at the expert after processing was completed with N = 50 , and 
around 5 with N = 1, 000 . In these cases, expert specification of uncertain edges reduced 
SHD by around a quarter. Interacting with the expert during the MCMC learning process 
made similar structural improvements, but required fewer judgements from the expert.
Masegosa and Moral (2013) proposed a new hybrid restrict/maximise algorithm 
designed to support active learning which has three phases. The first phase constructs a 
probability distribution of plausible skeletons built from Markov Blankets, and the second 

8798
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
phase builds a distribution of plausible DAGs using hill-climbing constrained by sampling 
from the first phase skeletons according to the relative probability of each skeleton. The 
distribution of plausible DAGs is improved in a third phase of unconstrained hill-climb-
ing. A human expert can be asked about the existence of variables in Markov Blankets, 
or edges during hill-climbing if the algorithm judges that the answer would provide an 
information gain above a specified threshold. Masegosa and Moral (2013) evaluated their 
approach on standard networks with the number of variables varied between 23 and 56 and 
sample size N = {100, 500, 1000, 5000} . SHD improved by around 10% when knowledge 
was used. The number of queries asked of the expert ranged from 13 to 15 with N = 100 , 
to 1–4 with N = 5000 . Results were slightly better if knowledge was requested in both the 
Markov Blanket and DAG learning phases rather than just in the DAG learning phases.
6.5  Structure learning software packages and datasets
This subsection lists some of the open-source software packages that are freely available 
for BN structure learning and datasets which are often used to evaluate structure learning 
algorithms. The lists are not meant to be exhaustive but focus on the algorithms described 
in this paper, and datasets commonly used to evaluate them.
Table 7 provides details of some software packages that may be of interest and which 
provide algorithms described in this paper. The location where the software can currently 
be found is included in the references section at the end of this paper. Only the algorithms 
described in this paper are included, but note that these packages may include other algo-
rithms. The programming language is given as this may be relevant for readers wishing to 
invoke them from their own software or learn the details of the algorithm from the program 
code. Note that we only list the ‘primary’ programming language, but some packages may 
provide ‘wrappers’ allowing easy access from other languages. Moreover, lower-level func-
tions that need to be very performant are often written in languages such as C or C++.
Table  8 lists some repositories of networks and datasets commonly used to evaluate 
structure learning algorithms. Perhaps the most common evaluation approach is to gener-
ate synthetic data from a known BN, attempt to learn the DAG from that data, and then 
compare the learnt DAG with the DAG used to generate the data. This approach is appro-
priate for the entries in Table 8 where reference graphs are available. Another approach to 
obtaining a reference graph is to generate random graphs, for example Erdos-Rényi graphs 
(Erdos and Rényi 1960) or scale-free networks (Barabási and Albert 1999), typically with 
some specified characteristic such as expected node degree. An alternative to generating 
a dataset from a reference graph is to learn from a ‘real-world’ dataset where the underly-
ing reference graph is unknown. In that case, the learnt graph is typically evaluated using 
model selection functions that take into consideration both data fitting and model dimen-
sionality; for example, the BIC score. Another possibility when there is no reference graph 
available, is to compare the predictive abilities with other machine learning approaches.
6.6  Guidelines on choosing and using structure learning algorithms
This subsection is aimed mostly at practitioners who want to learn the structure of BNs but 
are not necessarily familiar with the mechanics of learning algorithms. Thus, this section 
focuses on the capabilities of the algorithms available in the packages listed in Table 7, 
which tend to be well-maintained and documented. In our view, there is little consensus 

8799
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
in the literature on what might be the best algorithm in any particular context, so the 
focus here is on providing some guidelines to choosing and using algorithms, rather than 
attempting to provide a definitive guide. Note that some of the content in this subsection 
depends upon what software packages currently provide and is subject to change.
One factor which might affect algorithm choice is the data types of the variables. Fig-
ure 20 shows whether the algorithms offered by the software in Table 7 support continu-
ous or discrete variables or both. Note that whether a particular algorithm supports a var-
iable type is often not a fundamental property of the algorithm, but rather whether the 
software implementation supports CI tests or scores that support that variable type. We 
classify algorithms that support both continuous and discrete variables in three categories 
of increasing flexibility. Firstly, those algorithm implementations that support continuous 
or discrete variables, but not both in the same network, are shown in the lightest green 
area in Fig. 20. Secondly, those algorithm implementations that support mixtures of con-
tinuous and discrete variables in the same network, but with the restriction that continuous 
variables cannot be parents of discrete variables. This kind of restricted mixed network in 
known as a Conditional Linear Gaussian network, and the algorithms which support it are 
shown in the mid-green area in the figure. Most flexibly of all, there are algorithms which 
support mixtures without that restriction. To our knowledge, only the Tetrad package offers 
this for some of its algorithms through the use of the Conditional Gaussian (Andrews 
et al. 2018) and Degenerate Gaussian (Andrews et al. 2019) scores or CI likelihood tests 
(Andrews et al. 2018).
With score-based approaches a further choice is whether to opt for an approximate or 
exact algorithm. Exact algorithms can be feasible up to around one hundred variables and 
would therefore seem to be preferred in low to medium dimensional settings. However, 
they may not offer improved accuracy where latent confounders, selection bias or meas-
urement error is present, a finding supported by some of the results in Constantinou et al. 
(2021b). It is also often necessary to place a limit on in-degree for exact algorithms to be 
tractable, and this may not be appropriate where dense or scale-free graphs are expected.
Another consideration is whether the system may have latent confounders or selection 
variables present. The Tetrad software package focuses on this area and provides the FCI, 
CGCI, RFCI and FCI-Max algorithms that account for latent confounders and selection 
variables. FCI+ provided by the Pcalg software supports latent confounders too. Despite 
the theoretical advantages of these algorithms in causally insufficient settings, the study 
by Constantinou et al. (2021b) found that algorithms which did not account for latent con-
founders fared as well as those which did in simulated settings with latent confounders.
Another decision point is whether to choose an algorithm which returns a single 
graph, usually referred to as model selection, or one which returns multiple graphs. Even 
where the algorithm produces a single graph this generally represents multiple DAGs (or 
MAGs) when they are learning from observational data. This is explicit for constraint-
based approaches which return a CPDAG (or PAG). However, most hybrid or score-based 
approaches return a DAG, but since they invariably use equivalent scores, this graph might 
be best regarded as an example from the equivalence class. We note that even in caus-
ally sufficient settings, interpretation of CPDAGs may be problematic as many constraint-
based algorithms mark arcs as ambiguous if they encounter conflicts in the orientation 
phase, for example. Interpretation of PAGs is rather more difficult given that edge types 
can have several meanings. Generally speaking, causal inference applications (Noguiera 
et al. 2022) require a BN model with a well-defined DAG to be able to do causal inference. 
Incorporation of human knowledge either before the learning process, during the learn-
ing process (active learning) or by orientating undirected edges in the CPDAG can help 

8800
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Table 7   Open-source software providing algorithms described in this paper
Name
Reference
Algorithms
Description or focus
Programming language
BayesSuite
Michiels et al. (2021)
Constraint: PC, GS, IAMB, Fast-IAMB and 
Inter-IAMB, MMPC
Score: HC, Tabu, Hiton-PC, FGES-Merge
Hybrid: MMHC
Includes visualisation and inference capabili-
ties. Focussed on massive BNs particularly in 
neuroscience
Javascript and Python
Bayesys
Constantinou (2019b)
Score: HC, Tabu, MAHC
Hybrid: SaiyanH
Averaging version of score-based algorithms 
and incorporation of prior knowledge
Java
BiDAG
Suter et al. (2021)
Score: Order-MCMC, Partition-MCMC
Hybrid: Hybrid MCMC (Kuipers et al. (2022)
MCMC algorithms for sampling and learning 
the MAP DAG especially in large networks
R
Bnlearn
Scutari (2010)
Constraint: PC-Stable, GS, IAMB, Fast-IAMB, 
Inter-IAMB, MMPC, HITON-PC
Score: HC, Tabu
Hybrid: MMHC, H2PC
Well-established package often used as bench-
mark algorithms
R
Bnstruct
Franzin et al. (2017)
Constraint: MMPC
Score: HC, Dynamic Programming
Hybrid: MMHC
Package focuses on handling missing data 
including missing data imputation
R
CausalExplorer
Aliferis et al. (2003a, b)
Constraint: GS, IAMB, Inter-IAMB, TPDA, 
MMPC, MMMB, HITON, SI-HITON-PC, 
PC
Local and global constraint-based algorithms 
with a focus on bioinformatics
Matlab
Gobnilp
Cussens (2020)
Score: GOBNILP
Often used as benchmark exact score-based 
algorithm
C or Python
Pcalg
Kalisch et al. (2012)
Constraint: PC, CPC, PC-Stable, FCI, CFCI, 
FCI-Stable, RFCI, FCI+
Score: GES, GIES
Hybrid: ARGES
Includes algorithms which support latent vari-
ables and interventional data
R
Tetrad
(including causal-learn)
Ramsey et al. (2018)
Constraint: FCI, FCI-MAX, PC, PC-Stable, 
PC-MAX, CPC, RFCI
Score: GES, FGES, A*, DP
Hybrid: GFCI, RFCI-BSC
Large range of constraint-based algorithms 
including supporting latent variables and 
time-series
Java (or Python)

8801
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Table 8   Repositories of networks and datasets commonly used to evaluate structure learning algorithms
Name
Reference
Variable Types
Number 
of net-
works
Number of variables Reference 
graphs avail-
able
Notes
Bayesys
Constantinou et al. (2020)
Discrete
7
8–109
Yes
Includes datasets with synthetic noise
Bnlearn
Scutari (2021)
Continuous, discrete and mixed 27
5–1041
Yes
Contains networks most often used in BNSL
DREAM5 Marbach et al. (2012)
Continuous
4
1643–5667
Yes
Real gene regulatory data often used in high-
dimensional BNSL
UCI ML
Dua and Graff (2019)
Continuous, discrete and mixed 622
3–3,231,961
No
Real-world datasets used across machine 
learning
DEBD
Van Haaren and Davis (2012) Binary
20
16–1556
No
Real-world datasets originally collected for 
Markov Network learning

8802
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
towards obtaining a DAG for inference purposes. Inclusion of interventional data is another 
approach which can help orientate arcs, and we note that GIES (Hauser and Bühlmann 
2012) is provided in the Tetrad package.
In some cases, a practitioner’s aim may be to identify the major causal effects rather 
than try to learn a complete causal graph. Here, approaches such as those provided by 
the BiDAG package which produce a sample of the most probable graphs may be use-
ful. Model averaging over the sample graphs allow the most probable examples of features 
such as arcs or Markov Blankets to be identified. The approach can also be useful in under-
standing the uncertainty associated with particular graphs or features.
One of the most common and perhaps most robust method for evaluating the result of 
a learning algorithm is to compare the learnt graph structurally with the true causal graph. 
However, this is generally only possible in simulation studies, as a reference causal struc-
ture is not usually available in practical problems. If a reference graph is not available, 
then one may perform sensitivity studies to gain some understanding of the confidence one 
might have in the result. These can examine the sensitivity of the results to the choice of 
algorithm, score or CI test, and hyperparameters. Recent work by Kitson and Constantinou 
(2022) find that some competitive algorithms such as Tabu and MMHC are sensitive to the 
order of columns in the dataset and therefore this might also warrant investigation. Using 
a bootstrapping approach whereby graphs are learnt from sub-samples of the data can also 
cast light on the reliability of the result and provide some indication of whether the sample 
size is adequate.
To conclude, we note that no structure learning algorithm is perfect and that the litera-
ture is quite inconsistent about which algorithms are the most accurate. We note that algo-
rithm ranking is probably quite sensitive to the metrics used, and the scale and nature of 
the system being modelled. In these circumstances we recommend using a range of suita-
ble algorithms where possible, and considering model averaging across algorithms to iden-
tify those features which are most reliably identified. Finally, we note that the involvement 
of a domain expert to input some constraints into the learning process or review the learnt 
graphs is liable to be beneficial.
Fig. 20   Supported variable types for algorithms in open-source software. Note that where an algorithm is 
implemented by more than one package, we show the package with the most flexible variable type support. 
(Color figure online)

8803
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
7  Concluding remarks
Causal discovery is fundamental to understanding our world and predicting the effects 
of our interventions in it. BNs are an important tool for modelling causal relationships 
between variables, and hence inferring the effects of our interventions. This paper aims to 
provide a comprehensive review of the algorithms used to learn the graphical structures of 
BNs from data, and the ways in which knowledge can be incorporated into that process. 
We acknowledge that this is a large and rapidly advancing field but aim to have described 
the major developments over the past 30 years, many of which are still relevant today. Cur-
rent state-of-the-art and pioneering algorithms are also described.
We begin with a brief introduction to Bayesian Networks including the concepts of 
DAGs, conditional independence, causal classes, equivalence classes and graphical separa-
tion. This aims to be a succinct but accessible introduction for someone relatively new to 
the field. The bulk of the paper then describes structure learning algorithms broken down 
into the standard categories of score-based, constraint-based and hybrid algorithms. For 
each algorithm covered, we present detail for the reader to understand the basic principles 
that the algorithm employs, and the assumptions it makes. The review is relatively compre-
hensive and covers 24 constraint-based, 22 score-based and 15 hybrid learning algorithm. 
Our goal is to highlight the similarities and differences between algorithms and, to that 
end, we use a consistent set of terms and emphasise the evolution of the algorithms and the 
relationships between them.
Constraint-based algorithms use CI tests to learn the structure, and we describe these 
tests next. Constraint-based algorithms that assume causal sufficiency are then covered, 
categorised into global algorithms that learn the graph skeleton as a whole, and local algo-
rithms that learn the skeleton around each variable and then merge them. The end of this 
section covers algorithms which do not assume causal sufficiency and the ancestral graphs 
needed to represent the relationships between observed variables in that context. Score-
based algorithms follow a more traditional machine learning route of assigning a score 
to each graph and exploring possible graphs to find a high, or ideally, the highest, scor-
ing graph. The relevant section describes common choices for the scoring function before 
discussing exact algorithms which guarantee to return the highest scoring graph for the 
training dataset, and approximate algorithms which do not offer this guarantee. Sampling 
algorithms which provide a sample of the higher scoring graphs are also covered under 
approximate algorithms. We highlight the commonalities across score-based algorithms by 
grouping them according to the type of search space they explore. We then discuss hybrid 
algorithms which combine constraint-based and score-based approaches. The most com-
mon hybrid approach is to use a “restrict” constraint-based phase to define a reduced search 
space for the subsequent score-based “maximise” phase to explore. These are described in 
the first subsection. A second subsection describes other ways in which score-based and 
constraint-based approaches are combined. As with score-based algorithms, the search 
space employed is used as a way of categorising hybrid algorithms.
Our final substantive section discusses practical considerations when applying and 
evaluating the learning performance of these algorithms. We discuss the metrics used 
to evaluate structure learning, both in terms of graphical discovery and inference, 
and review the accuracy and runtime performance of algorithms by examining recent 
papers that focus on large scale comparative analyses. This provides an indication of 
the increasing scale of problems that can be tackled by the various algorithms and 
highlights inconsistencies within the literature about which algorithms might be ‘best’ 

8804
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
for a given problem. Whilst papers proposing new algorithms generally include simu-
lations demonstrating superior performance to previous algorithms, generally of the 
same type, we note that early approaches such as hill-climbing, GES and PC remain 
competitive in many comparative reviews.
We note that whilst many algorithms offer theoretical guarantees of accuracy such 
as asymptotically correct behaviour, these guarantees generally rely on unrealistic 
assumptions about the input data. We note that some or all of these assumptions are 
generally made for algorithms of all classes: exact and approximate score-based, con-
straint-based and hybrid ones. The quality of the learnt graphs is dependent on many 
complex interacting factors including the algorithm chosen, score or CI test employed, 
hyperparameter values, data size and quality, and the underlying graph. We note, too, 
that different evaluation metrics can paint different pictures about the superiority of 
one algorithm over another. This all makes algorithm comparisons rather problem-
atic. Much of the evaluation of the algorithms is performed using synthetic graphs, 
and even more so, with synthetically generated clean data. Constantinou et al. (2021b) 
found that forms of noise likely to be found in real world data can have a consider-
able impact on learning performance. These forms of noise included latent variables, 
missing data, and measurement or discretisation error. Hence, we include a section on 
modifications that can be made to algorithms to account for various forms of noise.
Given the huge diversity of algorithms and factors affecting their performance, 
incorporating expert knowledge into the learning process may be helpful in many situ-
ations and hence, we conclude by reviewing approaches for doing this. The relevant 
subsection discusses hard constraints where expert knowledge is used to restrict the 
graphs which the algorithm can consider, as well as soft constraints which less rigidly 
influence the learning process. Approaches to active learning, whereby the algorithm 
itself identifies which knowledge would be most beneficial, are also discussed.
In conclusion, BN structure learning has become a vibrant research area. However, 
several key open questions remain, amongst which we would highlight:
•	 a huge diversity of structure learning approaches with little consensus on the most 
appropriate algorithm in any given real-world context;
•	 an absence of real-world datasets with accompanying causal graphs validated by 
experts, or ideally randomised controlled trials or experiments;
•	 a need to identify the best ways of incorporating knowledge and interventional data 
into the learning process;
•	 many confounding factors making algorithmic comparisons difficult, including 
sample size, distributional assumptions, faithfulness, linearity, choice of score or 
CI/test, hyperparameter values, data dimensionality, data noise, and the evaluation 
metrics.

8805
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Appendix
A: glossary of symbols
Symbol
Meaning
⟂
Independent of, e.g. A ⟂B means “ A is independent of B”
̸⟂
Not independent of, e.g. A  ⟂B means “ A is not independent of B”
Given or conditional on, e.g. A|B means “ A conditional on (or given) B”
\
Substract from set. e.g. X{A, B} means set X with elements A and B removed
⊂
Is a strict subset of, e.g. S ⊂X means that all the elements of S are in X , and X contains 
one or more elements not in S
⊆
Is a subset of, e.g. S ⊆X means that all the elements of S are in X , but X may be the same 
as S
B
A Bayesian Network
G
A graph, typically the DAG in a Bayesian Network
횯
The set of parameters defining the strength of the relationships between variables
F
The number of free parameters in the Bayesian Network, that is, in |횯|
n
Number of nodes (vertices) in the DAG
|Gn|
Number of possible different graphs containing n nodes
X
Set of nodes in a DAG, X = {X1, X2, … , Xn} representing the variables being modelled
Xi, A, B, etc
An individual node in the Bayesian Network’s DAG representing a variable
xi, a, b
The value of the variable Xi, A, B respectively
P(X)
The joint probability distribution over the variables represented by the nodes
E
Set of edges in a graph
|E|
Number of edges in the graph
|M|
Number of missing (absent) edges, that is, the number of edges in the complete graph 
minus |E|
S
Set of nodes in a separating set,S = {s1, … , sq}
Pa(Xi)
The set of nodes that are direct parents of node Xi
De(Xi)
The set of nodes that are descendants of node Xi
MB(T)
The Markov Blanket of node T
PC(T)
The parents and children of node T
D
Dataset from which the graph will be learnt
dm
Individual data instance (i.e. row or case) within the dataset
N
Number of data instances (cases) in the data set,D
훼
Significance level used in Conditional Independence tests
휖
Threshold level used in Mutual Information tests
df
Degrees of freedom used in statistical tests
i
Index over nodes in the DAG,i = 1..n
ri
Number of different values (states) at node (variable)Xi
k
Index over possible values at a node, k = 1..ri at node Xi
qi
Number of unique combinations of values of the parents 휋i of node Xi
j
Index over combinations of parental values, j = 1..qi at node Xi

8806
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Symbol
Meaning
Nijk
Number of data instances with kth value, and jth combination of parental values at node 
Xi in data set D
휃ijk
The conditional probability of node Xi having value xk conditional on the parents of Xi 
having the jth combination of parental values
N
′, N
′
ijk, 휃′
ijk
As N, Nijk, 휃ijk but applying to a prior belief of the parameters
휌ab
Partial correlation between values a and b
TP, FP, TN, FN
True positive, false positive, true negative and false negative metrics
P
Precision metric
R
Recall metric
G2
The G-squared test statistic
휒2
The Chi-squared test statistic
MI(A, B)
The mutual information between random variables A and B
휁r
N
The stochastic complexity of N values of a discrete variable with r states
Acknowledgements  This research was funded by the EPSRC Fellowship project EP/S001646/1 on Bayes-
ian Artificial Intelligence for Decision Making under Uncertainty, and by the Alan Turing Institute in the 
UK under the EPSRC Grant EP/N510129/1, and by the Royal Thai Government Scholarship offered by 
Thailand’s Office of Civil Service Commission (OCSC).
Data availability  Data sharing not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during 
the current study.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Achterberg T, Berthold T, Koch T, Wolter K.  C (2008) Constraint integer programming: A new approach to 
integrate CP and MIP. In: International Conference on Integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Operations Research (OR) Techniques in Constraint Programming, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  pp 
6–20
Akaike H (1974) A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE Trans Autom Control 
19(6):716–723
Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov A (2003a) HITON: a novel Markov Blanket algorithm for optimal 
variable selection. In: AMIA annual symposium proceedings, vol. 2003a. American Medical Infor-
matics Association, p 21
Aliferis CF, Tsamardinos I, Statnikov AR, Brown LE (2003b) Causal explorer: a causal probabilistic net-
work learning toolkit for biomedical discovery. In: METMBS, vol 3, pp 371–376
Aliferis CF, Statnikov A, Tsamardinos I, Mani S, Koutsoukos XD (2010) Local causal and markov blanket 
induction for causal discovery and feature selection for classification part i: algorithms and empirical 
evaluation. J Mach Learn Res 11(1):171–234
Amirkhani H, Rahmati M, Lucas PJ, Hommersom A (2016) Exploiting experts’ knowledge for structure 
learning of Bayesian networks. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 39(11):2154–2170
Anderson TW (1962) An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis (No. 519.9 A53). Wiley, New York

8807
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Andersson SA, Madigan D, Perlman MD (1997) A characterization of Markov equivalence classes for acy-
clic digraphs. Ann Stat 25:505–541
Andrews B, Ramsey J, Cooper GF (2018) Scoring Bayesian networks of mixed variables. Int J Data Sci 
Anal 6(1):3–18
Andrews B, Ramsey J, Cooper GF (2019) Learning high-dimensional directed acyclic graphs with mixed 
data-types. In: The 2019 ACM SIGKDD workshop on causal discovery, PMLR, pp 4–21
Barabási AL, Albert R (1999) Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286(5439):509–512
Bartlett M, Cussens J (2017) Integer linear programming for the Bayesian network structure learning prob-
lem. Artif Intell 244:258–271
Behjati S, Beigy H (2020) Improved K2 algorithm for Bayesian network structure learning. Eng Appl Artif 
Intell 91:103617
Beinlich IA, Suermondt HJ, Chavez RM, Cooper GF (1989) The ALARM monitoring system: a case study 
with two probabilistic inference techniques for belief networks. In: AIME 89. Springer, Berlin, pp 
247–256
Bernaola N, Michiels M, Larrañaga P, Bielza C (2020) Learning massive interpretable gene regulatory net-
works of the human brain by merging Bayesian Networks. bioRxiv. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1101/​2020.​02.​
05.​935007
Bernstein D, Saeed B, Squires C, Uhler C (2020) Ordering-based causal structure learning in the presence 
of latent variables. In: International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, PMLR, pp 
4098–4108
Blom T, Klimovskaia A, Magliacane S, Mooij JM (2018) An upper bound for random measurement error in 
causal discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:​1810.​07973
Borboudakis G, Tsamardinos I (2012) Incorporating causal prior knowledge as path-constraints in Bayes-
ian networks and maximal ancestral graphs. In: Proceedings of the 29th international conference on 
machine learning, pp 427–434
Borboudakis G, Tsamardinos I (2013) Scoring and searching over Bayesian networks with causal and asso-
ciative priors. In: Proceedings of the twenty-ninth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 
pp 102–111
Bouckaert R (1994) Properties of Bayesian belief network learning algorithms. In: Proceedings of 10thcon-
ference on uncertainty intelligence, pp 102–109
Bouchaert R (1995) Bayesian belief networks: from construction to inference. Ph.D thesis, University of 
Utrecht
Buntine W (1991) Theory refinement on Bayesian networks. In: Proceedings of the 7th conference on 
uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 52–60
Cai B, Huang L, Xie M (2017) Bayesian networks in fault diagnosis. IEEE Trans Industr Inf 
13(5):2227–2240
Cano A, Masegosa AR, Moral S (2011) A method for integrating expert knowledge when learning Bayesian 
networks from data. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern B 41(5):1382–1394
Castelo R, Siebes A (2000) Priors on network structures. Biasing the search for Bayesian networks. Int J 
Approx Reason 24(1):39–57
Chen Y, Tian J (2014) Finding the k-best equivalence classes of Bayesian network structures for model aver-
aging. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol 28, no. 1
Chen EYJ, Choi AC, Darwiche A (2016a) Enumerating equivalence classes of Bayesian networks using EC 
graphs. In: Artificial intelligence and statistics, PMLR, pp 591–599
Chen EYJ, Shen Y, Choi A, Darwiche A (2016b) Learning Bayesian networks with ancestral constraints. 
Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 29:2325–2333
Cheng J, Bell DA, Liu W (1997) Learning belief networks from data: an information theory based approach. 
In: Proceedings of the sixth international conference on Information and knowledge management, pp 
325–331
Cheng J, Greiner R (1999) Comparing Bayesian network classifiers. In: Proceedings of the fifteenth confer-
ence on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., pp 101–108
Cheng J, Greiner R, Kelly J, Bell D, Liu W (2002) Learning Bayesian networks from data: An information-
theory based approach. Artif Intell 137(1–2):43–90
Chickering D (2002) Learning equivalence classes of Bayesian-network structures. J Mach Learn Res 
2:445–498
Chickering DM, Meek C (2002) Finding optimal Bayesian networks. In: Proceedings of the eighteenth con-
ference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 94–102
Chickering DM, Geiger D, Heckerman D (1994) Learning Bayesian networks is NP-hard, Technical Report 
MSR-TR-94-17, Microsoft Research, vol 196

8808
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Chickering DM, Heckerman D, Meek C (2004) Large-sample learning of Bayesian networks is NP-hard. J 
Mach Learn Res 5:1287–1330
Chobtham K, Constantinou AC (2020) Bayesian network structure learning with causal effects in the pres-
ence of latent variables. In: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on probabilistic graphi-
cal models, in proceedings of machine learning research, vol 138, pp 101–112
Chobtham K, Constantinou AC, Kitson NK (2022) Hybrid Bayesian network discovery with latent variables 
by scoring multiple interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:​2112.​10574
Claassen T, Heskes T (2012) A Bayesian approach to constraint based causal inference. In: Proceedings 
of the twenty-eighth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 207–216
Claassen T, Mooij JM, Heskes T (2013) Learning sparse causal models is not NP-hard. In: Proceedings 
of the twenty-ninth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 172–181
Colombo D, Maathuis MH (2014) Order-independent constraint-based causal structure learning. J Mach 
Learn Res 15(1):3741–3782
Colombo D, Maathuis MH, Kalisch M, Richardson TS (2012) Learning high-dimensional directed acy-
clic graphs with latent and selection variables. Ann Stat 40:294–321
Constantinou A (2019a) Evaluating structure learning algorithms with a balanced scoring function. 
arXiv:​1905.​12666 [cs.LG]
Constantinou A (2019b) The Bayesys user manual. Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. 
Software http://​bayes​ian-​ai.​eecs.​qmul.​ac.​uk/​bayes​ys/
Constantinou A (2020) Learning Bayesian Networks that enable full propagation of evidence. IEEE 
Access 8:124845–123856
Constantinou AC, Liu Y, Chobtham K, Guo Z, Kitson NK (2020) The Bayesys data and Bayesian net-
work repository. Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. http://​bayes​ian-​ai.​eecs.​qmul.​ac.​
uk/​bayes​ys/
Constantinou AC, Guo Z, Kitson NK (2021a) The impact of prior knowledge on causal structure learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:​2102.​00473
Constantinou AC, Liu Y, Chobtham K, Guo Z, Kitson NK (2021b) Large-scale empirical valida-
tion of Bayesian Network structure learning algorithms with noisy data. Int J Approx Reason 
131:151–188
Constantinou AC, Liu Y, Kitson NK, Chobtham K, Guo Z (2022) Effective and efficient structure learn-
ing with pruning and model averaging strategies. Int J Approx Reason 151:292–321
Cooper G, Herskovits E (1992) A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic networks from 
data. Mach Learn 9:309–347
Cooper GF, Yoo C (1999) Causal discovery from a mixture of experimental and observational data. In: 
Proceedings of the fifteenth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 116–125
Correia AHC, de Campos CP, van der Gaag LC (2019) An experimental study of prior dependence 
in Bayesian network structure learning. In: International symposium on imprecise probabilities: 
theories and applications, pp 78–81
Correia AHC, Cussens J, de Campos CP (2020) On pruning for score-based Bayesian network structure 
learning. In: International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, pp 2709–2718
Cussens J (2011) Bayesian network learning with cutting planes. In: Proceedings of the 27th conference 
on uncertainty in artificial intelligence (UAI 2011), AUAI Press, pp 153–160
Cussens J (2012) An upper bound for bdeu local scores. In: Proceedings of 20th European conference on 
artificial intelligence, workshop of algorithmnic issues for inference in graphical models, IOS Press.
Cussens J (2020) GOBNILP: learning Bayesian network structure with integer programming. In: Inter-
national conference on probabilistic graphical models, PMLR. pp 605–608. https://​bitbu​cket.​org/​
james​cusse​ns/​gobni​lp/
Dantzig G (2016) Linear programming and extensions. Princeton University Press, Princeton
Darwiche A (2009) Modeling and reasoning with Bayesian networks. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge
de Campos L (2006) A scoring function for learning Bayesian networks based on mutual information 
and conditional independence tests. J Mach Learn Res 7:2149–2187
de Campos LM, Castellano JG (2007) Bayesian network learning algorithms using structural restric-
tions. Int J Approx Reason 45(2):233–254
de Campos CP, Ji Q (2010) Properties of Bayesian Dirichlet scores to learn Bayesian network structures. 
In: Twenty-fourth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence
de Campos LM, Puerta JM, (2001) Stochastic local and distributed search algorithms for learning belief 
networks. In: Proceedings of the III international symposium on adaptive systems: evolutionary 
computation and probabilistic graphical model, pp 109–115

8809
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
de Campos LM, Fernandez-Luna JM, Gámez JA, Puerta JM (2002) Ant colony optimization for learning 
Bayesian networks. Int J Approx Reason 31(3):291–311
de Campos CP, Zeng Z, Ji Q (2009) Structure learning of Bayesian networks using constraints. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp 113–120
de Campos CP, Scanagatta M, Corani G, Zaffalon M (2018) Entropy-based pruning for learning Bayes-
ian networks using BIC. Artif Intell 260:42–50
de la Fuente A, Bing N, Hoeschele I, Mendes P (2004) Discovery of meaningful associations in genomic 
data using partial correlation coefficients. Bioinformatics 20(18):3565–3574
de Jongh M, Druzdzel MJ (2009) A comparison of structural distance measures for causal Bayesian network 
models. In: Klopotek M, Przepiorkowski A, Wierzchon ST, Trojanowski K (eds) Recent advances in 
intelligent information systems, challenging problems of science, computer science series. Academic 
Publishing House EXIT, Cambridge, pp 443–456
Dua D, Graff C (2019) UCI machine learning repository [http://​archi​ve.​ics.​uci.​edu/​ml]. University of Cali-
fornia, School of Information and Computer Science, Irvine
Eaton D, Murphy K (2007) Bayesian structure learning using dynamic programming and MCMC. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 23rd conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 101–108
Eggeling R, Viinikka J, Vuoksenmaa A, Koivisto M (2019) On structure priors for learning Bayesian 
networks. In: The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, PMLR, pp 
1687–1695
Erdos P, Rényi A (1960) On the evolution of random graphs. Publ Math Inst Hung Acad Sci 5(1):17–60
Fawcett T (2004) ROC graphs: notes and practical considerations for researchers. Mach Learn 31(1):1–38
Franzin A, Sambo F, Di Camillo B (2017) bnstruct: an R package for Bayesian Network structure learning 
in the presence of missing data. Bioinformatics 33(8):1250–1252
Friedman N (1997) Learning belief networks in the presence of missing values and hidden variables. In: 
ICML, vol 97, pp 125–133
Friedman N, Koller D (2003) Being Bayesian about network structure. A Bayesian approach to structure 
discovery in Bayesian networks. Mach Learn 50(1–2):95–125
Friedman N, Nachman I, Peér D (1999) Learning Bayesian network structure from massive datasets: the 
"sparse candidate" algorithm. In: Proceedings of the fifteenth conference on uncertainty in artificial 
intelligence, pp. 206–215
Gain A, Shpitser I (2018) Structure learning under missing data. In: International conference on probabilis-
tic graphical models, PMLR, pp 121–132
Gasse M, Aussem A, Elghazel H (2014) A hybrid algorithm for Bayesian network structure learning with 
application to multi-label learning. Expert Syst Appl 41(15):6755–6772
Geiger D, Heckerman D (1994) Learning gaussian networks. In: Uncertainty proceedings 1994, Morgan 
Kaufmann, pp 235–243
Geiger D, Heckerman D (2002) Parameter priors for directed acyclic graphical models and the characteriza-
tion of several probability distributions. Ann Stat 30(5):1412–1440
Gillispie SB, Perlman MD (2002) The size distribution for Markov equivalence classes of acyclic digraph 
models. Artif Intell 141(1–2):137–155
Glymour C, Zhang K, Spirtes P (2019) Review of causal discovery methods based on graphical models. 
Front Genet 10:524
Goudie R, Mukherjee S (2016) A Gibbs sampler for learning DAGs. J Mach Learn Res 17:1–39
Gretton A, Spirtes P, Tillman R (2009) Nonlinear directed acyclic structure learning with weakly additive 
noise models. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 22:1847–1855
Grzegorczyk M, Husmeier D (2008) Improving the structure MCMC sampler for Bayesian networks by 
introducing a new edge reversal move. Mach Learn 71:265–305
Guo Z, Constantinou AC (2020) Approximate learning of high dimensional Bayesian network structures via 
pruning of candidate parent sets. Entropy 22(10):1142
Hauser A, Bühlmann P (2012) Characterization and greedy learning of interventional Markov equivalence 
classes of directed acyclic graphs. J Mach Learn Res 13(1):2409–2464
Heckerman D, Geiger D, Chickering D (1995) Learning Bayesian networks: the combination of knowledge 
and statistical data. Mach Learn 20:197–243
Heckerman D, Meek C, Cooper G (1997) A Bayesian approach to causal discovery. Technical report MSR-
TR-97-5, Microsoft Research
Horvitz DG, Thompson DJ (1952) A generalization of sampling without replacement from a finite universe. 
J Am Stat Assoc 47(260):663–685
Hoyer P, Janzing D, Mooij JM, Peters J, Schölkopf B (2008a) Nonlinear causal discovery with additive 
noise models. In: Advances in neural information processing systems, p 21

8810
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Hoyer PO, Shimizu S, Kerminen AJ, Palviainen M (2008b) Estimation of causal effects using linear non-
Gaussian causal models with hidden variables. Int J Approx Reason 49(2):362–378
Hyttinen A, Eberhardt F, Järvisalo M (2014) Constraint-based causal discovery: conflict resolution with 
answer set programming. In: UAI, pp 340–349
Hyvärinen A, Oja E (2000) Independent component analysis: algorithms and applications. Neural Netw 
13(4–5):411–430
Imoto S, Higuchi T, Goto T, Tashiro K, Kuhara S, Miyano S (2004) Combining microarrays and bio-
logical knowledge for estimating gene networks via Bayesian networks. J Bioinform Comput Biol 
2(01):77–98
Jaakkola T, Sontag D, Globerson A, Meila M (2010) Learning Bayesian network structure using LP relaxa-
tions. In: Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, 
pp 358–365
Jabbari F, Ramsey J, Spirtes P, Cooper G (2017) Discovery of causal models that contain latent variables 
through Bayesian scoring of independence constraints. Joint European conference on machine learn-
ing and knowledge discovery in databases. Springer, Cham, pp 142–157
Jennings D, Corcoran J (2018) A birth and death process for Bayesian network structure inference. Probab 
Eng Inf Sci 32:615–625
Ji J, Wei H, Liu C (2013) An artificial bee colony algorithm for learning Bayesian networks. Soft Comput 
17(6):983–994
Kalisch M, Bühlman P (2007) Estimating high-dimensional directed acyclic graphs with the PC-algorithm. 
J Mach Learn Res 8(3)
Kalisch M, Mächler M, Colombo D, Maathuis MH, Bühlmann P (2012) Causal inference using graphical 
models with the R package pcalg. J Stat Softw 47(11):1–26
Kitson NK, Constantinou A (2021) Learning Bayesian networks from demographic and health survey data. 
J Biomed Inform 113:103588
Kitson NK, Constantinou AC (2022) The impact of variable ordering on Bayesian Network Structure Learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:​2206.​08952
Koivisto M, Sood K (2004) Exact Bayesian structure discovery in Bayesian networks. J Mach Learn Res 
5:549–573
Koller D, Friedman N (2009) Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT Press, 
Cambridge
Kontkanen P, Myllymäki P (2007) A linear-time algorithm for computing the multinomial stochastic com-
plexity. Inf Process Lett 103(6):227–233
Korb K, Nicholson A (2011) Bayesian artificial intelligence, 2nd edn. CRC Press, London
Kuipers J, Moffa G (2017) Partition MCMC for inference on acyclic digraphs. J Am Stat Assoc 
112(517):282–299
Kuipers J, Moffa G, Heckerman D (2014) Addendum on the scoring of Gaussian directed acyclic graphical 
models. Ann Stat 42(4):1689–1691
Kuipers J, Suter P, Moffa G (2022) Efficient sampling and structure learning of Bayesian networks. J Com-
put Graph Stat 31:639–650
Larranaga P, Kuijpers CM, Murga RH, Yurramendi Y (1996a) Learning Bayesian network struc-
tures by searching for the best ordering with genetic algorithms. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern A 
26(4):487–493
Larranaga P, Poza M, Yurramendi Y, Murga RH, Kuijpers CMH (1996b) Structure learning of Bayesian 
networks by genetic algorithms: A performance analysis of control parameters. IEEE Trans Pattern 
Anal Mach Intell 18(9):912–926
Lee JD, Hastie TJ (2015) Learning the structure of mixed graphical models. J Comput Graph Stat 
24(1):230–253
Lee C, van Beek P (2017) Metaheuristics for score-and-search Bayesian network structure learning. In: 
Canadian conference on artificial intelligence. Springer, Cham, pp 129–141
Li A, van Beek P (2018) Bayesian network structure learning with side constraints. In: International confer-
ence on probabilistic graphical models, pp 225–236
Liao ZA, Sharma C, Cussens J, van Beek P (2019) Finding all Bayesian network structures within a factor 
of optimal. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol 33, pp 7892–7899
Liu Y, Constantinou AC (2022) Greedy structure learning from data that contain systematic missing values. 
Mach Learn 111(10):3867–3896
Liu Z, Malone B, Yuan C (2012) Empirical evaluation of scoring functions for Bayesian network model 
selection. BMC Bioinform 13:1–16
Liu Y, Constantinou AC, Guo Z (2020) Improving Bayesian network structure learning in the presence of 
measurement error. arXiv preprint arXiv:​2011.​09776

8811
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Madigan D, York J, Allard D (1995) Bayesian graphical models for discrete data. In: International statistical 
review/revue internationale de statistique, 1995 Aug 1 pp 215–232
Madigan D, Andersson SA, Perlman MD, Volinsky CT (1996) Bayesian model averaging and model 
selection for Markov equivalence classes of acyclic digraphs. Commun Stat-Theory Methods 
25(11):2493–2519
Malone BM, Järvisalo M, Myllymäki P (2015) Impact of learning strategies on the quality of Bayesian net-
works: an empirical evaluation. In: UAI, pp 562–571
Marbach D, Costello JC, Küffner R, Vega NM, Prill RJ, Camacho DM, Allison KR, Kellis M, Col-
lins JJ, Stolovitzky G (2012) Wisdom of crowds for robust gene network inference. Nat methods. 
9(8):796–804
Marella D, Vicard P (2022) Bayesian network structural learning from complex survey data: a resampling 
based approach. Stat Methods Appl. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10260-​021-​00618-x
Margaritis D (2003) Learning Bayesian network model structure from data (no. CMU-CS-03-153). Carne-
gie-Mellon Univ Pittsburgh Pa School of Computer Science
Margaritis D, Thrun S (1999) Bayesian network induction via local neighborhoods. In: Proceedings of the 
12th international conference on neural information processing systems, pp 505–511
Masegosa AR, Moral S (2013) An interactive approach for Bayesian network learning using domain/expert 
knowledge. Int J Approx Reason 54(8):1168–1181
Meek C (1995) Causal inference and causal explanation with background knowledge. In: Proceedings of the 
11th UAI conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 403–410
Michiels M, Larranaga P, Bielza C (2021) BayeSuites: an open web framework for massive Bayesian net-
works focused on neuroscience. Neurocomputing 428:166–181
Moffa G, Catone G, Kuipers J, Kuipers E, Freeman D, Marwaha S, Lennox BR, Broome MR, Bebbington P 
(2017) Using directed acyclic graphs in epidemiological research in psychosis: an analysis of the role 
of bullying in psychosis. Schizophr Bull 43(6):1273–1279
Moraffah R, Karami M, Guo R, Raglin A, Liu H (2020) Causal interpretability for machine learning-prob-
lems, methods and evaluation. ACM SIGKDD Explor Newsl 22(1):18–33
Nandy P, Hauser A, Maathuis MH (2018) High-dimensional consistency in score-based and hybrid struc-
ture learning. Ann Stat 46(6A):3151–3183
Niinimäki T, Parviainen P, Koivisto M (2011) Partial order MCMC for structure discovery in Bayesian 
networks. In: Proceedings of the twenty-seventh conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 
pp 557–564
Nogueira AR, Pugnana A, Ruggieri S, Pedreschi D, Gama J (2022) Methods and tools for causal discovery 
and causal inference. Wiley Interdiscip Rev: Data Min Knowl Discov 12(2):e1449
Ogarrio JM, Spirtes P, Ramsey J (2016) A hybrid causal search algorithm for latent variable models. In: 
Conference on probabilistic graphical models, pp 368–379
Ott S, Imoto S, Miyano S (2003) Finding optimal models for small gene networks. In: Biocomputing 2004, 
pp 557–567
Pearl J (1985) Bayesian networks: a model of self-activated memory for evidential reasoning. In: Proceed-
ings of the 7th conference of the cognitive science society, pp 329–334
Pearl J (1988) Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kauf-
mann, Burlington
Pearl J, Mackenzie D (2018) The book of why: the new science of cause and effect. Basic books, New York
Pensar J, Talvitie T, Hyttinen A, Koivisto M (2020) A Bayesian approach for estimating causal effects from 
observational data. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol 34, No. 04, 
pp 5395–5402
Perrier E, Imoto S, Miyano S (2008) Finding optimal Bayesian network given a super-structure. J Mach 
Learn Res 9:2251–2286
Peters J, Buhlmann P (2015) Structural intervention distance (SID) for evaluating causal graphs. Neural 
Comput 27(3):771–799
Raghu VK, Ramsey JD, Morris A, Manatakis DV, Sprites P, Chrysanthis PK, Glymour C, Benos PV (2018) 
Comparison of strategies for scalable causal discovery of latent variable models from mixed data. Int 
J Data Sci Anal 6(1):33–45
Ramsey J (2016) Improving accuracy and scalability of the pc algorithm by maximizing p-value. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:​1610.​00378
Ramsey JD, Andrews B (2017) A comparison of public causal search packages on linear, gaussian data with 
no latent variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:​1709.​04240
Ramsey J, Spirtes P, Zhang J (2006) Adjacency-faithfulness and conservative causal inference. In: Proceed-
ings of the twenty-second conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 401–408

8812
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Ramsey J, Glymour M, Sanchez-Romero R, Glymour C (2017) A million variables and more: the fast 
greedy equivalence search algorithm for learning high-dimensional graphical causal models, with an 
application to functional magnetic resonance images. Int J Data Sci Anal 3(2):121–129
Ramsey JD, Zhang K, Glymour M, Romero RS, Huang B, Ebert-Uphoff I, Samarasinghe S, Barnes EA, 
Glymour C (2018) TETRAD—a toolbox for causal discovery. In: 8th international workshop on cli-
mate informatics
Raskutti G, Uhler C (2013) Learning directed acyclic graphs based on sparsest permutations. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:​1307.​0366
Raskutti G, Uhler C (2018) Learning directed acyclic graph models based on sparsest permutations. Stat 
7(1):e183
Richardson TS (2009) A factorization criterion for acyclic directed mixed graphs. In: Proceedings of the 
twenty-fifth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 462–470
Richardson T, Spirtes P (2002) Ancestral graph Markov models. Ann Stat 30(4):962–1030
Rissanen J (1996) Fisher information and stochastic complexity. IEEE Trans Inf Theory 42(1):40–47
Robinson RW (1973) Counting labeled acyclic digraphs. In: Harary F (ed) New directions in the theory of 
graphs. Academic Press, Cambridge, pp 239–273
Rubin DB (1976) Inference and missing data. Biometrika 63(3):581–592
Sachs K, Perez O, Pe’er D, Lauffenburger DA, Nolan GP (2005) Causal protein-signaling networks derived 
from multiparameter single-cell data. Science 308(5721):523–529
Scanagatta M, de Campos CP, Corani G, Zaffalon M (2015) Learning Bayesian networks with thousands of 
variables. In: Advances in neural information processing systems, pp 1864–1872
Scanagatta M, Corani G, Zaffalon M (2017) Improved local search in Bayesian networks structure learning. 
In: Advanced methodologies for Bayesian networks, pp 45–56
Scheines R, Ramsey J (2016) Measurement error and causal discovery. In: CEUR workshop proceedings, 
NIH Public Access, vol 1792, p 1
Scutari M (2010) Learning Bayesian networks with the bnlearn R Package. J Stat Softw 35:1–22
Scutari M (2016) An empirical-Bayes score for discrete Bayesian networks. In: Conference on probabilistic 
graphical models, pp 438–448
Scutari M (2021) Bayesian network repository. https://​www.​bnlea​rn.​com/​bnrep​osito​ry/
Scutari M, Graafland CE, Gutiérrez JM (2019a) Who learns better Bayesian network structures: accuracy 
and speed of structure learning algorithms. Int J Approx Reason 115:235–253
Scutari M, Vitolo C, Tucker A (2019b) Learning Bayesian networks from big data with greedy search: com-
putational complexity and efficient implementation. Stat Comput 29(5):1095–1108
Sesen MB, Nicholson AE, Banares-Alcantara R, Kadir T, Brady M (2013) Bayesian networks for clinical 
decision support in lung cancer care. PLoS ONE 8(12):e82349
Shimizu S, Hoyer PO, Hyvärinen A, Kerminen A (2006) A linear non-Gaussian acyclic model for causal 
discovery. J Mach Learn Res 7:2003–2030
Silander T, Myllymaki P (2006) A simple approach for finding the globally optimal Bayesian network struc-
ture. In: Proceedings of the 22nd conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 445–452
Silander T, Roos T, Kontkanen P, Myllymaki P (2008) Factorized normalized maximum likelihood criterion 
for learning Bayesian network structures. In: Proceedings of the 4th European workshop on probabil-
istic graphical models, pp 257–264
Silander T, Roos T, Myllymaki P (2010) Learning locally minimax optimal Bayesian networks. Int J Approx 
Reason 51:544–557
Silander T, Leppa-aho J, Jaasaari E, Roos T (2018) Quotient normalized maximum likelihood criterion for 
learning Bayesian network structures. In: Proceedings of the 21st international conference on artificial 
intelligence and statistics, pp 948–957
Silva R, Scheines R, Glymour C, Spirtes P, Chickering DM (2006) Learning the structure of linear latent 
variable models. J Mach Learn Res 7(2):191–246
Singh A, Moore A (2005) Finding optimal Bayesian networks by dynamic programming. Technical report 
CMU-CALD-05-106, Carnegie Mellon University
Singh M, Valtorta M (1993) An algorithm for the construction of Bayesian network structures from data. In: 
Uncertainty in artificial intelligence. Morgan Kaufmann, Burlington, pp 259–265
Singh K, Gupta G, Tewari V, Shroff G (2017) Comparative benchmarking of causal discovery techniques. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:​1708.​06246
Solus L, Wang Y, Uhler C (2017) Consistency guarantees for greedy permutation-based causal inference 
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:​1702.​03530
Sorensson N, Een N (2005) Minisat v1. 13-a sat solver with conflict-clause minimization. SAT 2005(53):1–2
Spirtes P, Glymour C (1991) An algorithm for fast recovery of sparse causal graphs. Soc Sci Comput Rev 
9(1):62–72

8813
A survey of Bayesian Network structure learning﻿	
1 3
Spirtes P, Zhang J (2014) A uniformly consistent estimator of causal effects under the k-triangle-faithfulness 
assumption. Stat Sci 29(4):662–678
Spirtes P, Glymour C, Scheines R (1990) Causality from probability. In: Conference proceedings: advanced 
computing for the social sciences, Williamsburgh
Spirtes P, Glymour C, Scheines R (1993) Causation, prediction, and search, 1st edn. Springer, New York
Spirtes P, Meek C, Richardson T (1995) Causal inference in the presence of latent variables and selection 
bias. In: Proceedings of the eleventh conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 499–506
Spirtes P, Glymour C, Scheines R (2000) Causation, prediction, and search, 2nd edn. The MIT Press, 
Cambridge
Steck H, Jaakkola TS (2002) On the dirichlet prior and Bayesian regularization. In: Proceedings of the 15th 
international conference on neural information processing systems, pp 713–720
Strobl EV, Visweswaran S, Spirtes PL (2018) Fast causal inference with non-random missingness by test-
wise deletion. Int J Data Sci Anal 6(1):47–62
Suter P, Kuipers J, Moffa G, Beerenwinkel N (2021) Bayesian structure learning and sampling of Bayesian 
networks with the R package BiDAG. arXiv preprint arXiv:​2105.​00488. https://​CRAN.R-​proje​ct.​org/​
packa​ge=​BiDAG
Suzuki J (1993) A construction of Bayesian networks from databases based on an MDL principle. In: Pro-
ceedings of the ninth international conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 266–273
Suzuki J (1999) Learning Bayesian belief networks based on the minimum description length principle: 
basic properties. IEICE Trans Fundam Electron Commun Comput Sci 82(10):2237–2245
Suzuki J (2017) An efficient Bayesian network structure learning strategy. N Gener Comput 35(1):105–124
Tan X, Gao X, Wang Z, Han H, Liu X, Chen D (2022) Learning the structure of Bayesian networks with 
ancestral and/or heuristic partition. Inf Sci 584:719–751
Teyssier M, Koller D (2005) Ordering-based search: a simple and effective algorithm for learning Bayesian 
networks. In: Proceedings of the 21st conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 584–590
Tian J, He R (2009) Computing posterior probabilities of structural features in Bayesian networks. In: Pro-
ceedings of the twenty-fifth conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 538–547
Triantafillou S, Tsamardinos I (2015) Constraint-based causal discovery from multiple interventions over 
overlapping variable sets. J Mach Learn Res 16(1):2147–2205
Triantafillou S, Tsamardinos I (2016) Score-based vs constraint-based causal learning in the presence of 
confounders. In: CFA@ UAI, pp 59–67
Trösser F, de Givry S, Katsirelos G (2021) Improved acyclicity reasoning for bayesian network structure 
learning with constraint programming. In: 30th international joint conference on artificial intelligence 
(IJCAI-21)
Tsamardinos I, Aliferis CF, Statnikov A (2003) Time and sample efficient discovery of Markov blankets 
and direct causal relations. In: Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international conference on 
Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 673–678
Tsamardinos I, Brown LE, Aliferis CF (2006) The max-min hill-climbing Bayesian network structure learn-
ing algorithm. Mach Learn 65(1):31–78
Tsirlis K, Lagani V, Triantafillou S, Tsamardinos I (2018) On scoring maximal ancestral graphs with the 
max–min hill climbing algorithm. Int J Approx Reason 102:74–85
Tu R, Zhang C, Ackermann P, Mohan K, Kjellstrom H, Zhang K (2019) Causal discovery in the presence 
of missing data. In: The 22nd international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics, PMLR, 
pp 1762–1770
Ueno M (2010) Learning networks determined by the ratio of prior and data. In: Proceedings of the ­26th 
conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, pp 598–605
Van Beek P, Hoffmann HF (2015) Machine learning of Bayesian networks using constraint programming. 
In: Proceedings of the international conference on principles and practice of constraint programming, 
pp 429–445
Van Haaren J, Davis J (2012) Markov network structure learning: a randomized feature generation approach. 
In: Twenty-sixth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence
Verma T, Pearl J (1990) Equivalence and synthesis of causal models. In: Proceedings of the sixth annual 
conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence, Elsevier Science Inc, pp 255–270
Viinikka J, Hyttinen A, Pensar J, Koivisto M (2020) Towards scalable bayesian learning of causal dags. Adv 
Neural Inf Process Syst 33:6584–6594
Vitolo C, Scutari M, Ghalaieny M, Tucker A, Russell A (2018) Modeling air pollution, climate, and health 
data using Bayesian Networks: a case study of the English regions. Earth and Space Sci 5(4):76–88
Vowels MJ, Camgoz NC, Bowden R (2021) D’ya like DAGs? A survey on structure learning and causal 
discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:​2103.​02582

8814
	
N. K. Kitson et al.
1 3
Wang Z, Gao X, Yang Y, Tan X, Chen D (2021) Learning Bayesian networks based on order graph with 
ancestral constraints. Knowl-Based Syst 211:106515
Wong ML, Leung KS (2004) An efficient data mining method for learning Bayesian networks using an evo-
lutionary algorithm-based hybrid approach. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 8(4):378–404
Yang J, Li L, Wang A (2011) A partial correlation-based Bayesian network structure learning algorithm 
under linear SEM. Knowl-Based Syst 24(7):963–976
Yang C, Ji J, Liu J, Liu J, Yin B (2016) Structural learning of Bayesian networks by bacterial foraging opti-
mization. Int J Approx Reason 69:147–167
Yaramakala S, Margaritis D (2005) Speculative Markov blanket discovery for optimal feature selection. In: 
Fifth IEEE international conference on data mining (ICDM’05). IEEE, p 4
Yehezkel R, Lerner B (2009) Bayesian network structure learning by recursive autonomy identification. J 
Mach Learn Res 10(7):1527–1570
Yuan C, Malone B, Wu X (2011) Learning optimal Bayesian networks using A* search. In: Twenty-second 
international joint conference on artificial intelligence
Zanga A, Ozkirimli E, Stella F (2022) A survey on causal discovery: theory and practice. Int J Approx Rea-
son 151:101–129
Zhang J (2008a) Causal reasoning with ancestral graphs. J Mach Learn Res 9:1437–1474
Zhang J (2008b) On the completeness of orientation rules for causal discovery in the presence of latent con-
founders and selection bias. Artif Intell 172(16–17):1873–1896
Zhang K, Hyvärinen A (2009) On the identifiability of the post-nonlinear causal model. In: 25th conference 
on uncertainty in artificial intelligence (UAI 2009, AUAI Press, pp. 647–655
Zhang J, Spirtes P (2008) Detection of unfaithfulness and robust causal inference. Mind Mach 
18(2):239–271
Zhang K, Gong M, Ramsey J, Batmanghelich K, Spirtes P, Glymour C (2018) Causal discovery with lin-
ear non-gaussian models under measurement error: structural identifiability results. In: UAI, pp 
1063–1072
Zhao J, Ho SS (2019) Improving Bayesian network local structure learning via data-driven symmetry cor-
rection methods. Int J Approx Reason 107:101–121
Zheng X, Aragam B, Ravikumar PK, Xing EP (2018) DAGs with NO TEARS: continuous optimization for 
structure learning. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 31:9472–9483
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.