Evaluating the Effectiveness of Large Language
Models in Representing Textual Descriptions of
Geometry and Spatial Relations
Yuhan Ji #
GeoDS Lab, Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA
Song Gao #
GeoDS Lab, Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA
Abstract
This research focuses on assessing the ability of large language models (LLMs) in representing
geometries and their spatial relations. We utilize LLMs including GPT-2 and BERT to encode the
well-known text (WKT) format of geometries and then feed their embeddings into classifiers and
regressors to evaluate the effectiveness of the LLMs-generated embeddings for geometric attributes.
The experiments demonstrate that while the LLMs-generated embeddings can preserve geometry
types and capture some spatial relations (up to 73% accuracy), challenges remain in estimating
numeric values and retrieving spatially related objects.
This research highlights the need for
improvement in terms of capturing the nuances and complexities of the underlying geospatial data
and integrating domain knowledge to support various GeoAI applications using foundation models.
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computing methodologies →Artificial intelligence
Keywords and phrases LLMs, foundation models, GeoAI
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.GIScience.2023.43
Category Short Paper
Funding The authors would like to acknowledge the support from the H.I. Romnes Fellowship,
National Science Foundation (No. 2112606) and Arity.
1
Introduction
Deep learning methods have exhibited great performance to tackle many challenging tasks
in geographical sciences [16, 9]. However, the models often depend on handcrafted features
for specific downstream tasks, thus being hard to be generalized into different tasks. The
emergence of representation learning largely mitigated the issue by decomposing the learning
process into two steps (task-agnostic data representation and downstream task) [1]. Therefore,
an effective location-based representation should preserve key spatial information (e.g.,
distance, direction, and spatial relations) and make classifiers or other predictors easy to
extract useful knowledge [13]. In geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI) research, although
the geospatial data are usually well-formatted and can be readily understood by GIS software,
not all of them can be directly integrated into a deep learning model.
The success of ChatGPT has been a milestone that attracts the general public’s attention
to Large Language Models (LLMs).
With tons of parameters trained on a large text
corpus, LLMs have learned profound knowledge across many domains. Other well-known
LLMs include the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) [5],
the Generative Pre-trained Transformer (GPT) series [14, 2], etc. Despite the differences
in network architectures, these LLMs can achieve state-of-the-art performance on natural
language processing (NLP) benchmarks. Consequently, researchers have begun the early
exploration of integrating LLMs into GIS research, such as geospatial semantic tasks [12] and
© Yuhan Ji and Song Gao;
licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
12th International Conference on Geographic Information Science (GIScience 2023).
Editors: Roger Beecham, Jed A. Long, Dianna Smith, Qunshan Zhao, and Sarah Wise; Article No. 43; pp. 43:1–43:6
Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

43:2
Evaluating the Effectiveness of LLMs in Spatial Representations
automating spatial analysis workflows [11]. These studies have demonstrated the ability of
LLMs to understand and reason about geospatial phenomena from a semantic perspective as
learned from human discourse or formalized programming instructions. In contrast, accurate
geometries and spatial relations in GIS are not necessarily expressed in natural languages.
Therefore, it can be challenging for LLMs to reconstruct the physical world solely from the
textual description of these building blocks, which is the motivation of this research.
In GIScience, spatial relations refer to the connection between spatial objects regarding
their geometric properties [8] , which play an important role in spatial query, reasoning
and question-answering. Using natural language to describe spatial relations is essential for
humans to perceive our surroundings and navigate through space. Attempts have been made
to formalize the conversion between quantitative models and qualitative human discourse
[4]. For topological spatial relations, the RCC-8 (region connection calculus [15]) and the
Dimensionally Extended 9-intersection (DE-9IM) model [6] are widely used. Based on the
DE-9IM model, five predicates are named by [3] for complex geometries, including crosses,
disjoint, touches, overlaps, within. On top of them, the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC)
further added the predicates equals, contains, intersects for computation convenience. In
addition, predicates can also be used to describe the distance or direction between a subject
and an object. Fuzzy logic can also be adopted to convert precise metrics into narrative
predicates such as near and far [18].
However, there remains a gap between the contextual semantics of predicates in everyday
language and the abovementioned formalization procedures, yielding disagreement and
vagueness in the understanding. It is yet to be determined whether the LLMs can fully
capture how people describe spatial objects with predicates in natural language. If so, how
we can leverage such knowledge to represent geospatial contexts with LLMs.
2
Methodology
2.1
Workflow
This research focuses on assessing the ability of LLMs in representing geometries and their
spatial relations through a set of downstream tasks. Figure 1 illustrates the workflow we
employed, which consists of three primary modules. The first module utilizes a GIS tool to
extract the attributes, such as geometry type, centroid, and area, of individual geometries
and their spatial relations, including predicates and distances between pairs of geometries.
The second module applies LLMs to encode the well-known text (WKT) format of geometries,
e.g., LINESTRING (30 10, 10 30, 40 40), which includes the geometry type and the ordered
coordinates whereas the map projection is not considered in this work. Finally, the obtained
embeddings from LLMs, along with the ground-truth attributes or spatial relations, are fed
into classifiers or regressors to evaluate the effectiveness of the LLMs-based embeddings.
2.2
Notation
The notations used in this paper are listed in Table 1.
2.3
Evaluation Tasks
The downstream tasks are designed for deriving the geometric attributes or identifying
spatial relations, as described in Table 2. The targets of Tasks 1-5 are straightforward, that
is, to train a neural network classification/regression model that can best approximate the
ground-truth values computed from a GIS tool. All of these tasks use a Multilayer Perceptron

Y. Ji and S. Gao
43:3
Figure 1 The evaluation workflow of this research.
Table 1 Notations.
Notation
Description
g
A geometry instance (e.g. Point, LineString, and Polygon) that can be
processed in GIS tools
WKT(g)
The WKT format of g
Enc(g)
The location encoding of g using a LLM model to encode WKT(g)
Type(g)
The geometry type of g
Centroid(g)
The centroid of g
Area(g)
The area of g
rel
A predicate that can be used to represent the spatial relation, which is one
of {equals, disjoint, intersects, crosses, touches, contains, within, overlaps},
as defined by OGC and implemented in GeoPandas.
Rel(gi, gj)
The spatial relation between the subject gi and the object gj
Dist(gi, gj)
The minimum euclidean distance between two objects gi and gj
[Enc(gi); Enc(gj)]
The concatenation of the embeddings of gi and gj
Enc(rel, g)
The embedding of the short phrase rel + WKT(g). For example, “within
Polygon ((0 0, 0 1, 1 1, 1 0, 0 0))”
(MLP) as the classifier or regressor. Task 6 aims to investigate whether a geometry gi can
be predicted based on its neighbor gj and their spatial relation Rel(gi, gj). We employ the
nearest neighbor retrieval approach to evaluate whether LLMs have learned the meaning of
spatial predicates properly. During inference, given an object gj and a spatial relation rel,
we retrieve the top-k nearest neighbors of Enc(rel, gj) and examined whether they belong to
the set of subjects {gi|Rel(gi, gj) = rel}. This approach assesses the ability of the LLMs to
relate geographic objects through spatial predicates.
Table 2 Evaluation Tasks.
Task
Subtask
Model type
Input
Target
Geometric
attributes
T1: Geometry type
Classification
Enc(g)
Type(g)
T2: Area computation
Regression
Enc(g)
Area(g)
T3: Centroid derivation
Regression
Enc(g)
Centroid(g)
Spatial
relations
T4: Spatial predicate
Classification
[Enc(gi); En(gj)]
Rel(gi, gj)
T5: Distance measure
Regression
[Enc(gi); En(gj)]
Dist(gi, gj)
T6: Location prediction
Retrieval
Enc(rel, gj)
{gi|Rel(gi, gj) = rel}
GIScience 2023

43:4
Evaluating the Effectiveness of LLMs in Spatial Representations
3
Experiments
3.1
Dataset and Preprocessing
Since there is no available benchmark dataset, we constructed real-world multi-sourced
geospatial datasets for our case study in Madison, Wisconsin, United States. We downloaded
the OpenStreetMap road network data (including links and intersections) using OSMnx 1,
points of interest (POIs) categorized by SLIPO 2, and Microsoft Building Footprints 3. Our
evaluation tasks focus on the spatial objects with Point, LineString, and Polygon geometry
types and assessing their spatial relations, respectively. The datasets are created as follows.
1) For each geometry type, we randomly select 4,000 samples, including 2,000 road
intersections and 2,000 POIs for Point data, 4,000 road links for LineString data, and 4,000
building footprints for Polygon data. In total 12,000 samples are used for performing the
downstream tasks. The area and centroid of each polygon are also computed.
2) For the spatial predicate disjoint, we randomly generate pairs of geometries and check
whether their spatial relation is disjoint. For other predicates, we identify spatially related
objects using spatial join. Given each combination of subject/object geometry type and their
spatial predicate, we keep 400 triplets (subject, predicate, object) for each category for the
task of predicate prediction and distance measure. Then we compute the minimum distance
between the subjects and the objects.
3) We further construct data for the task of location prediction. In addition to the
subjects and objects that are spatially joined in step 2), we also relate neighboring disjoint
geometries using a buffer radius of 0.003°. The predicate of “disjoint” is replaced by “disjoint
but near”. For each predicate except disjoint, we select 200 objects of each geometry type
that are related to more than 5 subjects by the same predicate.
All the computations are performed by using the GeoPandas package in Python. We
consider the predicates of crosses, disjoint (but near), touches, overlaps, within, equals,
contains in this work but not intersects as it is the opposite of disjoint. The data for
downstream tasks are further split into 80% training, 5% validation, and 15% test sets.
3.2
Encoding
In this work, we perform the evaluation tasks based on two LLMs: GPT-2 and BERT. Due
to the computational and memory resources required to train and use the models, GPT-2
and BERT have a maximum input sequence length (i.e., 1024 and 512 tokens respectively).
Therefore, a sliding window approach is employed to tackle the issue as the WKT of LineString
and Polygon types can exceed the length limitation. The long input sequences are broken
down into smaller segments of 512 tokens with an overlap of 256 tokens between adjacent
segments. Each segment is processed by the LLMs separately. We then take the average of
the token embeddings to generate the final embedding for the whole sequence of geometries.
3.3
Training MLPs
As we hypothesize that the learned embeddings from LLMs can be effectively utilized in
downstream geometry-related tasks, we use a simple neural network architecture (i.e., MLP)
across all tasks. Specifically, the input layer of the MLP is the embedding layer generated
from LLMs, followed by a dropout layer for regularization purposes. Following the dropout
1 http://osmnx.readthedocs.io/
2 http://slipo.eu/
3 http://www.microsoft.com/maps/building-footprints

Y. Ji and S. Gao
43:5
layer is a single hidden layer, which employs the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation
function. Finally, the MLP is concluded with the output linear layer. The number of neurons
in the output layer varies depending on the specific task.
To facilitate the training process, we apply a logarithmic function to the target values
for the area computation and distance measure tasks. In the centroid derivation task, we
use the min-max normalization for the target values. The loss function combines the Mean
Squared Error (MSE) on both the transformed and original scales. However, for reporting
the performance, we only use the original scale of the target values.
3.4
Results
As shown in Table 3, the performance of the downstream tasks based on the embeddings
generated by GPT-2 and BERT are similar, which can be understood from the similarity in
their subword tokenization and transformer-based architecture.
Table 3 LLMs Performance Comparison.
Tasks
Metric
GPT-2
BERT
Validation
Test
Validation
Test
T1: Geometry type
Accuracy(%)
100
100
100
100
T2: Area computation
All geometries
MAPE(%)
13124
11700
12251
10850
Polygon only
45.1
44.1
40.7
41.9
T3: Centroid derivation
RMSE
0.037
0.037
0.029
0.029
T4: Spatial predicate
Without geometry type
Accuracy(%)
62.6
65.7
63.8
68.7
With geometry type
73.7
71.0
73.1
72.3
T5: Distance measure
Disjoint only
RMSE
0.064
0.063
0.057
0.075
T6: Location prediction
Precision@5
N/A
0.03
N/A
0.03
For T1-T3, the assessment is conducted on individual geometries. The 100% accuracy
achieved on both the validation and the test dataset of T1 is expected as the geometry type
are words that often occur in text documents. Considering the unit of degree in longitude and
latitude, significant errors (measured by Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) and Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE)) are observed in area and centroid computations, and increasing
or reducing the model complexity does not alleviate the issue, suggesting a potential loss of
information when averaging the token embeddings or fragmentation of coordinates during
tokenization. Training the regressor on all geometries for T2 does not successfully learn
that Point and LineString have an area of 0. Even when training the regressor on Polygon
separately, the results remain unsatisfactory. In T3, the centroids computed from the high-
dimensional embeddings often fall outside the study area. T4-T6 evaluates the embeddings’
ability to capture spatial relations. One interesting finding is that the spatial predicate can
be better predicted when combined with the geometry type, with accuracy increased from
62%∼68% to 71%∼73%. This can be attributed to the imbalanced spatial relations among
different combinations of geometry types. However, the distance measure task T5 still faces
challenges in accurately estimating numeric values even when restricted to the “disjoint”
relation only. The poor performance on T6 shows that even though the LLMs can encode
the spatial relations and geometries in a consistent way, generating embeddings using an
average approach alone is insufficient to support spatial reasoning and conduct geometric
manipulations directly. Therefore, a different design to enhance the function of localizing
spatial objects from textual descriptions [17] can improve the applications of LLMs in GeoAI.
Overall, the results indicate that the LLMs-generated embeddings have encoded the
geometry types and coordinates present in the WKT format of geometries. However, it should
be noted that the performance of the embeddings does not consistently meet expectations
across all evaluation tasks. While the LLMs-generated embeddings can preserve geometry
types and capture some spatial relations, challenges remain in estimating numeric values
GIScience 2023

43:6
Evaluating the Effectiveness of LLMs in Spatial Representations
and retrieving spatially related objects due to the loss of magnitude during tokenization
[7]. Despite the possibility of ameliorating the issue by modifying notations or applying
chain-of-thought prompting [10], this research highlights the need for improvement in terms
of capturing the nuances and complexities of the underlying geospatial data and integrating
domain knowledge to support various GeoAI applications using LLMs.
References
1
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review
and new perspectives.
IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
35(8):1798–1828, 2013.
2
Tom B. Brown et al. Language models are few-shot learners, 2020. arXiv:2005.14165.
3
Eliseo Clementini and Paolino Di Felice. A model for representing topological relationships
between complex geometric features in spatial databases. Information sciences, 90(1-4):121–136,
1996.
4
Anthony G Cohn and Shyamanta M. Hazarika. Qualitative spatial representation and reasoning:
An overview. Fundamenta informaticae, 46(1-2):1–29, 2001.
5
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805,
2018.
6
Max J Egenhofer. Reasoning about binary topological relations. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Symposium on Advances in Spatial Databases: SSD’91 Zurich, Switzerland, August 28–30,
pages 141–160. Springer, 1991.
7
Simon Frieder, Luca Pinchetti, Ryan-Rhys Griffiths, Tommaso Salvatori, Thomas Lukasiewicz,
Philipp Christian Petersen, Alexis Chevalier, and Julius Berner. Mathematical capabilities of
chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13867, 2023.
8
Renzhong Guo. Spatial objects and spatial relationships. Geo-spatial Information Science,
1(1):38–42, 1998.
9
Krzysztof Janowicz, Song Gao, Grant McKenzie, Yingjie Hu, and Budhendra Bhaduri. Geoai:
spatially explicit artificial intelligence techniques for geographic knowledge discovery and
beyond. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 34(4):625–636, 2020.
10
Guillaume Lample and François Charton. Deep learning for symbolic mathematics. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.01412, 2019.
11
Zhenlong Li and Huan Ning. Autonomous gis: the next-generation ai-powered gis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.06453, 2023.
12
Gengchen Mai, Weiming Huang, Jin Sun, Suhang Song, Deepak Mishra, Ninghao Liu, Song
Gao, Tianming Liu, Gao Cong, Yingjie Hu, et al. On the opportunities and challenges of
foundation models for geospatial artificial intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.06798, 2023.
13
Gengchen Mai, Krzysztof Janowicz, Yingjie Hu, Song Gao, Bo Yan, Rui Zhu, Ling Cai, and
Ni Lao. A review of location encoding for geoai: methods and applications. International
Journal of Geographical Information Science, 36(4):639–673, 2022.
14
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
15
David A Randell, Zhan Cui, and Anthony G Cohn. A spatial logic based on regions and
connection. KR, 92:165–176, 1992.
16
Markus Reichstein, Gustau Camps-Valls, Bjorn Stevens, Martin Jung, Joachim Denzler, and
Nuno Carvalhais. Deep learning and process understanding for data-driven earth system
science. Nature, 566(7743):195–204, 2019.
17
Maria Vasardani, Stephan Winter, and Kai-Florian Richter. Locating place names from place
descriptions. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 27(12):2509–2532,
2013.
18
Yang Wang, Huilin Peng, Yiwei Xiong, and Haitao Song. Spatial relationship recognition via
heterogeneous representation: A review. Neurocomputing, 2023.