A Multi-Modal Distributed Real-Time IoT System
for Urban Traffic Control
Zeba Khanam
BT Security Research, Adastral Park, UK
Vejey Pradeep Suresh Achari #
Keele University, Keele, UK
Issam Boukhennoufa #
University of Essex, Colchester, UK
Anish Jindal #
Durham University, Durham, UK
Amit Kumar Singh #
University of Essex, Colchester, UK
Abstract
Traffic congestion is one of the growing urban problem with associated problems like fuel wastage,
loss of lives, and slow productivity. The existing traffic system uses programming logic control (PLC)
with round-robin scheduling algorithm. Recent works have proposed IoT-based frameworks that use
traffic density of each lane to control traffic movement, but they suffer from low accuracy due to lack
of emergency vehicle image datasets for training deep neural networks. In this paper, we propose a
novel distributed IoT framework that is based on two observations. The first observation is major
structural changes to road are rare. This observation is exploited by proposing a novel two stage
vehicle detector that is able to achieve 77% vehicle detection accuracy on UA-DETRAC dataset.
The second observation is emergency vehicle have distinct siren sound that is detected using a novel
acoustic detection algorithm on an edge device. The proposed system is able to detect emergency
vehicles with an average accuracy of 99.4%.
2012 ACM Subject Classification Computer systems organization →Real-time system architecture
Keywords and phrases Vehicle Detection, Deep Neural Network, Traffic Control, Edge Computing,
Emergency Vehicle Detection, Sliding Window
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/OASIcs.NG-RES.2024.2
Category Invited Paper
1
Introduction
One of the major problems plaguing urban cities is traffic congestion. This problem stems
from lopsided growth in road infrastructure in comparison to traffic volume. The visible
devastating effects on travelers and urban cities in general are increased global carbon
footprint, low productivity, fuel wastage; resource depletion, loss of lives, and economic
downfall. To address this pressing issue, governments have invested heavily in infrastructure
upgradation with complex civil construction of bridges, roads, and new lanes addition.
However, this solution has further complicated the issue. Big cities like London that have
been implementing this solution are currently reeling under issues like urban sprawl, pollution,
and stalling [8]. As the number of on-road vehicles is projected to increase manifold, this
problem is going to intensify. With the global emphasis to cut the scope 1 emission due to
road transportation for a sustainable future, an intelligent urban traffic system is the need of
the hour.
© Zeba Khanam, Vejey Pradeep Suresh Achari, Issam Boukhennoufa, Anish Jindal,
and Amit Kumar Singh;
licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
Fifth Workshop on Next Generation Real-Time Embedded Systems (NG-RES 2024).
Editors: Patrick Meumeu Yomsi and Stefan Wildermann; Article No. 2; pp. 2:1–2:10
OpenAccess Series in Informatics
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany

2:2
A Multi-Modal Distributed Real-Time IoT System for Urban Traffic Control
Most of the cities deploy a traditional traffic control system that uses an array of
programming logic controllers (PLC) and a round-robin scheduling algorithm to allow traffic
for each lane to pass in a circular fashion [7]. However, few pilot studies have been conducted
on the deployment of Internet of Things (IoT)-driven intelligent traffic control systems. Most
of these studies have been part of the deployment of connected and automated vehicles
and self-driving cars [16, 14]. Given the uncertainty around the future of self-driving cars
and the urgency of decarbonization targets, there is a need for an IoT system for current
on-road vehicles. Few recent IoT frameworks have used recent technologies like infrared
cameras and GPS [3], RFID [6], Bluetooth and Zigbee [15]. However, these technologies
require the deployment of an array of sensors in vehicles. These solutions require large
investment and energy to revamp the existing vehicles and the accuracy of detection of traffic
density estimation is not substantially high due to their susceptibility to noise from the
environment [12].
To overcome the aforementioned problems, we proposed a novel framework, IoT based
Intelligent Urban Traffic System (I2UTS) for traffic light control that leveraged the existing
CCTV network for designing the IoT-based framework for traffic light control [1]. CCTV
videos have proven to be efficient and economical in past. There are several works that
have explored the potential of CCTV camera networks as input sensors for solving traffic
problems like predicting accidents, monitoring spatio-temporal behavior of pedestrians, and
the detection of firearms and knives [4]. I2UTS framework used CCTV video and state-of-
the-art CNN to estimate the traffic density. Traffic density was a major input to control
traffic lights. To address the privacy concern and computational resource requirements, Yolo
v3 with a darknet backbone was deployed over edge device, Raspberry Pi, alongside our novel
scheduling algorithm. Even though, I2UTS was able to achieve 68.10% vehicle detection
accuracy, it inherited problems associated with end-to-end convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) that rendered practical difficulties in real-time traffic network analysis.
The first major problem associated with I2UTS was the inability to find datasets with
emergency vehicles. One of the novel contributions of our previous research was to account
for the different traffic signal times incase emergency vehicles like police cars, firefighter
trucks, and ambulances are part of the traffic scheduling algorithm. Since, the proposed
CNNs Yolo v3- Efficient Net is dependent on labeled data, the availability of labeled dataset
of the emergency vehicle was a challenge. Finding such a dataset is cumbersome given
the rare occurrence of emergency vehicles in traffic conditions. The proposal of emergency
vehicle datasets has been an area of research. Researchers have turned to various resources
like google search alongside manual annotation of 1500 images, manual filtering of Kaggle
dataset images, and youtube streams [13]. Given the amalgamation of various sources
of image acquisition, these datasets suffer from large viewpoint variations, which renders
them unsuitable for our IoT framework where the input sensor, CCTV camera, has a fixed
viewpoint. Apart from viewpoint variation, another problem in the detection of emergency
vehicles is weather variation. Inclement weather conditions present in the images often
decrease vehicle detection accuracy significantly [5]. Since, the speed of non-emergency
vehicles is comparatively slow, their occurrence on CCTV images for a fixed time frame is
higher. This increases their detection accuracy alongside the availability of a large set of
labeled images in varying weather as a training input for YOLO V3. These problems clearly
illustrate the inhibition of using RGB cameras for emergency vehicles. This serves as a
major motivation to re-investigate our previous work I2UTS for emergency vehicle detection.
Emergency vehicles all over the world use loud-noise making noise, sirens, to alert the traffic
of passage. In this work, we propose a multi-modal distributed IoT framework that detects
the distinguished sound property of emergency vehicles alongside the image-based traffic
density estimation.

Z. Khanam, V. P. S. Achari, I. Boukhennoufa, A. Jindal, and A. K. Singh
2:3
The second major problem associated with I2UTS is the high variance in mean average
precision (mAP) across different classes of vehicle detectors. Although, the major outlier was
the class “van” where mAP was 37.49%. Further, False Discovery Rate (FDR) was 63.23%,
which clearly indicates that the proposed YOLOV3-Effecient net has high false positive (FP)
in comparison to true positive (TP) for “van”. YOLO is a preferred single-stage object
detector in comparison to its counterparts two-stage detectors like RCNN due to its faster
performance on edge devices. However, YOLO struggles to localize smaller objects/vehicles
and identify the optimum number of clusters. This is the main reason that I2UTS has a
high misclassified bus stops as vans due to similar features. Single-stage detectors classify
and localize objects in a single shot using dense sampling whereas two-stage detector consists
of an additional preliminary stage of region proposal. The region proposal stage indeed
increases the performance of object detector but are computationally expensive. However,
the CCTV camera on road is fixed and viewpoint variation in the images captured is hardly
possible. Changes in road infrastructure are also minimal. Considering, this advantage, we
propose a novel two-stage detector road-based YOLO (“R-YOLO”) that confines the search
of vehicles to the road with an increased performance accuracy comparable to two-stage
object detector(like RCNN) and low computational resource usage like single stage detector
(like YOLO).
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section II describes the proposed IoT
framework. The experimental evaluation and results of the proposed distributed system is
detailed in Section III. Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section IV.
2
Proposed Distributed IoT framework
The proposed distributed IoT based urban traffic management system contains two edge
parts: 1) S1: Vehicle Detector that uses Deep Neural Network, R-CNN. 2) S2: Emergency
Vehicle Detector that uses acoustic sliding window approach to detect siren’s of emergency
vehicle.
Figure 1 A multi-modal IoT Distributed Framework.
NG-RES 2024

2:4
A Multi-Modal Distributed Real-Time IoT System for Urban Traffic Control
2.1
Edge Devices and Sensors
The previous works deployed NVIDIA Jetson TX2 that is a computationally powerful edge
device with the dual support of CPU and GPU [2]. However, the cost of Jetson Nano is 24
times more than average cost of other edge devices. Given the economic feasibility contraint
of the system, we use Raspberry PI 4 as the edge device S1 for vision algorithms with
moderate memory of 4 GB and powerful Quad core cortex-A72 (Arm-8) 1.5GHz processor.
The acoustics emergency vehicle detector uses Arduino Nano as Edge device S2. Arduino
Nano is an open source micro-controller based on ATmega328P architecture. With a flash
memory of 32 KB, 16 Analog Pins and 22 I/O pins, SEN0232 noise meter is used. SEN0232
uses an instrument circuit and a low noise microphone, with a measuring decibel value ranges
from 30dBA to 130dBA, accurately measuring noise level of the surrounding environment.
2.2
System Overview
A higher level overview of the distributed system is as follows.
1. Cloud Layer: Road Detector
a. Train Faster-RCNN network on cloud to detect the vehicles.
b. Detect the object road and Estimate the road mask.
c. Train the YOLO v3 network with Efficient net as a backbone on cloud to detect the
road.
d. Transfer the trained weights to the Faster RCNN deployed on the edge device S1 for
testing.
e. Transfer road mask to the edge device S2 for road extraction.
2. Edge S2: Acoustic Emergency Vehicle Detector
a. Detect Siren Sound from continuous noise level monitoring.
b. Send the emergency vehicle trigger to Edge Device S1.
3. Edge S1: Vehicle Detector
a. Estimate the traffic density of each road lane by detecting vehicles using road mask
and YOLOv3 vehcile detector.
b. Use the parameters generated in previous steps as an input to the proposed traffic
control algorithm.
2.2.1
Dataset
Many prior studies have utilized the KITTI and COCO datasets to train the YOLOv3
network. However, a more recent dataset, UA-DETRAC [18], developed by the University
of Albany for object detection and tracking, is more profound as a benchmark dataset for
real-world multi-object tracking. This dataset comprises traffic camera videos, recorded at
25 fps over a span of 10 hours, with a resolution of 960 x 540 pixels. The footage originates
from 24 distinct locations in Beijing and Tianjin, China, offering a diverse and challenging
environment. UA-DETRAC includes approximately 1.21 million labeled bounding boxes
representing 8250 vehicles across four classes: car, van, bus, road and others. Figure 2
illustrates some CCTV images from the dataset. An additional strength of utilizing UA-
DETRAC is its representation of multi-class weather conditions and variations in day and
night illumination. This dataset is used for both the purposes-road and vehicle detection.
For both the tasks, the dataset is divided into training, validation, and testing sets following
a 70:15:15 ratio, respectively.

Z. Khanam, V. P. S. Achari, I. Boukhennoufa, A. Jindal, and A. K. Singh
2:5
(a)
(b)
Figure 2 Sample CCTV images from UA-DETRAC [18].
2.2.2
DNN for Road Detection
For road detection and classification, we use YOLO v3 CNN model [9] trained on the
backbone of Efficient Net [17]. Unlike the traditional YOLO v3 model [9] which has used
DarkNet-53 network as backbone, our network has a high object detection accuracy at low
inference latency. Changes in road infrastructures are minimal, so we can assume CCTV
images have advantage of viewpoint invariation. Since vehicles runs on road, the bounding
boxes of vehicles are embedded within the bounding box of road, pooling of region of interests,
we select the road bounding box. Once the bounding box is selected, we calculate road mask.
Road Mask is a binary image that is applied to CCTV images to mask out remaining image
( converts the pixels to black) except road object. Road Mask image is helpful in limiting
regions of interest. Fig 3b, 3d, and 3f show the CCTV image obtain after applying road
mask.
2.2.3
DNN for Vehicle detection
For vehicle detection and classification into five annotation classes: bus, car, vans, road,
and others, we use Faster R-CNN model [10]. Faster R-CNN in comparison to traditional
regional based CNN [11] is manifold times faster due to region proposal network. However,
its pooling characteristic is also extremely beneficial. Faster RCNN has a better accuracy
than single shot detectors like YOLO. However, the inference speed is extremely slow in
comparison to YOLO, rendering it unsuitable for real-time object detection on edge devices.
To overcome this, we limit the scope by inputing the image with road mask. Therefore,
Faster R-CNN will now only detect object on road, significantly reducing the image area,
number of objects, in turn reducing the processing time. Few instances of vehicle detection
are illustrated in Figure 3.
2.2.4
Acoustic Emergency Vehicle Detection Framework
Most sirens are rated at around 124 dB when measured 10 feet in front of the sound source. As
the distance from the siren doubles, the sound pressure of the siren will drop by approximately
6dB. This concept is known as the “inverse square law.” In our system, Data is collected with
a frequency of 50Hz and a sliding window technique is employed to detect the emergency
vehicle. A sliding window computes the area of the sound noise level over a certain period of
time as shown in Figure 4. When the area exceeds a predefined value the detection algorithm
dispatches the emergency light sequence. When it does not, normal sequence is carried out.
The area value is computed using the formula:
Area = Frequency × sound level
(1)
NG-RES 2024

2:6
A Multi-Modal Distributed Real-Time IoT System for Urban Traffic Control
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 3 Examples of vehicle detection by a), c), e) by I2UTS and in b), d), f) by our proposed
system on same CCTV images from UA-DETRAC [18]. Proposed system performs masking while
leaving road.
The system is continuously computing the area over the window length, noise values are
summed together over a defined window. The highest sound level is set 100dB, this value
has been chosen to take into account different distances of the ambulance from the sound
sensor. It has been chosen as it is the average noise level when taking into account 80 feet
(25m) as the noise level varies between 124dB and 76dB.
Figure 4 Sample Sliding Window for Emergency vehicle’s siren.

Z. Khanam, V. P. S. Achari, I. Boukhennoufa, A. Jindal, and A. K. Singh
2:7
Once the siren is detect, a trigger is generated in Edge device S2. This is sent to edge
device S1 as shown in Figure 1. Edge Device S1 estimates the vehicle density of each lane
using vision algorithm explained in Section 2.2.3. Traffic Control Algorithm proposed by us
in our earlier work in I2UTS uses both these parameters to calculate traffic light sequence
again on edge device S1. The mutli-modal nature of our framework that encapsulates both
acoustic and vision sensor and processing to build a resilient system.
3
Experimentation and Results
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed distrubuted IoT framework.
The weights of the Faster RCNN and YOLO v3- Effecient Net are trained on a cloud server
with Intel i7-9th generation as main processor alongside Nvidia 1660Ti GPU on Linux 18.04
operating system. CUDA 10.1 with Cudnn 7 libraries were used for parallel computation
on GPU. The edge device S1, Raspberry Pi 4, has Quad core cortex-A72 (Arm-8) 1.5GHz
processor, 4GB RAM and OpenGL ES 3.0 graphics with Raspbian Buster as the operating
system.
The experimental setup for edge system for edge comprises of a SEN0232 sound meter
that is connected through a SPI serial connection to an Arduino Nano. This edge device is
further connected to Raspberry Pi either wirelessly or through USB. Raspberry Pi is edge
device that is responsible for managing the traffic light sequence.
3.1
Emergency Vehicle Detection
Experiments were conducted to find the optimal window lengths. To do so multiple window
sizes were chosen starting from 0.5s to 10s. After each trial the window length is incremented
by 0.5s. For each window size, ten different sounds are played, of which three correspond to
sirens sound of emergency vehicles (police, ambulance, fire-truck) while the rest are different
urban noises. The detection time is measured, as well as detection accuracy. The overall
operation is repeated 100 times. The detection time Dt is the difference between the time at
which the siren is first detected Td and the time at which the sound is played Tp.
Dt = Td −Tp
(2)
The accuracy of detection is defined as the number of the truly predicted siren sounds Ps
and the truly predicted urban noises Pu divided by the number all the tests N.
Accuracy = Ps + Pu
N
(3)
Table 1 Accuracy and detection time per window size.
Window Length(s)
0.5
2
3.5
5
6.5
8
9.5
Detection Accuracy (%)
63.6
88.4
94.5
99.5
97.4
99.2
99.4
Detection Time (s)
0.54
2.032
3.524
5.031
6.521
8.041
9.523
Results are shown in Table 1, accuracy is very low for short window sizes. The main
reason behind this is that it detects numerous urban noises as being siren sounds. Short
window sizes make the detection algorithm act as a threshold detection. Accuracy increases
with the window length to attain a maximum of 99.5% at 5s and it stays at the same
level relatively. From 1000 segments, only 5 sound segments were miss-classified, and these
NG-RES 2024

2:8
A Multi-Modal Distributed Real-Time IoT System for Urban Traffic Control
Figure 5 Number of Epoch v/s Loss Difference [1].
segments belong to the urban noises’ sounds. The detection time for the different experiments
takes an average time of 0.03s ± 0.007s. For 5s the maximum accuracy is reached, and it is
selected to be utilised. Another reason is that it is more effective to have a quicker detection.
3.2
Vehicle Detection
While training and fine-tuning the hyper-parameters of both the DNNs for vehicle and road
detection, we ensure model reaches optima by neither overfiting nor underfiting. The most
important hyperparameter that we need to fine-tune will be number of epochs. To determine
this, we plot number of epochs with respect to validation and training loss difference. Figure 5
shows that the loss value’s difference is lowest around 100th epoch.
The other important metric to measure efficiency of vehicle detection system is inference
time. The inference time of our DNN on the edge divice S1, Raspberry Pi varied between
1.55 – 2.3 sec per frame. This is comparable to state-of-the-art I2UTS framework which
had inference time of 1.45 – 1.57 sec per frame. The power consumption of edge device
(Raspberry Pi 4) per second on different loads is presented in Table 2. The input voltage
and current to edge device was DC 5.1V and 3A.
Table 2 Power consumption of IoT device on different loads.
Parameters
Current (Amps)
Voltage (Volts)
Power (Watts)
IoT device not connected to monitor
0.76
5.8
3.12
IoT device connected to monitor
0.78
5.8
3.45
IoT device running only detector
1.34
5.23
6.87
IoT device running detector with connected monitor
1.4
5.23
7.182
The highest power consumption observed was 7.18 W when the detector ran alongside a
monitor, constituting only half of the input power supplied. When connected to a traffic
camera, the power consumption reduced to 6.87 W. The mean average precision (mAP)
for vehicle detection DNN is 79.5% in comparison to 65.10% achieved by state-of-the-art
framework I2UTS. If both the metrics inference time and accuracy are looked together, we
can easily say that our proposed novel two-stage detector R-YOLO is able to achieve better
accuracy in similar inference time.

Z. Khanam, V. P. S. Achari, I. Boukhennoufa, A. Jindal, and A. K. Singh
2:9
4
Conclusion
This paper proposes a distributed IoT framework for urban traffic management system using
the CCTV camera and sound sensor. The framework uses the two important observations in
urban traffic control: 1) Structural Changes to road are minimum. 2) Emergency Vehicles
have distinct sound. The novel two stage detector exploits the first observation by detecting
road in first stage and vehicles in second stage. The detector achieves 79.5% accuracy that
can further be enhanced by training the network on multiple datasets with CCTV footage
with viewpoint and illumination variation. The second observation is implemented using
acoustic sliding window detection algorithm achieving 99.4% accuracy.
References
1
Vejey Pradeep Suresh Achari, Zeba Khanam, Amit Kumar Singh, Anish Jindal, Alok Prakash,
and Neeraj Kumar. I 2 UTS: An IoT based intelligent urban traffic system. In 2021 IEEE
22nd International Conference on High Performance Switching and Routing (HPSR), pages
1–6. IEEE, 2021.
2
Stephan Patrick Baller, Anshul Jindal, Mohak Chadha, and Michael Gerndt. DeepEdgeBench:
Benchmarking deep neural networks on edge devices. In 2021 IEEE International Conference
on Cloud Engineering (IC2E), pages 20–30. IEEE, 2021.
3
Sayalee Deshmukh and SB Vanjale. Iot based traffic signal control for reducing time delay
of an emergency vehicle using gps. In 2018 Fourth International Conference on Computing
Communication Control and Automation (ICCUBEA), pages 1–3. IEEE, 2018.
4
Michał Grega, Andrzej Matiolański, Piotr Guzik, and Mikołaj Leszczuk. Automated detection
of firearms and knives in a CCTV image. Sensors, 16(1):47, 2016.
5
Jose Carlos Villarreal Guerra, Zeba Khanam, Shoaib Ehsan, Rustam Stolkin, and Klaus
McDonald-Maier. Weather classification: A new multi-class dataset, data augmentation
approach and comprehensive evaluations of convolutional neural networks. In 2018 NASA/ESA
Conference on Adaptive Hardware and Systems (AHS), pages 305–310. IEEE, 2018.
6
Yeong-Lin Lai, Yung-Hua Chou, and Li-Chih Chang. An intelligent IoT emergency vehicle
warning system using RFID and Wi-Fi technologies for emergency medical services. Technology
and health care, 26(1):43–55, 2018.
7
Vamsi Paruchuri, Sriram Chellappan, and Rathinasamy B Lenin. Arrival time based traffic
signal optimization for intelligent transportation systems. In 2013 IEEE 27th International
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA), pages 703–709.
IEEE, 2013.
8
Sonam Pathak and Manish Pandey. Smart cities: Review of characteristics, composition,
challenges and technologies. In 2021 6th International Conference on Inventive Computation
Technologies (ICICT), pages 871–876. IEEE, 2021.
9
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. Yolov3: An incremental improvement. arXiv preprint, 2018.
arXiv:1804.02767.
10
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time
object detection with region proposal networks. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 28, 2015.
11
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-CNN: Towards real-time
object detection with region proposal networks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, 39(6):1137–1149, 2016.
12
David Dorantes Romero, Anton Satria Prabuwono, A Hasniaty, et al. A review of sensing
techniques for real-time traffic surveillance. Journal of applied sciences, 11(1):192–198, 2011.
13
Shuvendu Roy and Md Sakif Rahman. Emergency vehicle detection on heavy traffic road from
CCTV footage using deep convolutional neural network. In 2019 International Conference on
Electrical, Computer and Communication Engineering (ECCE), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
NG-RES 2024

2:10
A Multi-Modal Distributed Real-Time IoT System for Urban Traffic Control
14
Mohd Saifuzzaman, Nazmun Nessa Moon, and Fernaz Narin Nur. Iot based street lighting
and traffic management system. In 2017 IEEE region 10 humanitarian technology conference
(R10-HTC), pages 121–124. IEEE, 2017.
15
Rajeshwari Sundar, Santhoshs Hebbar, and Varaprasad Golla. Implementing intelligent traffic
control system for congestion control, ambulance clearance, and stolen vehicle detection. IEEE
Sensors Journal, 15(2):1109–1113, 2014.
16
Mehal Zaman Talukder, Sheikh Shadab Towqir, Arifur Rahman Remon, and Hasan U Zaman.
An IoT based automated traffic control system with real-time update capability. In 2017
8th International Conference on Computing, Communication and Networking Technologies
(ICCCNT), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2017.
17
Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural
networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019.
18
Longyin Wen, Dawei Du, Zhaowei Cai, Zhen Lei, Ming-Ching Chang, Honggang Qi, Jongwoo
Lim, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Siwei Lyu. UA-DETRAC: A new benchmark and protocol for
multi-object detection and tracking. Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 193:102907,
2020.