arXiv:2301.03857v3  [cs.IT]  15 Dec 2023
1
Integrated Sensing and Communication Signals
Toward 5G-A and 6G: A Survey
Zhiqing Wei, Member, IEEE, Hanyang Qu, Member, IEEE, Yuan Wang, Member, IEEE,
Xin Yuan, Member, IEEE, Huici Wu, Member, IEEE, Ying Du, Member, IEEE, Kaifeng Han, Member, IEEE,
Ning Zhang, Senior, IEEE, Zhiyong Feng, Senior, IEEE
Abstract—Integrated sensing and communication (ISAC) has
the advantages of efﬁcient spectrum utilization and low hardware
cost. It is promising to be implemented in the ﬁfth-generation-
advanced (5G-A) and sixth-generation (6G) mobile communica-
tion systems, having the potential to be applied in intelligent
applications requiring both communication and high-accurate
sensing capabilities. As the fundamental technology of ISAC,
ISAC signal directly impacts the performance of sensing and
communication. This article systematically reviews the literature
on ISAC signals from the perspective of mobile communication
systems, including ISAC signal design, ISAC signal processing
and ISAC signal optimization. We ﬁrst review the ISAC signal de-
sign based on 5G, 5G-A and 6G mobile communication systems.
Then, radar signal processing methods are reviewed for ISAC
signals, mainly including the channel information matrix method,
spectrum lines estimator method and super resolution method.
In terms of signal optimization, we summarize peak-to-average
power ratio (PAPR) optimization, interference management, and
adaptive signal optimization for ISAC signals. This article may
provide the guidelines for the research of ISAC signals in 5G-A
and 6G mobile communication systems.
Index Terms—Integrated Sensing and Communication, ISAC,
Joint Sensing and Communication, 5G-A, 6G, OFDM, OTFS,
Signal Design, Waveform Design, Signal Processing, Signal Op-
timization
I. INTRODUCTION
In the future 5G-A and 6G mobile communication systems,
new intelligent applications and services have emerged, such
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (NSFC) under Grant 62271081, 92267202 and U21B2014, in part by
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2020YFA0711302, and in part by the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship
Program by CAST under Grant YESS20200283.
Zhiqing Wei, Hanyang Qu, Yuan Wang, and Zhiyong Feng are with the Key
Laboratory of Universal Wireless Communications, Ministry of Education,
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (emails: {weizhiqing;
hanyangqu; wangyuan; fengzy}@bupt.edu.cn).
Huici Wu is with the National Engineering Lab for Mobile Network
Technologies, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing
100876, China, and also with Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066,
China (e-mail: dailywu@bupt.edu.cn).
Xin
Yuan
is
with
Data61,
CSIRO,
Sydney,
Australia
(email:
xin.yuan@data61.csiro.au).
Ning Zhang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering, University of Windsor, Windsor, ON, N9B 3P4, Canada. (email:
ning.zhang@uwindsor.ca).
Ying Du is with the University of Science and Technology of China, and
China Academy of Information and Communications Technology, Beijing
100191, China. Kaifeng Han is with China Academy of Information and
Communications Technology, Beijing 100191, China. (emails: {duying1;
hankaifeng}@caict.ac.cn).
Correspondence authors: Ying Du, Zhiyong Feng, Zhiqing Wei.
as machine-type communication (MTC), connected robotics
and autonomous driving, and extended reality (XR) [1]. Cur-
rently, separated design of sensing and communication cannot
achieve high data transmission and high-accurate sensing
simultaneously and meet the requirements of these new emerg-
ing services and applications [2]. Besides, with increasingly
scarce spectrum resources, it is difﬁcult to satisfy the spectrum
requirements of the new intelligent applications and services.
Integrated sensing and communication (ISAC) system is a
uniﬁed system providing wireless communication and radar
sensing functions. ISAC effectively improves the spectrum
utilization and solves the spectrum conﬂict between radar and
communication systems. In addition, ISAC system reduces
the size and energy consumption of the equipment. Due to
the high spectrum efﬁciency and low hardware cost, academia
and industry both pay extensive attention to ISAC technology
[3]–[6]. As shown in Fig. 1, ISAC technology is expected
to be applied in a wide range of intelligent applications that
require high communication rates and high-accurate sensing
capabilities in the era of 5G-A and 6G. With the development
and application of millimeter-wave (mmWave) and terahertz
(THz) technologies, the frequency bands of communication
gradually coincide with these of radar, which promotes the
realization of ISAC technology [7].
ISAC technology is developed on the basis of active phased
array radar (APAR), since APAR is easily integrated with
communication technologies [8]. In 1963, Mealey et al. pro-
posed that radar pulses can transmit information to space
vehicles [9]. In the 1980s, the national aeronautics and space
administration (NASA) begin to study the ISAC technology to
provide communication and navigation for the space shuttle.
A space shuttle program is proposed to support the research of
ISAC [10]. Since the 1990s, multiple countries have competed
to carry out the research of ISAC technology. The US Ofﬁce
of Naval Research launches the advanced multi-function radio
frequency concept program in 1996, trying to integrate radar,
electronic warfare, communication and other functions by
using the broadband radio frequency front-end aperture with
separated transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX). Germany and
Britain have also started the research on ISAC. In 5G-A and
6G, the ISAC enables mobile communication systems have
attracted much attention [11]. international mobile telecom-
munication (IMT) 2030 [12] has regarded ISAC as one of the
potential technologies of 6G.
ISAC signals, as the basis of ISAC technology, have been
studied extensively. In 2006, Shao et al. apply direct sequence

2
TABLE I: Glossary
5G-A
Fifth-generation-Advanced
6G
Sixth-generation
APAR
Active Phased Array Radar
AWGN
Additive White Gaussian Noise
BS
Base Station
BER
Bit Error Rate
CP
Cyclic Preﬁx
CC
Cyclic Cross-correlation
CD-OFDM
Code Division OFDM
CSMA
Carrier Sense Multiple Access
CSMA/CA
Carrier Aware Multiple Access / Collision
Avoidance
CSI
Channel State Information
DSSS
Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum
DARPA
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DFRC
Dual-functional Radar-Communication
DoA
Directions of Arrival
DAS
Distributed Antenna System
DIR
Data Information Rate
ESPRIT
Estimating Signal Parameter via Rotational In-
variance Techniques
EM
Expectation Maximization
FBMC
Filter-bank Multi-carrier
FM
Frequency Modulation
FRFT
Fractional Fourier Transform
FCW
Forward Collision Warning
GFDM
Generalized Frequency Division Multiplexing
ICI
Inter-carrier Interference
IoV
Internet of Vehicle
ISAC
Integrated Sensing and Communication
ISI
Inter-symbol Interference
KKT
Karush Kuhn Tucher
LRR
Long-Range Radar
MTC
Machine-Type Communication
mmWave
Millimeter-wave
MIMO
Multiple Input Multiple Output
MUSIC
Multiple Signal Classiﬁcation
MTI
Moving Target Indication
MSK
Minimum-Shift Keying
ML
Maximum Likelihood
MI
Mutual Information
MMSE
Minimum Mean Square Error
MRR
Medium-range Radar
MVDR
Minimum Variance Distortionless Response
MC-DS-
CDMA
Multicarrier Direct Sequence CDMA
NASA
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NC-OFDM
Non-Contiguous-Orthogonal
Frequency-
Domain Modulation
OFDM
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex
OTFS
Orthogonal Time Frequency Space
OOB
Out of Band
OCDM
Orthogonal Chirp Division Multiplexing
OFDMA
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Ac-
cess
PAPR
Peak to Average Power Ratio
PSLR
Peak Side Lobe Ratio
PMCW
Phase Modulated Continuous Waveform
PTS
Partial Transmission Sequence
QCQFP
Quadratically Constrained Quadratic Fractional
Programming
RCC
Radar-Communication Coexistence
SSPARC
Shared Spectrum Access for Radar and Com-
munications
SIR
Signal to Interference Ratio
SS-OFDM
Spread Spectrum OFDM
SIC
Serial Interference Cancellation
SLM
Selected Mapping
S&C
Schmidl and Cox
SCM
Slow Chirp Modulation
SPR
Subcarrier Power Ratio
SRR
Short-range Radar
SVD
Singular Value Decomposition
TLS-SVD
Total Least Squares-Singular Value Decompo-
sition
THz
Terahertz
V2V
Vehicle-to-Vehicle
XR
Extended Reality

3
UAV swarm
Communication signal
ISAC signal
Smart factory
Smart home
Passive sensing
ISAC BS
ISAC BS
Communication
Active sensing
ISAC BS
Sensing
Sensing
Fig. 1: Application scenarios of ISAC in the future.
spread spectrum (DSSS) technique to spread the spectrum
of the ISAC system to avoid the jamming between radar
and communication [13]. In 2011, Sturm et al. design an
ISAC signal based on orthogonal frequency division multiplex
(OFDM) [14]. They demonstrate that OFDM has a high
dynamic range of radar imaging [15], which is able to detect
multiple targets [16]. In 2013, the shared spectrum access
for radar and communications (SSPARC) project proposed by
defense advanced research projects agency (DARPA) promotes
the development of ISAC technology [17]. In 2014, Koslowski
et al. design a ﬁlter-bank multicarrier (FBMC) based ISAC
signal, and show that the sensing performance of FBMC is
similar to that of OFDM. FBMC-based ISAC signal reduces
the overhead of cyclic preﬁx (CP) and improves the accuracy
of velocity estimation [18]. In 2017, the ISAC signal based
on orthogonal time frequency space (OTFS) is designed to
detect the target with high mobility [19]. In 2019, Sanson et al.
design generalized frequency division multiplexing (GFDM)
based ISAC signal, where the signal can reduce out of band
(OOB) and use the spectrum without interfering with other
users in comparison with OFDM [20].
Nevertheless, the design of ISAC signal faces great chal-
lenges, which are summarized as follows.
• ISAC signal design: Communication aims to achieve ef-
ﬁcient and reliable data transmission, which requires high
spectrum efﬁciency and the capability of anti-interference
and combating channel fading. Radar is to achieve high-
resolution target sensing, which requires good autocor-
relation, large signal bandwidth, large dynamic range,
and large Doppler frequency shift. Thus, the ISAC signal
design needs to balance the performance of radar and
communication [21], [22].
• ISAC signal processing: In order to improve the sensing
accuracy with limited computation resources, the design
of ISAC signal processing algorithms with high-accuracy
and low-complexity is required.
• ISAC signal optimization: It is necessary to design ﬂex-
ible ISAC signal optimization to meet the requirements
of sensing and communication in various scenarios.
Facing the above challenges, some existing articles have
reviewed the ISAC technology. Hayvaci et al. review the
ISAC signals from the perspectives of cognitive commu-
nication, cognitive radar, and joint cognition of radar and
communication systems [3]. Chiriyath et al. deﬁne three levels
of ISAC, including coexistence, cooperation, and co-design.
In addition, the interference management methods between
radar and communication are summarized [4]. Liu et al.

4
comprehensively review the scenarios and key technologies
of radar communication coexistence (RCC) and dual function
radar communication (DFRC) [5]. Zhang et al. summarize
radar signal processing algorithms in ISAC system [6]. [23]
reviews the development status and challenges of ISAC in the
context of perceptive mobile networks. [24] analyzes the key
technologies of ISAC signal in 6G from different application
requirements. [25] proposes four typical use cases of ISAC,
where the requirements of these use cases are analyzed in
detail. The existing ISAC signals are reviewed from the aspect
of signal design [26]. The application scenarios and key
technologies of ISAC are summarized in [5], [23]. Recently,
institute of electrical and electronics engineers (IEEE), 3rd
generation partnership project (3GPP), and IMT-2030, etc.,
have launched projects on ISAC technology.
The above studies provide a comprehensive overview on
the scenarios, requirements and key technologies of ISAC.
However, the ISAC signals from the perspective of 5G-A and
6G mobile communication systems have not been thoroughly
reviewed. As 6G takes ISAC as the potential key technology
and the ISAC signals are the foundation of ISAC technology,
the ISAC signals from the perspective of mobile commu-
nication systems of 5G-A and 6G have attracted extensive
attention. In this article, we review the ISAC signals, including
ISAC signal design, ISAC signal processing, and ISAC signal
optimization. The contributions of this article are summarized
as follows.
• ISAC signal design: This article summarizes ISAC signal
design based on the signals in 5G, 5G-A and 6G mobile
communication systems, such as the ISAC signal based
on OFDM [8], [27], FBMC [18], [28], GFDM [20],
discrete fourier transform-spread-orthogonal frequency
division multiplexing (DFT-s-OFDM) [29], and OTFS
[30], [31].
• ISAC signal processing: The signal processing algo-
rithms for ISAC signal are introduced, including chan-
nel information matrix method, spectrum lines estimator
method and super resolution method. Then, the detailed
signal processing algorithms for the OFDM and OTFS-
based ISAC signals are reviewed.
• ISAC signal optimization: The ISAC signal optimization
methods, including PAPR reduction, interference man-
agement and adaptive signal optimization, are reviewed.
The organization of this article is shown in Fig. 2. In
Section II, we review ISAC signal design based on mobile
communication systems. In Section III, we review the ISAC
signal processing methods. The ISAC signal optimization
methods are summarized in Section IV. The future trends are
provided in Section V, followed by conclusions in Section VI.
The glossary of this article is provided in Table I.
II. ISAC SIGNAL DESIGN
OFDM is the signal of the 4th-generation (4G) and 5G
mobile communication systems. The candidate signals of
the next-generation mobile communication systems include
FBMC, GFDM, DFT-s-OFDM, OTFS, etc. Various ISAC
signal design schemes are proposed using the above-mentioned
Integrated Sensing and Communication Signals Towards 5G-A and 6G
Section I:  Introduction 
Section II:  ISAC Signal Design 
Section III:  ISAC Signal Processing
Section IV:  ISAC Signal Optimization
Section V:  Future Trends 
Section VI:  Conclusion 
ISAC signal optimization
Performance metrics of ISAC signal processing
Channel information matrix method
Spectrum lines estimator method
Super resolution method
Signal processing for OFDM based ISAC signals
Signal processing for OTFS based ISAC signals
Performance Metrics of ISAC Signals
ISAC signal based on OFDM
ISAC signal combining OFDM and LFM
ISAC signal combining OFDM and phase coding
ISAC signal combining OFDM and spread spectrum
ISAC signals using the candidate signals of 5G-A/6G
PAPR optimization
Interference management
Adaptive signal optimization
ISAC signal design
ISAC signal processing
Fig. 2: The organization of this article.
signals. Firstly, we introduce the performance metrics of ISAC
signals, followed by the features of OFDM. Then, ISAC
signals based on OFDM are introduced. Finally, ISAC signals
based on the candidate signals of the next-generation mobile
communication system are reviewed.
A. Performance Metrics of ISAC Signals
This section summarizes the performance metrics of ISAC
signals, which are used to evaluate the performance of ISAC
signals for various application scenarios.
• Resolution: Resolution reveals the ability of ISAC signal
to distinguish multiple targets. A small value of resolution
of the ISAC signal indicates that the signal has a strong
ability to distinguish multiple targets [32].
• Ambiguity function: Ambiguity function is the time-
frequency composite autocorrelation function of the com-
plex envelope of ISAC signal. Under the conditions of
optimal signal processing, the performance metrics of
resolution, ambiguity, accuracy and clutter suppression
of radar sensing are derived via ambiguity function [33].
• Doppler sensitivity: Doppler sensitivity is the error of
output response of the radar signal processing module
and communication demodulation module caused by
the Doppler frequency shift. For the signals with high

5
QAM
/PSK
Bit steam
Serial-parallel 
convertion
IFFT
Add CP
Parallel-serial 
convertion
RF
Channel
Serial-parallel 
convertion
FFT
Parallel-serial 
convertion
Remove CP
RF
Signal 
processing
Fig. 3: Signal processing procedure for OFDM signal [8].
TABLE II: Characteristics of OFDM-based ISAC signals (✓indicates the existence of the advantage)
OFDM based
ISAC signal
Design method
Resolution
PAPR reduction
Anti-interference
Secrecy
References
Combination of
OFDM and LFM
LFM increases the time-bandwidth
product of the signal.
✓
[39]–[42]
Combination of
OFDM and phase
coding
Phase coding provides a ﬂexible signal
design to reduce PAPR.
✓
✓
[43]–[46]
Combination of
OFDM and spread
spectrum
Spread
spectrum
improves
anti-
jamming performance.
✓
✓
[47]–[50]
Doppler sensitivity, the sensing output of the radar signal
processing module has an intolerable error in the pres-
ence of a Doppler frequency shift. Besides, the Doppler
frequency shift affects the bit error rate (BER) of the
received signals [34], [35].
• Doppler tolerance: Doppler tolerance is obtained by
calculating the cross-correlation between stretched echoes
and narrowband approximation signal subtraction in time
domain. Doppler tolerance reveals the maximum velocity
detected by the radar, beyond which the velocity estima-
tion will produce intolerable error [36].
• PAPR: PAPR is the ratio of the peak instantaneous
power to the average power. A high PAPR will require a
high-performance power ampliﬁer, resulting in additional
overhead for hardware equipment [37].
• Mutual information (MI): Communication MI evaluates
the channel capacity. Sensing MI is a performance metric
that measures the performance of ISAC signals. The
sensing MI is deﬁned by the conditional MI of the
sensing channel and the echo signal, which is used as
the evaluation criterion of sensing performance [21].
• Data information rate (DIR): DIR is the information
transmission rate, which is used to evaluate the commu-
nication efﬁciency of ISAC signal [38].
B. ISAC Signal based on OFDM
OFDM is a kind of multi-carrier modulation technology,
whose signal processing procedure is shown in Fig. 3. The
ISAC signal is formulated as [8]
s (t) =
M−1
X
m=0
N−1
X
n=0
(d (mN + n)
· exp (j2πfnt) rect(t −mTsym
Tsym
)),
(1)
where M is the number of symbols, N is the number of
subcarriers, Tsym is the OFDM symbol duration, fn is the
frequency of the n-th subcarrier, d (mN + n) is the modula-
tion symbol, and rect (·) is rectangular window function.
The subcarriers of OFDM are orthogonal to each other and
have the same frequency spacing. The orthogonality reduces
inter-carrier interference (ICI), and improves the spectrum
efﬁciency. OFDM facilitates synchronization and equalization,
because of the capability of combatting multipath fading. The
subcarriers in the ISAC signal using OFDM are orthogonal,
and the number and frequency spacing of the subcarriers are
ﬂexibly adjusted according to the requirements of various
scenarios. As for the sensing capability, a thumbtack-typed
ambiguity function is obtained to reduce the delay-Doppler
ambiguity for moving target detection, and high-resolution
imaging [27]. Therefore, OFDM is widely applied in the
design of ISAC signals due to its excellent communication
and sensing performance.
However, the OFDM signal has high PAPR, distorting the
RF front-end [8]. Meanwhile, the mutual-interference between
the radar echo signal and communication signal, as well as
the self-interference between TX and RX, both degrade the
performance of radar sensing and communication in the ISAC
system, which needs to be solved via signal optimization.
OFDM is usually combined with other modulation methods
such as linear frequency modulation (LFM), phase coding,
and spread spectrum to improve the sensing performance

6
TABLE III: OFDM-LFM signals
Category
References
One sentence summary
Carrier modulation
[51], [52]
The subcarrier of OFDM is designed in the form of LFM, and the communication
symbol is modulated to the subcarrier.
Non-carrier modulation
[53]
The communication signal is multiplexed at the sideband of an LFM pulse to improve
the communication rate.
[54]
A generalized OFDM-LFM signal is designed to obtain a large time-bandwidth product.
QAM
/PSK
Bit steam
Serial-parallel 
convertion
IFFT
Chirp
RF
Channel
FFT
Parallel-serial 
convertion
Dechirp
RF
Signal 
processing
Fig. 4: Signal processing procedure for OFDM-LFM signal [52].
of OFDM-based ISAC signals. The OFDM signals com-
bined with these modulation methods have better sensing
performance improvement in terms of optimizing ambiguity
function, improving anti-interference capability, and reducing
PAPR. The ISAC signal combining OFDM and LFM is
proposed to improve the resolution of detecting long-distance
targets, and the resolution is improved by increasing the time-
bandwidth product [39]–[42]. ISAC signal combining OFDM
and phase coding reduces the PAPR [43]–[46]. To enhance
the anti-interference capability of ISAC signal in the low SNR
regime, ISAC signals combining OFDM and spread spectrum
are proposed [47]–[50]. The characteristics of OFDM-based
ISAC signals are summarized in Table II.
C. ISAC Signal Combining OFDM and LFM
LFM signal is a frequency continuous signal applied in
high-accurate radar sensing. In addition, its frequency changes
with time. LFM is also called chirp because its frequency
changes like a bird call. The echo signal contains delay and
Doppler frequency shift. The distance and velocity of the target
are estimated through signal processing.
The LFM signal is given by [52]
s (t) = exp

j2π

f0t + 1
2kt2

rect
t −TLF M
TLF M

, (2)
where TLF M is the duration of LFM signal, f0 is the starting
frequency and k is the chirp rate of LFM.
The instantaneous frequency of the LFM signal increases
with time, thereby increasing the time-bandwidth product of
the signal and realizing high-resolution and long-distance radar
sensing [55]. The ISAC signal combining OFDM and LFM,
namely OFDM-LFM ISAC signal, effectively improves the
Doppler sensitivity and reduce the estimation error of velocity
[39]. The signal processing procedure for OFDM-LFM signals
is shown in Fig. 4. Compared with the signal processing
procedure of OFDM, OFDM-LFM signals have chirp and
dechirp processes.
According to the modulation methods, OFDM-LFM signals
are classiﬁed into two types, namely carrier modulation and
non-carrier modulation, as shown in Table III. The OFDM-
LFM signals based on carrier modulation modulate the sym-
bols onto the LFM signals. Non-carrier modulation changes
the OFDM-LFM signals, such as changing the sideband or
subcarrier arrangement to transmit data [53], [54].
1) Carrier modulation: Darlington et al. ﬁrst patented LFM
modulation in 1954 [51]. Winkler et al. improved LFM mod-
ulation in 1962 [56]. In the early stage of LFM modulation,
binary data 0 and 1 are mapped into positive and negative
frequency modulation (FM) frequencies for data transmission.
This is approximately regarded as BPSK modulation, where
0 denotes that frequency increases over time, and 1 indicates
that frequency decreases with time [52].
The data rate of the above methods is very low. Therefore,
high-order modulation schemes are applied to improve the data
rate of LFM modulation, such as FSK [42], [57], [58], PSK
[39], [40] and QAM [59].
The OFDM-LFM signal based on carrier modulation is
expressed as [55]
s (t) =
M−1
X
m=0
N−1
X
n=0
(d (mN + n) exp (j2πfnt)
· exp
 jπkt2
rect(t −mTsym
Tsym
)).
(3)
To reduce the BER of communication and raise the res-
olution of distance estimation, a modulation scheme using
fractional fourier transform (FRFT) is proposed in [60]. Small
phase BPSK modulation is applied to improve the concealment
of the signal. Compared with traditional BPSK modulation,
the phase changes of small phase BPSK are ±ϕ, where
0 < ϕ < π/2 [41].
2) Non-carrier modulation: Takahashi et al. design an
ISAC signal to improve Doppler tolerance, where the commu-
nication signal is multiplexed at the sideband of an LFM pulse

7
TABLE IV: ISAC signals combining OFDM and phase coding
Category
References
One sentence summary
Waveform modulated by phase
coding sequence
[43], [44], [61], [62]
Phase coding sequence is modulated to subcarriers to reduce PAPR.
Phase modulated continuous
waveform
[45], [63]–[65]
This method combines phase coding sequence and LFM. Phase coding sequence
restrains PAPR and LFM provides good velocity estimation performance.
TABLE V: Performance comparison of phase coding sequences
Phase code
Computational complexity of encoding
Sidelobe level of the
autocorrelation function
Envelope of signal
Biphase code
Low
High
Low
Code coding
Medium
Medium
Low
Amplitude and phase
modulation
High
Close to zero
Medium
Complementary code
High
Zero between symbols
Low
[53]. The original LFM pulse is transformed into frequency do-
main by calculating its FFT, and part of the subcarrier signal in
the sideband of the LFM pulse is replaced by complex symbols
for communication. Under the above modulation mode, there
is no interference between communication and radar. The DIR
is proportional to the number of communication subcarriers.
The large time-bandwidth product of the OFDM-LFM sig-
nal improves the sensing resolution. To obtain the signal
with a large time-bandwidth product and a suitable signal
envelope, Dash et al. propose a generalized OFDM-LFM
signal design, which combines LFM and OFDM signals to
achieve a high-resolution of distance and velocity estimation
[54]. They interleave zeros in the input sequence to generate
a new sequence. Then, other sequences are generated by
shifting the new sequence. Therefore, the above sequences
are orthogonal. Assuming that the input sequence is xp[n],
as shown in (4), with N discrete spectral components, the
input sequence is interleaved by K −1 zeros between the
two components to form. A new data sequence x1[n] is
obtained with the above method. Then x1[n], as shown in
(5), is cyclically shifted to generate x2[n]...xK[n], as shown
in (6). The new K input sequences are calculated by NK
points IDFT to get the signals in time domain which occupy
NK subcarriers. However, only the N subcarriers are used to
transmit data. Since the input sequence is obtained by cyclic
shift, the subcarriers used by data sequences, x2[n]...xK[n],
are shifted with frequency spcaing of ∆f. The insertion of
zero sequences reduces the peak power of the signal, reducing
PAPR. Two adjacent signals are distinguished according to the
shift of the used subcarriers. However, the NK subcarriers
only carry N modulation symbols.
xp[n] = {x[0], x[1], x[2], .., x[N −1]},
(4)
x1[n] = {x[0], 01, 02, ..., 0K,x[1], 01, 02, ..., 0K,...,
x[N −1], 01, 02, ..., 0K}
,
(5)
xK[n] = {01, 02, ..., 0K,x[0], 01, 02, ..., 0K,x[1], ...,
01, 02, ..., 0K, x[N −1]}
.
(6)
D. ISAC Signal Combining OFDM and Phase Coding
OFDM signal based on phase coding optimizes the peak
sidelobe ratio (PSLR), improving signal envelope performance
of the ambiguity function [43]. The speciﬁc phase sequence
is modulated to the subcarriers of OFDM after constellation
mapping. Existing schemes are divided into two cases, namely,
direct phase coding sequence modulation and phase modulated
continuous waveform (PMCW). The combination of phase
coding and LFM, as shown in Table IV, realizes a high time-
bandwidth product and reduces PAPR.
1) Direct phase coding sequence modulation: A phase cod-
ing sequence with high autocorrelation reduces the sidelobe
level of ambiguity function. The selection of phase coding
sequence affects the performance of radar sensing. Commonly
used phase coding sequences include biphase code, polyphase
code, amplitude and phase modulation code (i.e., Huffman
code), and complimentary code. The comparison of these
phase coding sequences is shown in Table V.
The OFDM signal combined with phase coding is
s (t) =
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
m=0
anm exp (j2πfnt) rect
t −mtb
tb

,
(7)
where tb is the duration of the phase code, and anm is the
phase coding sequence [43]. The signal processing procedure
for phase-coded OFDM signal is shown in Fig. 5. Compared
with OFDM, the bit stream is modulated with a phase code
sequence prior to QAM/PSK. A dephasing coding module is
added at the communication RX.
ISAC signals based on phase coding have been studied
extensively [43], [44], [61], [62], [70]. Hu et al. apply random
sequences to design ISAC signals that meet the requirements
of radar and communication [61]. The deserialized digital
sequence is modulated in the corresponding subcarriers, and
the information required for radar and communication are
extracted at the RX, respectively.
A phase-coded OFDM signal design for a single scattering
point target is proposed in [43]. The OFDM signal comprises

8
QAM
/PSK
Bit steam
Serial-parallel 
convertion
IFFT
Add CP
Parallel-serial 
convertion
RF
Channel
Serial-parallel 
convertion
FFT
Parallel-serial 
convertion
Remove CP
RF
Signal 
processing
Phase 
code
Fig. 5: Signal processing procedure for phase-coded OFDM signal [43].
TABLE VI: ISAC signal combining OFDM and spread spectrum
Categories of spread spectrum sequences
References
One sentence summary
Gold sequence
[48], [49], [66], [67]
Gold sequence is the best coding sequence to reduce the peak
of cross-ambiguity function.
Minimum-shift keying (MSK) sequence
[68], [69]
ISAC signal based on MSK sequence has a strong correlation.
Multi-carrier direct sequence
[50]
ISAC signal based on multi-carrier direct sequence obtains ideal
ambiguity function and low PAPR.
N subcarriers, and the bit stream is mapped onto an M-
bits sequence. They also propose a radar signal processing
algorithm that achieves distance and velocity estimation with
high-resolution and high-DIR [70].
Traditional pseudo-random sequences, such as maximum
length linear shift register sequences (m-sequence) and Gold
sequences, have good autocorrelation. However, their cross-
correlation is not ideal. Moreover, the length of the n-th order
m-sequences and Gold sequences is 2n −1. They have a
limited number of sequence types and cannot be selected
randomly. Therefore, a large number of literatures have paid
attention to chaotic sequences, which are pseudorandom and
only related to the initial state and free parameters. Zhao
et al. design a phase-coded OFDM signal using chaotic
sequences, which has a large time-bandwidth product [44].
They propose a method to extract phase code sequences from
chaotic sequences with a good correlation. Then, they use the
method of subcarrier weighting to reduce the PAPR of the
signal. Besides, the signal design has high ﬂexibility to support
different application scenarios [44]. Recently, Qi et al. propose
the ISAC signal combining OFDM and phase coding with
complete complementary codes, which achieves a high DIR,
and accurate target detection [62].
2) Phase modulated continuous waveform (PMCW):
PMCW provides high-resolution sensing. The ambiguity func-
tion of PMCW is sharp pushpin type, so that the distance-
Doppler coupling is reduced [63], [64]. Moreover, PMCW is
easily implemented.
Dokhanchi et al. propose an automotive ISAC system based
on a multicarrier-phase modulated continuous waveform (MC-
PMCW). MC-PMCW reduces the modulation complexity of
PMCW signal. Due to the PMCW, the proposed signal im-
proves the anti-noise and anti-interference performance of
OFDM signal [45].
In the scenario of MTC, the multiplexing strategy is applied
to ISAC system to improve the identiﬁability of parameters.
Dokhanchi et al. embed communication symbols into PMCW
to reduce distance-Doppler ambiguity. At the TX, the sampled
sensing and communication sequences are modulated with
differential phase shift keying (DPSK) in frequency domain
and transformed to time domain through IFFT [71], [72].
ISAC signal based on LFM or phase coding alone cannot
satisfy the extremely high requirements of sensing and com-
munication. Hence, combining phase coding and LFM has
attracted widespread attention [46]. Related designs appear in
the ISAC-enabled automotive radars. In [46], a group delay
ﬁlter is applied to process radar echo signals with incon-
sistent phase coding. The signal-to-interference ratio (SIR)
is efﬁciently enhanced. The RX uses stretching processing
to reduce the sampling requirements of the received signal.
This method allows the RX to preserve phase coding through
dechirp processing because of the transmitted phase-encoded
LFM signal.
E. ISAC Signal Combining OFDM and Spread Spectrum
Spread spectrum technology has the advantages of high con-
ﬁdentiality, low power spectral density and anti-interference
capability. The combination of OFDM and spread spectrum,
namely spread spectrum-OFDM (SS-OFDM), reduces the
PAPR of OFDM signal. Among the spread spectrum technolo-
gies, DSSS is widely applied in the design of ISAC signals. In
addition, the selection of spread spectrum sequences directly
impacts the performance of ISAC signals, as shown in Table
VI.
The implementation process of SS-OFDM is provided as
follows. The communication data are ﬁrst modulated at the TX
and then spread with a spread spectrum sequence. Then, the
CP is added after IFFT. At the RX, with the processes of FFT,
demodulation, and despreading, the original communication
data are recovered [47], [73]. The SS-OFDM signal is given
by [67]
s (t) =
M−1
X
m=0
N−1
X
n=0
P −1
X
p=0
(d (n, m) am (p) exp (j2πfnt)
· rect(t −ptc −mTsym
Tsym
)),
(8)

9
Spread 
spectrum 
sequence
Bit stream
Serial-parallel 
convertion
IFFT
Add CP
Parallel-serial 
convertion
RF
Channel
Serial-parallel 
convertion
FFT
Parallel-serial 
convertion
Remove CP
RF
Signal 
processing
QAM
/PSK
Fig. 6: Signal processing procedure for SS-OFDM signal [67].
where P is the length of the spread spectrum sequence. am (p)
is the spread spectrum code, with the value of ±1. tc is the
duration of a spread spectrum code. The signal processing
procedure for SS-OFDM signals is shown in Fig. 6. Compared
with OFDM, the modulation symbols are multiplied by the
spread spectrum sequence. A despread spectrum module is
added at the communication RX.
The follow-up studies have shown that the spread factor
affects the sidelobes of the ranging ambiguity function. Gold
sequence is a commonly used spread spectrum sequence,
which efﬁciently reduces the peak of the cross-ambiguity
function [66], [67]. The OFDM signal combining spread
spectrum and LFM is proposed to improve the resolution of
the ISAC signal. The signal design ensures the orthogonality
of the signal at the RX and has a large time-bandwidth product
[49].
In addition to the Gold sequence, ISAC signals using
minimum-shift keying (MSK) and DSSS are designed in [68],
[69]. The MSK signal has the advantage of strong correlation
[69]. Besides, the optimization method of phase coding at
the TX and the method to increase the PSLR at the RX are
proposed, which effectively suppress the sidelobe level with
sacriﬁcing DIR.
The ISAC signal using multi-carrier direct sequence is
proposed to obtain an ideal ambiguity function and low PAPR
[50]. The subset of M subcarriers uses scrambling codes
and orthogonal variable spread factor codes to reduce the
correlation between subcarriers. Communication and radar
functions are isolated due to the application of scrambling
codes, reducing interference between radar and communica-
tion.
F. ISAC Signals Using the Candidate Signals of 5G-A/6G
FBMC, GFDM, DFT-s-OFDM and OTFS are proposed to
solve the problems of Doppler sensitivity, high CP overhead
and high PAPR of OFDM [29]. Another candidate signal for
the future mobile communication system, namely universal
ﬁltered multi-carrier (UFMC), has a higher OOB than OFDM,
GFDM and FBMC, which is rarely used to design ISAC
signals. In this section, we introduce the ISAC signals using
the candidate signals of 5G-A/6G.
1) FBMC:
Different from the complex input data of
OFDM, the data stream of FBMC applies real data. FBMC
applies prototype ﬁlters to ensure orthogonality between sub-
carriers, thereby avoiding the overhead of CP [28]. The
expression of the FBMC signal is
s (t) =
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
m=0
(d (mN + n) gf (t)
· exp (j2πfnt) rect(t −mTsym
Tsym
)),
(9)
where gf (t) is the prototype ﬁlter.
In terms of communication, FBMC has no CP and achieves
higher spectrum efﬁciency than OFDM. In terms of radar
sensing, FBMC has a pushpin ambiguity function. Due to the
characteristics of large bandwidth, FBMC attains the distance
resolution equivalent to OFDM. In addition, FBMC does not
have the sidelobes brought by CP, and its Doppler bandwidth
is larger than OFDM, thereby improving the estimation per-
formance of distance and velocity [18]. The orthogonality
between subcarriers is destroyed by the ﬁlters. Therefore, the
QAM symbol carried by the FBMC signal is not easy to be
demodulated. Moreover, the bandwidth of the ﬁlter is narrow
and there is a long tail in time domain, which is also one of
the disadvantages of FBMC signals.
2) GFDM: GFDM divides subcarriers into multiple groups
and adds a ﬁlter to each group. The ﬁlter of GFDM is wider
in frequency domain than that of FBMC, so that the tail of
the ﬁlter in time domain is shorter. The GFDM signal is
s (t) =
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
m=0
(d (mN + n) gk,GF DM (t)
· exp (j2πfnt) rect(t −mTsym
Tsym
)),
(10)
where gk,GF DM (t) is the ﬁlter used for the k-th group of
subcarriers, which has wide bandwidth to support multiple
subcarriers [74]. The ﬁlter of GFDM is simpler to implement
compared with that of FBMC. The modulation method of
the GFDM signal is to modulate block-like time-frequency
resources. Compared with other signals, it has a more ﬂexible
frame structure. However, the complex receiving algorithm is
required to eliminate inter-symbol interference (ISI) and ICI.
The ﬁlters preserve the circular property of the signals in
both time and frequency domains [74]. Therefore, the severe
mutual-interference is avoided and the OOB is reduced. The
performance of communication and sensing using OFDM and
GFDM signals is analyzed in [20], where GFDM achieves
higher distance resolution and reduces mutual-interference
compared to OFDM [20].

10
Bit stream
ISFFT
Heisenberg transform
Bit stream
SFFT
Wigner transform
Channel
[ , ]
x k l
[ , ]
X m n
( )
s t
( )
r t
[ , ]
Y m n
[ , ]
y k l
Fig. 7: Signal processing procedure for OTFS signal [30].
ISAC signal 
processing methods
Channel information 
matrix method
Spectrum lines 
estimator method
Super resolution 
method
Prony’s method
2D FFT method 
Bartlett method
Cyclic correlation method
MUSIC method
MVDR method
ESPRIT method
Fig. 8: ISAC signal processing methods.
3) DFT-s-OFDM: Compared with the OFDM-based ISAC
signal, the DFT-s-OFDM based ISAC signal has lower PAPR
and simple implementation, while retaining the main advan-
tages of OFDM, which allows the receiver to use multi-user
joint processing frequency division multiple access (FDMA)
and frequency domain equalization, while reducing the PAPR
of each user, so that it obtains large coverage [75]. In the
DFT-s-OFDM signal, data symbols are expanded by DFT
blocks, and then undergo IDFT [76], [77]. In order to avoid ISI
caused by the multi-path of the channel and allow frequency
domain equalization at the receiver, CP is set to the beginning
of the symbol in advance. By changing the size of the
DFT expansion block, block-based single carrier signals with
different bandwidths are synthesized. It is proved that DFT-
s-OFDM signal contains a ﬂexible internal protection cycle,
which does not affect the symbol duration [78].
Meanwhile, the DFT-s-OFDM ISAC signal is combined
with MIMO to achieve high DIR [79]. However, this scheme
still generates high PAPR with high-order QAM modulation.
Considering the extremely high data rate requirements of 5G-
A and 6G, the high-order modulation is commonly applied.
Hence, how to maintain the low PAPR and improve the spec-
tral efﬁciency of DFT-s-OFDM ISAC signal is the challenge
of ISAC signal design.
4) OTFS: OTFS is a two-dimensional (2D) modulation
scheme designed in the delay-Doppler domains. The OTFS
modulation converts the dual dispersion channel into the
delay-Doppler domains using Heisenberg transform, which
is approximately equivalent to a non-fading channel [19],
[80]. OTFS modulation has high communication reliability and
efﬁciency in the environment with high mobility [30], because
the symbol in a frame experiences nearly the same constant
fading in the delay-Doppler domains.
OTFS is an extension of OFDM and is compatible with
OFDM by adding a precoding module. The OTFS modulation
process is shown in Fig. 7. In the ﬁrst stage, the symbols
in the delay-Doppler domains, namely x[k, l], are converted
into symbols in the time-frequency domains, namely X[m, n],
through inverse symplectic ﬁnite Fourier transform (ISFFT).
ISFFT is expressed as [30]
X[m, n] =
M−1
X
k=0
N−1
X
l=0
x[k, l] exp

j2π
mk
M −nl
N

, (11)
where m, n and k, l are the indices of the symbols in time-
frequency domains and delay-Doppler domains, respectively.
Then, the obtained symbols are modulated by Heisenberg

11
transform to form transmitted signal s (t) [30].
s (t) =
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
m=0
(X [m, n] exp (j2πn∆ft)
· rect(t −mTsym
Tsym
))
,
(12)
The signal in the delay-Doppler domains is obtained by
calculating the IDFT and Wigner transform of the received
signal at the RX. Finally, the window function is applied to
improve the channel sparsity in the delay-Doppler domains
[81].
OTFS fully reveals the sparsity of wireless channels using
delay-Doppler impulse response in terms of communication.
Therefore, the number of pilots for channel estimation is
reduced, which improves the efﬁciency of channel estimation,
especially for the fading channel with large Doppler frequency
shift. Therefore, OTFS is crucial for communication in a
highly mobile environment [81].
In terms of radar sensing, OTFS is a fully digitally modu-
lated signal. Gaudio et al. study the radar sensing performance
of OTFS, OFDM, and FMCW. OTFS and OFDM achieve
the same sensing performance as FMCW, while transmitting
at high DIR [80]. Compared with OFDM, OTFS requires a
shorter CP and achieves longer sensing distance and faster
target tracking rates. Moreover, OTFS is ICI-free, which
enables large Doppler frequency shift estimation, and detects
target with high velocity [81].
OTFS-based ISAC signal is ﬁrst proposed in [82]. TX
transmits signals to RX according to the mobility state of RX,
which is obtained by echo signal, to reduce the adverse effects
of the channel. The RX demodulates the communication data
directly without channel estimation. In other words, the entire
OTFS frame is used for communication without setting the
pilot used for channel estimation.
III. ISAC SIGNAL PROCESSING
The main radar signal processing methods for ISAC signals
are divided into three categories, as shown in Fig. 8, i.e.,
channel information matrix method, spectrum lines estimator
method and super resolution method. Channel information ma-
trix method obtains sensing information through constructing a
channel information matrix, including 2D FFT method, cyclic
correlation method, and Bartlett method. The representative
method of spectrum lines estimator method is Prony’s method.
Super resolution method estimates the distance and velocity of
the target by decomposing the received signal into a noise
subspace and a signal subspace, including multiple signal
classiﬁcation (MUSIC) method, estimating signal parameter
via rotational invariance techniques (ESPRIT) method, and
minimum variance distortionless response (MVDR) method.
In 2011, Sturm et al. propose a radar signal processing
algorithm applying 2D FFT to the received modulation symbol
matrix, which simpliﬁes radar signal processing [83]. In order
to improve the sensing accuracy and improve the anti-noise
capability with low SNR, the cyclic correlation method and
Bartlett’s method are proposed respectively [84], [85]. The
cyclic correlation method is also applicable to ISAC signals
using OTFS. Prony’s method is proposed in 1795 [86]. The
sample space is obtained by oversampling the symbols of the
OFDM signal. Then, the sensing information such as distance
and velocity, is obtained by solving the differential equation
and the n-order polynomial of the pole. Schmidt et al. propose
the MUSIC method in 1986 [87]. Firstly, the signals received
at the antenna array are decomposed into signal subspace and
noise subspace through singular value decomposition (SVD).
Then, the sensing information is obtained by eigenvalue es-
timation. In 1986, Roy et al. proposed the ESPRIT method,
which applies the shift-invariant structure in the cisoids signal
subspace. Besides, the sensing information is estimated by
subspace decomposition and generalized eigenvalue calcula-
tion [88]. MVDR method is proposed by Capon in 1969, which
has lower computational complexity than that of MUSIC and
ESPRIT [89]. In the following subsections, these radar signal
processing algorithms are reviewed.
A. Performance Metrics of ISAC Signal Processing
This section summarizes the performance metrics of ISAC
signal processing, which are used to evaluate the performance
of ISAC signal processing in various scenarios.
• Computational complexity: Computational complexity
mainly refers to the time consumption of ISAC signal
processing, which is crucial for ISAC signal processing.
• Accuracy: The accuracy reveals the difference between
the sensing result and the real value.
• Root mean square error (RMSE): RMSE shows the
error of ISAC signal processing algorithm. Since SNR
affects the sensing results, RMSE also reveals the anti-
noise performance of ISAC signal processing algorithm.
• Cramer-rao lower bound (CRLB): CRLB is obtained
by calculating the likelihood function of the observation
value and the Fisher information matrix. CRLB reveals
the accuracy of radar sensing [90].
B. Channel Information Matrix Method
1) 2D FFT method: 2D FFT method directly processes
the transmitted and received modulation symbols, rather than
operating on the received signals. This approach exploits the
time-frequency structure of the OFDM signal and has low
complexity [83]. The transmitted OFDM signal is written as
s(t) =
M−1
X
m=0
N−1
X
n=0
(sTx(mN + n)
· ej2πfntrect(t −mTsym
Tsym
)),
(13)
where sTx is the communication modulation symbol sequence.
sRx(mN+n)=H(m, n)sT x(mN + n)
· e−j2πfn
2Rr
c ej2πmTsymfd,r,
(14)
where sRx is the communication symbols demodulated at RX,
H represents the channel matrix, Rr stands for the distance
of target, and fd,r represents Doppler frequency shift.
With the known phase shift of the n-th subcarrier elimi-
nated, the channel information matrix sg is obtained as

12
sg (m, n) = sRx(mN+n)
sTx(mN+n) = H(m, n)(¯kr ⊗¯kd)m,n,
(15)
with ⊗referring to Kronecker product. The terms ¯kr and ¯kd
are as follows [83].
¯kr =
h
e−j2πf1
2Rr
c , e−j2πf2
2Rr
c , ..., e−j2πfn
2Rr
c
iT
,
(16)
¯kd =
h
1, ej2πTsymfd,r, ..., ej2π(M−1)Tsymfd,r
i
.
(17)
The Doppler frequency shift fd,r and the distance Rr are
obtained by DFT transform for each row and IDFT transform
for each column of the channel information matrix sg.
Denoting the peak index of DFT on n-th row of sg as
inds,n, the velocity of target v is derived using (18) [83].
inds,n = ⌊fd,rTsymM⌋,
fd,r = 2vfc
c
,
(18)
where ⌊⌋is the ﬂoor function.
Similarly, denoting the peak index of IDFT on m-th column
of sg as inds,m, the distance Rr is derived using (19) [83].
inds,m =
2RrB
c

,
(19)
where B is the bandwidth of ISAC signal.
2) Cyclic
correlation
method:
The
signal
processing
method based on correlation method adopts a virtual cyclic
preﬁx (VCP) according to the sampling points [84]. The
maximum detection distance is related to the length of VCP.
Therefore, the maximum detection distance is no longer
limited by CP. The number of subcarriers and symbols in
ISAC signal inﬂuence the sensing performance of 2D FFT
method. However, these parameters are limited by existing
communication standards and cannot be dynamically set ac-
cording to the sensing requirements. Meanwhile, compared
with 2D FFT method, cyclic correlation (CC) method is more
suitable for processing OTFS based ISAC signals, where the
communication symbols modulated on subcarriers may be 0.
In this case, if a 2D FFT is applied, the sampling value at the
RX contains noise. Direct division leads to noise ampliﬁcation
that affects the accuracy of distance and velocity estimation
[84].
The CC method samples the echo signal and transmitted
signal in time domain, divides the samples into multiple
continuous sub-blocks, then generates the channel information
matrix by calculating the correlation between the samples of
the echo signal and the samples of the transmitted signal.
The estimation results of distance and velocity are obtained
by processing the channel information matrix. The essential
difference between CC method and 2D FFT method is the
approach of grouping sample points. At the RX, the sampling
points are grouped in time domain in CC method instead of the
grouping of samping points in time-frequency domains in 2D
FFT method. The channel information matrix in CC method
is obtained by multiplying the values of grouped sampling
points by the conjugate of the values of sampling points at
the TX. With the obtained channel information matrix, the
distance and velocity of target are obtained using maximum
likelihood (ML) and discrete fourier transform (DFT) methods,
respectively [91].
3) Bartlett’s method: The sensing accuracy of 2D FFT
method varies with the number of FFT points, falling to
achieve stable results. According to the correlation of variance,
Bartlett divides the signal sequence into several groups, and
calculates the power spectrum function of each segment [92].
This method not only obtains stable and accurates sensing
results, but also effectively mitigates the impact of noise on
sensing results [93].
Using the channel information matrix sg, Bartlett’s method
obtains the column vector yielding distance and the row
vector yielding velocity. The obtained vector is divided into
several groups, and the power spectrum function of each
group is calculated. Then, the power spectrum function of
each group is accumulated and averaged to obtain the average
periodic graph. The peak is searched according to the average
periodogram. Then, the distance and velocity of target are
calculated [85].
C. Spectrum Lines Estimator Method
In 1795, Prony proposed a method using a set of linear
combinations of exponential functions to ﬁt uniformly sampled
data. The sensing information is obtained by solving difference
equations. In the presence of noise, this method transforms the
parameter estimation into an optimization problem to improve
the sensing resolution. The steps of the Prony’s method are
provided as follows [86].
Step 1: Data vector is obtained by adopting a sampling
scheme. Assuming that the k-th sampling symbol at the RX
is expressed as
sk =
N−1
X
n=0
an

ej2π(fn+σk)∆tk−1
+ ωk,
(20)
where ∆t is the sampling interval, and ωn is the AWGN. The
purpose of this step is to estimate ej2π(fn+σk)∆t from the
sampled value.
Step 2: The characteristic equations of the linear difference
equations are constructed as
sk +
N
X
i=1
bisk−i = ω (k) +
N
X
i=1
biω (k −i) k = 1, 2, ..., N.
(21)
Step 3: Characteristic roots are derived accordings to the
characteristic equations.
Step 4: Doppler frequency shift and delay of the signal are
derived according to the characteristic roots [86].
Prony’s method uses a set of sampled values to obtain the
sensing information. However, Prony’s method is affected by
the sampling interval and noise. Total least squares-singular
value decomposition (TLS-SVD) algorithm is used to reduce
the amount of calculation and overcome the impact of noise
on ISAC signal processing [86]. The characteristic roots of
the signal are obtained according to the singular value, and
Doppler frequency shift and delay are derived using the
characteristic roots.

13
TABLE VII: Performance comparison of super resolution methods
Super resolution methods
Computational complexity
Accuracy
Resolution
MUSIC
High
High
Medium
ESPRIT
Medium
Medium
High
MVDR
Low
Low
Low
D. Super Resolution Method
The accuracy of 2D FFT and CC methods is limited by the
sampling rate. Super resolution methods effectively overcome
the limitations of the sampling rate, and provide high esti-
mation accuracy and resolution compared with channel infor-
mation matrix method and spectrum lines estimator method.
The MUSIC method comprehensively has the best accuracy
among the super resolution methods with high computational
complexity. The accuracy and computational complexity of
the ESPRIT method are both medium [94]. Although the
implementation of the MVDR method is simple, it has low
resolution and accuracy. The performance comparison among
the super resolution methods in terms of computational com-
plexity, accuracy and resolution is shown in Table VII.
1) MUSIC method: MUSIC method adopts the matrix
eigenspace decomposition, which provides an asymptotically
unbiased estimation of a) the number of incident wavefronts;
b) the direction of arrival (DoA) and distance of the target; c)
the strength and cross-correlation between the incident signals;
d) the strength of noise and interference. The steps of the
MUSIC method are provided as follows [87].
Step 1: The signal received at the antenna array composing
of M antenna elements is the combination of echo signals and
noise. It is represented as a vector X.
X=AF + W,
(22)
where A is a matrix of phase difference of the echo signal on
the antenna elements due to the delay of signal propagation,
F represents the sampling value of the echo signals on the
reference antenna array, and W represents the noise received
by the antenna array.
Step 2: The signal subspace and noise subspace are obtained
by calculating the autocorrelation matrix RXX of X.
Step 3: The spatial spectrum PMU (θ) is obtained by
constructing orthogonal relation equation according to the
orthogonal relation between the signal subspace and the noise
subspace.
Step 4: Sensing information, such as DoA, distance and
velocity etc., is obtained by searching the peak of the spatial
spectrum function.
As shown in Fig. 9, when estimating DoA, the echo
signals received by different antenna elements are used to
construct spatial spectrum function. As illustrated in Fig. 9,
when estimating distance and velocity, the channel information
matrix is constructed as the method in Section III-B1. Then,
the phase differences of subcarriers and OFDM symbols
are applied to estimate the distance and velocity of target,
respectively. Speciﬁcally, the spatial spectrum functions are
Phase difference of 
antenna elements
Signal
DoA of target
Phase difference of 
subcarriers
Signal
Distance of target
Phase difference of 
OFDM symbols
Signal
Velocity of target
Fig. 9: MUSIC method estimating DoA, distance and velocity
of target.
constructed using the row vector and column vector of the
channel information matrix by undergoing the above steps.
Then, the distance and velocity of target are estimated by
searching the peaks of these spatial spectrum functions. The
MUSIC method provide parameter estimation close to CRLB.
Simulation results in [87] demonstrate that the MUSIC method
estimates the DoAs of multiple targets with higher accuracy
than ML [95] and maximum entropy (ME) [96] methods.
2) ESPRIT method: In order to solve the challenge of blind
synchronization of OFDM signal in mobile communication
systems, Ufuk et al. propose ESPRIT [97]. This method
exploits the structure information of OFDM signals to estimate
sensing information. Compared with MUSIC method, ESPRIT
method provides the same resolution with lower complexity.
Simulation results show that ESPRIT method is superior to
MUSIC method in terms of complexity [97].
Similar to MUSIC method, ESPRIT method exploits the
signal and noise to generate asymptotically accurate estimation
of distance and velocity. ESPRIT method has the following
advantages. a) ESPRIT method does not require the knowledge
of antenna patterns. b) The complexity of ESPRIT method
is much lower than MUSIC method because it does not
need the search procedure inherent in MUSIC algorithm,
namely the Step 4 in MUSIC algorithm. c) ESPRIT method
simultaneously estimates the number of sources and their
DoAs [97].
ESPRIT exploits the rotational invariance signal subspace.
The steps of ESPRIT method are provided as follows [97].

14
Step 1: The K samples of the received signal are given by
X [k] =
N
X
n=1
anej2πfnt + ω [k] , k = 0, 1, ..., K −1,
(23)
where an is the symbol modulated on the n-th subcarrier, and
ω [k] is the AWGN.
Step 2: In order to exploit the deterministic nature of
the cisoids, X
=
[X [0] , X [1] , ..., X [K −2]] and Y
=
[X [1] , X [2] , ..., X [K −1]] are constructed. The autocorrela-
tion matrix RXX and cross-correlation matrix RXY are derived.
Step 3: Calculating the eigendecomposition of autocorrela-
tion matrix RXX, the minimum eigenvalue is the variance of
noise σ2.
Step 4: The generalized eigenvalue matrix CXX and CXY
are calculated using the variance of noise as follows.
CXX=RXX −σ2I,
(24)
CXY=RXY −σ2Z,
(25)
where I is the identity matrix, Z is given by
Z =


0
.
.
.
0
1
0
.
.
.
1
0
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1
.
.
.
0
0


.
(26)
When estimating DoA, the received signals of different
antenna array elements are used to construct the covariance
matrices and the generalized eigenvalue matrices, which are
applied to calculate the subspace rotation operator. The eigen-
value of subspace rotation operator yields DoA of target [88].
When estimating distance and velocity of target, the channel
information matrix is constructed as the method in Section
III-B1. The covariance matrices and the generalized eigenvalue
matrices are obtained using the row vector and column vector
of the channel information matrix by undergoing the above
steps. Then, the subspace rotation operators for distance and
velocity estimation are constructed, whose eigenvalues yield
the distance and velocity of target.
3) MVDR method: Capon et al. propose MVDR method
by in 1969. Compared with MUSIC and ESPRIT methods,
MVDR method has the advantages of easy implementation
and minimizing the power of noise and interference, thereby
mitigating their impact on sensing performance. MUSIC
and ESPRIT methods have better sensing performance than
MVDR method with the same number of sampling points [89].
Similar to MUSIC and ESPRIT methods, MVDR method
ﬁrstly constructs channel information matrix. The column and
row vector of the channel information matrix are weighted
summed to obtain the frequency response vectors projected
into the delay and Doppler domains, respectively. By using
frequency response vectors, the autocorrelation matrices are
constructed. The spatial spectrum functions are then con-
structed according to the autocorrelation matrices and the peak
indices of the spatial spectrum functions are obtained, yielding
the estimation of distance and velocity of target [89].
E. Signal Processing for OFDM based ISAC Signals
According to the above algorithms, 2D FFT estimates the
distance and velocity of target with low complexity. Therefore,
2D FFT method is widely applied to process most OFDM-
based ISAC signals. This section brieﬂy reviews the signal
processing methods for the OFDM-based ISAC signals.
1) ISAC signal combining OFDM and LFM: The modula-
tion symbol is recovered from the received signal by removing
CP and undergoing FFT. The echo signal is expressed as
r (t) =
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
m=0
(H (n, m) d (mN + n)ej2πfdt
· ej2πfn(t−τ)ejπkr,m(t−mTsym−τ)2),
(27)
where H (n, m) is the channel response of the n-th subcarrier
of the m-th symbol, fd is the Doppler frequency shift, τ = 2Rr
c
is the delay [55].
At the RX, the same steps are performed in reverse order to
the TX. Because of the existence of CP, the demodulator can
capture the signal of a complete symbol period and obtain the
starting point of the symbol period, which guarantees that the
result of 2D FFT is correct. When the signal is dechirped, the
received modulation symbols are recovered by calculating the
FFT of the received baseband signal.
2) ISAC signal combining OFDM and phase coding:
Combining OFDM and phase coding, as given in (7), the
received signal with down-conversion is obtained as [43]
r (t) =
N−1
X
n=0
M−1
X
m=0
(H (n, m) an,m
· rect (t −mtb −τ) ej2πfn(t−τ)).
(28)
There are multiple methods of ISAC signal processing. Take
2D FFT method as an example. The channel information
matrix is obtained. Then, the distance and velocity of target
are obtained using 2D FFT method [43].
3) ISAC signal based on spread spectrum: Take 2D FFT
method as an example. Before the OFDM modulation of the
SS-OFDM signal, the communication symbols are spread by
the spread spectrum sequence. Similarly, the received matrix
is composed of the transmitted symbols. The received matrix
is divided by the transmitted matrix, generating the channel
information matrix. The distance and velocity of the target
are obtained using 2D FFT method [98].
F. Signal Processing for OTFS based ISAC signals
The RX of OTFS signal performs the inverse process of the
TX, converting the received signal to the delay-Doppler do-
mains for demodulation [19]. Speciﬁcally, the received signal
in the time domain is ﬁrst processed by Wigner transform, and
then the symbols in the delay-Doppler domains are obtained
by adding a receiving window function and calculating SFFT
as shown in Fig. 7.
Gaudio et al. propose OTFS-based ISAC signal and the
corresponding signal processing algorithm [31]. The ML algo-
rithm is applied in radar signal processing and the soft-output
detector utilizing channel sparsity in Doppler-delay domains is

15
TABLE VIII: ISAC signal optimization
Category
Optimization method
One-sentence summery
PAPR optimization
Coding method
The coding method is used to design the information sequence to avoid
the occurrence of large signals.
Probability method
PTS and SLM are used to restrain PAPR.
Tone reservation
Part of LFM signals are used for information transmission, while other
LFM signals are used for PAPR suppression.
Interference management
Mutual-interference
cancellation
One user’s ISAC signal brings interference to another user’s reception of
the echo of ISAC signal.
Self-interference cancellation
The signal sent by TX interferes with the echo signal received by RX.
Interference avoidance
Duplex or multiple access are used to avoid interference between users.
Adaptive signal optimization
Total power constraint
When the maximum power of the signal is determined, the ISAC signal is
designed with the best performance.
Mutual information (MI)
constraints
Design adaptive ISAC signals to achieve maximum MI.
Indoor environment
Adaptive ISAC signals are used to achieve optimal scattering characteris-
tics.
Pilot structure design
The sensing performance and anti-noise ability of signal are improved by
inserting pilot.
applied for communication [31]. Then, with the combination
of OTFS and MIMO, they further applied ML algorithm in
estimating the DoA, distance and velocity of target. Two steps
of coarse and reﬁned parameter estimation are designed to
reduce the complexity of ISAC signal processing [99]. Raviteja
et al. propose a matched ﬁlter for the distance and velocity
estimation of the target. Compared with the CP overhead in
OFDM, OTFS requires less overhead. Meanwhile, since OTFS
signal has no ICI, it achieves more accurate Doppler frequency
shift estimation, achieving more accurate velocity estimation
compared with OFDM signal [19].
IV. ISAC SIGNAL OPTIMIZATION
ISAC signal optimization mainly includes three categories,
i.e., PAPR optimization, interference management, and adap-
tive signal optimization, as shown in Table VIII. ISAC signal
with high PAPR is easy to enter the non-linear region of
the power ampliﬁer, which leads to signal distortion. There-
fore, an effective PAPR reduction scheme is necessary to
reduce the PAPR of ISAC signal. The RX will encounter
the self-interference from the TX and the mutual-interference
from other TX, which will degrade the sensing performance.
Hence, interference management is essential in ISAC sig-
nal optimization. As the application scenarios of the ISAC
signal are various, adaptive signal optimization is required,
including signal parameter optimization and signal structure
optimization. Through signal optimization, ISAC signal adapts
to various application scenarios, and improves the performance
of sensing and communication.
A. PAPR Optimization
High PAPR may cause OOB or in-band distortion of the
transmitted OFDM signals [37]. Thus, the OFDM signals
require a large linear dynamic range of power ampliﬁers to
avoid distortion. This subsection reviews coding method, tone
preserving method, and probability method to reduce PAPR.
1) Coding method: When the OFDM signal has a large
amplitude, it may produce a high PAPR. However, this only
occurs when the modulation symbols of the OFDM signal
form a tightly structured symbol sequence. The coding method
generates a signal with low PAPR by coding sequences [100].
The bit stream is processed through the coding sequences to
generate a plurality of candidate sequences. The candidate
sequences are modulated into symbol sequences respectively.
The PAPR of the OFDM signal for each symbol sequence is
ﬁrst calculated, and then the candidate sequences that produce
high peak power are discarded. Since some candidate se-
quences are abandoned, the bit stream needs to be transmitted
with long codes. For example, 3-bit information needs to be
encoded with 4-bit coding sequences. The coding methods
have a large amount of calculation, because it needs to exhaust
all the candidate sequences. However, the coding methods are
applicable to the case where the coding sequence is short and
the number of subcarriers is small. The number of candidate
sequences that need to be exhausted will grow rapidly if there
are many subcarriers [101].
Take the Golay code as an example. Golay code is a typical
PAPR reduction coding method with strong error correction
capability and high sensing performance [102]. Using the
Golay sequence, PAPR is reduced to 3 dB [100].
The OFDM signal is a superposition of modulation symbols
over all the subcarriers. A self-disarrange block coding method
is proposed to reduce PAPR [101]. Firstly, Golay sequences are
applied to encode the information bits to obtain an encoded
packet. Then, the proposed algorithm generates all arrange-
ments of encoded packets on the OFDM symbol. Finally, the
modulation symbol sequence with the lowest PAPR is selected.

16
In addition, the P4 code is used to reduce PAPR, and the phase
code sequence of the signal is designed by cyclic shift based
on the P4 sequence [103].
2) Probability method: The probability method is an ex-
tension of the coding method. The idea of the probability
method is to use a sequence set to represent a bit stream
of communication information. Then, the sequence with the
lowest PAPR is selected from the sequence set and regarded
as the transmission sequence. Commonly used probability
methods mainly include partial transmission sequence (PTS)
and selected mapping (SLM) [104].
The PTS divides the modulation symbols into several sub-
blocks. Each sub-block is modulated onto ﬁxed subcarriers and
adjusted with different phase factors to minimize the PAPR of
each sub-block. The ability to reduce PAPR improves as the
number of sub-blocks increases [104].
The SLM converts the original modulation symbols into low
PAPR symbols. This method generates modulation symbols
according to the original modulation symbols created by the
TX. Then, the modulation sequence with a low PAPR is
selected to transmit, thereby reducing PAPR without distorting
the transmitted signal [105].
Both PTS and SLM need to record the side information (SI)
indicating the modulation symbols. The RX demodulates the
modulation symbols according to the SI index to obtain the
communication symbol. The performance of communication
and sensing at RX depends on the accuracy of SI [104], [105].
An SLM method without sending SI indices is proposed in
[105], where the SI indices are embedded into the modulation
sequence to reduce the overhead in the transmitted sequence.
In order to reduce PAPR efﬁciently, a method combining
SLM and PTS is proposed in [104]. The modulation symbol
sequences ﬁrst undergo SLM. When the PAPR of the output
sequence of the previous step is smaller than a threshold, the
sequence is chosen to be modulated on the ISAC signal at TX.
Otherwise, the output sequence is further processed using the
PTS method. This method reduces the PAPR with low com-
plexity without degrading the performance of communication
and sensing.
3) Tone reservation:
Tone reservation method reserves
some subcarriers to modulate LFM signals and generate
peak canceling signals. Other subcarriers are used to transmit
communication signals. This method has low complexity and
BER. However, some subcarriers are reserved to reduce PAPR,
resulting in the waste of spectrum resources.
In [106], a PAPR reduction method is proposed using
the tone reservation method. An orthogonal chirp division
multiplexing (OCDM) signal is composed of N orthogonal
LFM signals and OFDM signals. Compared with classical
tone reservation method, this scheme requires fewer peak can-
cellation signals to reduce PAPR. The performance of PAPR
reduction improves as the number of peak cancellation signals
increases. The tone preserving method is combined with the
SLM method by ﬁrst performing the SLM method, and then
performing the tone preserving method, which reduces the
PAPR more effectively than the tone reservation method [107].
B. Interference Management
Interference is one of the non-negligible factors that restrict
the performance of ISAC system. ISAC interference mainly
consists of mutual-interference and self-interference. For the
ISAC system, since the echo signal usually returns to the RX
before the transmission is completed, the transmission will
interfere with the echo signal, which causes self-interference.
When the ISAC system is applied in the multi-path multi-user
scenario, the ISAC signal transmitted by one user may cause
interference to other users, resulting in mutual-interference.
If there is strong mutual-interference and self-interference, as
shown in Fig. 10, the sensing performance of ISAC system
will be severely degraded, failing to correctly identify targets
within its detection distance.
1) Mutual-interference
cancellation:
Typical
mutual-
interference
cancellation
algorithms
consist
of
serial
interference cancellation [108] and selective interference
cancellation [16], [109], [110].
• Serial interference cancellation
The core method of the serial interference cancellation is to
demodulate the received ISAC signal. Then the reconstructed
interference signal from the received signal is subtracted [108].
Schmidl and Cox (S&C) algorithm is ﬁrst used to detect
interference signals through amplitude attenuation and phase
rotation. Then, starting from the identiﬁed interference signal
with the maximum power, the interference signal is decoded
successively. Finally, in order to reconstruct the signal, it is
necessary to remodulate the correct demodulation interference
signal, and add the amplitude attenuation, phase rotation,
frequency offset and delay. Then the reconstructed interference
signal is subtracted from the original ISAC echo signal to
eliminate the interference.
One of the challenges of serial interference cancellation
is that the amplitude attenuation and phase rotation of the
interference signals with the same delay cannot be detected by
correlation. It is shown in [108] that when the power difference
between the identiﬁed interference signal and other received
signals is smaller than 15 dB, the frequency offset may be
misestimated by S&C algorithm. Moreover, the residual fre-
quency offset in the estimation process will have a cumulative
effect on the subsequent signal subtraction [16], [109], [110].
• Selective interference cancellation
Difference from serial interference cancellation, only the
strongest identiﬁed interference will be reconstructed for se-
lective interference cancellation [109]. Selective interference
cancellation only needs one cycle processing, and it does not
leave ambiguous dots, which will not be mistaken as a target.
However, the performance of the two interference cancella-
tion algorithms largely depends on the correct frequency offset
estimation. Minor errors in frequency offset estimation may
lead to incorrect signal reconstruction.
2) Self-interference cancellation: In addition to mutual-
interference, self-interference is also the main factor impacting
the performance of the ISAC system. The self-interference
may be much stronger than the echo signal, since the TX
is close to the RX [111]. Although the radar RX knows

17
Multi-path
Terminal 1 
with ISAC capability
Terminal 2 
with ISAC capability
Self-interference
Mutual-interference
BS
with ISAC 
capability
Fig. 10: Multi-path and multi-user scenario.
the transmitted signal, the channel is random, making self-
interference cancellation challenging.
The adaptive interference cancellation method proposed in
[112] generates the cancellation signal with the opposite phase
and equal amplitude to the self-interference signal, and then
adds it to the received signal to cancel the self-interference.
In [111], instead of using a direct interference cancellation
scheme, the self-interference channel between transmitting
and receiving antennas is estimated to eliminate the self-
interference and realize full duplex operation, which is suitable
for moving target detection. In [113], the self-interference of
an omnidirectional antenna is considered, and the least squares
matching pursuit (LSMP) algorithm was used to search all
targets iteratively. [114] and [11] indicate that promoting
sufﬁcient TX-RX isolation is a critical issue to be considered.
In order to achieve adequate TX-RX isolation, appropriately
customized RF and digital cancellation solutions are designed
in [11] to cancel the self-interference without suppressing the
echo signals of actual targets.
3) Interference avoidance: Another solution to interfer-
ence management is interference avoidance, which adopts
the schemes such as duplex or multiple access to avoid the
interference, such that there is no need to apply complex
interference cancellation schemes.
• Mutual-interference avoidance
For multi-path and multi-user scenarios shown in Fig. 10,
a multiple access scheme is applied to distinguish different
ISAC users, so as to avoid mutual-interference. Common
multiple access methods include time division multiple access
(TDMA), code division multiple access (CDMA), orthogonal
frequency division multiple access (OFDMA), and carrier
sense multiple access (CSMA), which are applied to avoid
mutual-interference in the ISAC system.
The principle of TDMA is that different ISAC users
transceive signals within the speciﬁed time slots, avoiding
the interference. In [115], the TDMA is applied for channel
allocation among multiple radars to achieve the required
channel isolation level.
With CDMA, ISAC users are assigned with orthogonal code
sequences for channel separation to avoid mutual-interference.
One method for mutual-interference avoidance is to combine
CDMA with DSSS techniques to design ISAC signal. In [50],
a new ISAC signal based on multicarrier-direct sequence-
CDMA (MC-DS-CDMA) is proposed. The radar subsystem
uses spread spectrum codes with ideal autocorrelation and
cross-correlation characteristics to estimate distance, and uses
scrambling codes to distinguish radar and communication
signals. In [116], an ISAC signal combining radar sensing
with DSSS communication is proposed, which reduces the
interference between multiple users. Another method is to
adopt a signal processing scheme to suppress interference.
In [98], a code division-OFDM (CD-OFDM) ISAC system is
proposed. The corresponding serial interference cancellation-
based signal processing method is proposed to suppress the
mutual-interference, which achieves code division gain to
suppress the interference between radar echo signal and com-
munication signal.
With OFDMA, each user is assigned a subset of subcar-
riers, and multiple users transmit simultaneously. In [117],
the concept of OFDMA radar is proposed, and a subset of
subcarriers are allocated to each radar task so that the radar
performs multiple tasks at the same time. OFDMA radar has
the advantages of high sensing accuracy, strong anti-clutter
and anti-interference ability, and high spectrum efﬁciency. In
[118], based on OFDMA, the concept of interference-aware
power allocation is proposed to improve sensing ability and
clutter suppression. The subcarriers overly affected by clutter
will be dropped.
CSMA is a distributed multiple access method to avoid

18
transmission conﬂict. In [119], an FMCW radar based on
CSMA is proposed, which simultaneously avoids both wide-
band and narrowband interferences causing miss detection and
false alarm. In [120], a novel concept of packet-based FMCW
radar using CSMA is proposed to reduce the probability of
narrowband interference causing false alarm of ghost target
[121].
• Self-interference avoidance
Self-interference is the main challenge of a full-duplex
ISAC system, which will degrade the sensing performance.
The performance of self-interference cancellation under the
full duplex assumption is limited and has high computational
complexity in the digital domain. Therefore, self-interference
avoidance is essential to improve the sensing performance
with imperfect self-interference cancellation. In [122], the
Golay sequence in the preamble is applied to reduce self-
interference in short-distance sensing. In addition, for long-
distance sensing, a pilot signal is designed, where the OFDM
symbols without self-interference at the end of OFDM data
frame is uesd to achieve accurate distance estimation. This
method does not need self-interference cancellation in the
digital domain, which reduces the computational complexity.
In [123], a factor-graph approach is proposed for joint channel
estimation, self-interference mitigation, and decoding, which
is suitable for OFDM-based self-interference-limited transmis-
sions.
C. Adaptive Signal Optimization
According to the domains of the decision variables, different
ISAC signal parameter optimization algorithms are proposed.
Adaptive signal optimization methods are proposed for vari-
ous scenarios, including ISAC signal parameter optimization
and ISAC signal structure optimization. When optimizing
the parameters of ISAC signal, the objective functions and
constraints need to be designed according to the requirements
of scenarios, including sensing MI, DIR, PAPR, and transmit
power, etc. ISAC signal optimization faces the trade-off be-
tween the performance of sensing and communication, which
is a challenge of ISAC signal optimization [124]. According
to the decision variables, different ISAC signal parameter
optimization algorithms are proposed.
1) ISAC signal parameter optimization: The parameters
of ISAC signal in space-time-frequency domains need to be
optimized to satisfy the requirements of communication and
sensing in various application scenarios.
• Parameter optimization in space domain
The beamforming and precoding methods have been pro-
posed for the ISAC signal optimization in the space domain.
In [69], the impact of random communication signal on radar
peak sidelobe level (PSL) is reduced by selecting the signal
with high PSL to detect weak targets accurately. The transmit
waveform matrix is optimized for designing the radar beam
pattern under the constraints of transmit power and signal-to-
interference plus noise ratio (SINR) in [125]. The CRLB of
sensing channel estimation is minimized under the constraint
of SINR for each user [126]. In [127], a low-complexity min-
imum beam pattern gain maximization method is proposed to
match the beam pattern and maximize the minimum weighted
beam pattern gain.
• Parameter optimization in time-frequency domains
In terms of the ISAC signal optimization in time-frequency
domains, existing works applied the sensing and communica-
tion MI and CRLB to optimize the ISAC signal.
Several literature take sensing MI as the objective function
of the ISAC signal optimization. For example, the sensing
MI is maximized under the constraints of DIR and subcarrier
power ratio to improve the performance of ISAC systems in
[128]. The weighted sum of sensing MI and communication
MI is maximized under the total power constraint to obtain
a closed-form solution for optimal power allocation of ISAC
signals [21], [38].
Besides sensing and communication MI, other performance
metrics are adopted as the objective functions. [129] max-
imizes the detection probability of radar sensing under the
constraints of the total transmit power and DIR. In point-to-
point communication scenarios, the power of the ISAC signals
is optimally allocated under the constraints of pulse com-
pression sidelobe and communication data rate in [130]. The
proposed method in [130] outperforms traditional windowing
and waterﬁlling techniques under severe channel fading con-
ditions. In [131], an adaptive ISAC signal optimization model
with the maximum entropy, SNR and DIR are established
under the constraint of total power. To achieve a balanced
trade-off between sensing and communication, the CRLB
of sensing channel estimation is minimized to enhance the
sensing accuracy and channel capacity under the constraint of
total transmit power [132]. To solve the optimization model,
they propose two signal optimization methods, namely the
weighted optimization ISAC signal design and the Pareto
optimal ISAC signal design method.
Signal 
Structure
Signal 
Technology
Sensing
Sensing
Pilot
Data
Sequence 
Selection
Pilot 
Structure
Resource 
Allocation
Coding 
Mode
Time 
Frequency 
Resources
Fig. 11: ISAC signal structure.
2) ISAC signal structure optimization: The signal structure
is divided into the pilot and data parts, as shown in Fig. 11.
The pilot signal is known in the modulation domain and is
normally inserted in the OFDM signal for synchronization and
channel estimation [133]. The pilot signal has the advantages
of high power, excellent sensing performance and strong anti-
interference capability, which has the potential to be applied
in radar sensing [134]. The performance of the ISAC signal
is improved by optimizing the pilot signal structure. Pilot
sequences with ideal autocorrelation characteristics are used
to improve the radar sensing. In addition, the structure and

19
resource allocation of the pilot also affect the performance of
radar sensing.
In terms of sequence selection, sequences with ideal auto-
correlation characteristics and good cross-correlation charac-
teristics should be selected. In [135], the preamble composed
of Golay sequence of 802.11ad is applied to radar sensing
because of its good autocorrelation properties. In [136], the
Zadoff-Chu sequence is used for radar processing because
of its good orthogonal ability, which reduces the impact of
phase between adjacent pulses. In [134], the performance of
5G reference signals, including positioning reference signal
(PRS), demodulation reference signal (DMRS), channel state
information-reference signal (CSI-RS) and synchronization
signal (SS), is veriﬁed and it is proved that PRS has advantages
in radar sensing. Further, the concept of sensing reference
signal is proposed by exploiting the existing reference signal
in radar sensing, which is speciﬁcally suitable to 5G-A.
In terms of the pilot structure, due to the 2D time-frequency
properties of OFDM signals, the pilot signals are inserted
in the 2D resource blocks. There are three common pilot
structures as shown in Fig. 12. Block pilots are distributed con-
tinuously in frequency domain and discretely in time domain,
which are suitable for frequency-selective fading channels. The
comb pilots are continuously distributed in time domain and
discretely in frequency domain. Comb pilots are suitable for
time-selective fading channels. Discrete pilots are discretely
inserted in both the time and frequency domains, which saves
time-frequency resources and signiﬁcantly improves spectrum
efﬁciency [137], [138].
O
f
t
O
f
O
t
t
O
f
t
f
(a) Block pilot
(b) Comb pilot
(d) Rhombus discrete pilot
(c) Rectangle discrete pilot
Pilot symbol
Empty symbol
Fig. 12: Main pilot structures.
The comb pilot structure is adopted in [137], where the
pilot sequence is Barker code and the radar signal processing
method combining matched ﬁlter detection and 2D Fourier
transform is applied. The distance resolution of 0.1 m and ve-
locity resolution of 0.58 m/s are realized. In [138], an OFDM-
MIMO ISAC system using a superimposed pilot is proposed.
Compared with comb pilot and block pilot, the superimposed
pilot has the advantages of comb pilots in velocity estimation
and block pilots in distance estimation, which is suitable for
frequency-selective and fast fading channels.
In terms of resource allocation, the subcarrier allocation
between the data and pilot is optimized to maximize the
sensing accuracy and channel capacity [137]. In [139], the
dynamic change of the number of pilot subcarriers is used
for radar detection at different distances, which realizes short-
range radar (SRR), medium-range radar (MRR) and long-
range radar (LRR). A full-duplex ISAC system is proposed in
[140], where the pilot overhead is used for channel estimation
and radar sensing, and the sum data rate is optimized according
to the pilot overhead and power.
In addition, as shown in Fig. 11, the autocorrelation of the
data part is improved by utilizing phase coding to enhance the
sensing performance [102]. Radar sensing with both pilot and
data achieving high sensing performance is the future trend in
ISAC signal design and optimization.
V. FUTURE TRENDS
The application scenarios of ISAC systems are various. As
shown in Fig. 1, typical scenarios include UAV swarm, intelli-
gent transportation, smart factory, smart home, etc. Therefore,
the ISAC signals need to be ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable,
adapting to diverse scenarios. As shown in Fig. 13, this
section provides the future research trends of ISAC signals for
various application scenarios, including signal design, signal
processing and signal optimization, to realize the goal of
ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable ISAC signals.
Scenarios
Requirement
Key technologies
Flexible signal design
Efficient ISAC signal processing
Multi-domain signal optimization
Flexible and reconfigurable ISAC signals
Various ISAC scenarios including UAV 
swarms, intelligent transportation, smart 
factories, smart home, etc.
Fig. 13: Future research trends of ISAC signals.
A. ISAC Signal Design
ISAC signal design mainly includes waveform design, frame
structure design, and transmission mode design. Academics
continue to propose new waveforms for 5G-A and 6G. It is
crucial to select the appropriate waveform for ISAC through
performance evaluation. It is necessary to optimize the frame
structure to improve the efﬁciency of communication and
sensing. In terms of transmission mode, the duplex method
is still an open problem.

20
1) Waveform design: OFDM is the mainstream modula-
tion technology in mobile communication systems. However,
various waveforms, such as FBMC, GFDM, and OTFS, are
proposed for the next-generation mobile communication sys-
tems, which are the further trends of modulation technology.
Considering the high DIR and sensing accuracy of the signals
on the THz spectrum bands, the ISAC signals on THz bands
have great advantages in improving the performance of sensing
and communication. It is noted that the candidate ISAC
signals on THz bands include DFT-s-OFDM and single carrier-
frequency domain equalization (SC-FDE), etc.
As part of the Internet of things (IoT) applications, it is
expected that ISAC technology will be required not only
on the base station (BS) side for sensing the surrounding
environment, such as intelligent transportation and other ap-
plication scenarios, but also on the terminal side in various
IoT scenarios, such as smart home.
Speciﬁc requirements need to be considered in the modu-
lation technology. For example, low sidelobe, high reliability
[141] and multi-user interference [142]. In addition, due to
the different requirements of communication and sensing, it
is necessary to balance communication and sensing when
designing the ISAC signal.
2) Frame structure: Existing ISAC signals generally adopt
the frame structure speciﬁed by the standards such as 3GPP 5G
NR and IEEE 802.11. In complex scenarios, the ﬁxed frame
structure cannot perfectly adapt to differentiated requirements.
Hence, the frame structure design of ISAC signals should
be ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable to adapt to various scenarios.
The existing ISAC signals generally apply pilots to realize
the sensing function, which will not affect the communication
function. When more resources are allocated to the pilot, the
sensing performance will be improved, and the communication
performance will be degraded. There are some studies on the
ﬂexible design of the ISAC frame structure. In [137], the pilot
and data subcarriers are optimally allocated to improve the
performance of sensing and communication. The pilot-based
ISAC signal in [143] ﬂexibly allocate the pilots to achieve
long-distance sensing [143]. In the future, joint optimization
of the parameters in space-time-frequency domains adapts to
various scenarios and realize ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable ISAC
signals.
3) Transmission mode: The transmission modes of com-
munication include full duplex and half duplex. The majority
of ISAC systems adopt half duplex mode. [144] propose a
full duplex (FD) ISAC scheme, which uses the waiting time
of traditional pulse radar to transmit communication signals.
Compared with the traditional ISAC signal, this scheme im-
proves the DIR and solves the problem of blind detection.
However, the transmission mode suitable to ISAC is still one
of the future research trends.
B. ISAC Signal Processing
ISAC signal processing includes single-BS sensing algo-
rithms and multi-BS cooperative sensing algorithms. High
sensing accuracy and low computational complexity are the
two most critical performance metrics pursued by ISAC signal
processing algorithms. ISAC signal processing algorithm will
be the trade-off between these two performance indices. For
new applications such as intelligent transportation and smart
city, multi-BS cooperative sensing is the key technology to
realize large-scale and high-accuracy sensing. The design of a
cooperative sensing algorithm is challenging.
1) ISAC signal processing with high accuracy and low
complexity: There is a trade-off between the complexity and
accuracy when designing ISAC signal processing algorithms.
[145] analyzes the sensing performance of the existing frame
structure using different reference signals. However, since
there are multiple reference signals, the effective application
of these reference signals is still an open problem. In the
future, the ISAC systems on the mmWave and THz bands
will be common [146]. Hence, the high-accurate ISAC signal
processing algorithms on mmWave and THz bands are the
future research trends.
2) Cooperative signal processing: The networked mobile
communication system is applied to realize cooperative sens-
ing using multiple BSs, which can signiﬁcantly improve the
sensing accuracy and range [147]. Correspondingly, the signal
processing for cooperative sensing needs to be studied. Most
existing cooperative sensing methods are designed for pulse
radar or coherent radar. Take the coherent radar as an example,
the signals transmitted by each radar are adjusted to the same
frequency and phase when they reach the target, which greatly
improves the SNR of the echo signal [148]. Coherent radar
requires high time and phase synchronization, whose signal
processing methods are unsuitable for mobile communication
systems with ISAC capability. There are few existing studies
on cooperative sensing methods for ISAC systems. Hence, the
signal processing for cooperative sensing and communication
system is one of the future trends.
C. ISAC Signal Optimization
The ISAC signal design mainly focuses on the research
of modulation technology, and there is no ﬂexible and re-
conﬁgurable ISAC design combined with the frame struc-
ture. Besides, there are no comprehensive signal optimization
schemes in the space-time-frequency domains. The goal of
spatial optimization is to design the ISAC beams into ideal
directions to improve the performance of sensing and commu-
nication. Optimization in the time-frequency domains focuses
on the subcarrier and power allocation of ISAC signals. The
ISAC signal optimization in the space-time-frequency domains
simultaneously optimizes the precoding matrix, subcarrier
allocation, power allocation, frame structure, etc., to obtain an
ISAC signal with approximate ideal performance. In addition,
there are limited studies on ISAC signal optimization for
multi-BS cooperative sensing. Overall, under the differentiated
requirements of communication and sensing in diversiﬁed sce-
narios, the ISAC signal optimization in space-time-frequency
multi-domain is the future trend. Besides, to extend the sensing
range and improve the sensing accuracy, further in-depth
research on ISAC signal optimization for cooperative sensing
is required.

21
VI. CONCLUSION
ISAC has been regarded as one of the potential key tech-
nologies of future mobile communication systems, with ISAC
signal as the fundamental technology. In this article, we review
ISAC signals from the perspective of 5G, 5G-A and 6G
mobile communication systems from three aspects, namely
signal design, signal processing, and signal optimization. In the
future, facing the various scenarios in the era of 5G-A and 6G,
ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable ISAC signals need to be designed.
This article comprehensively reviews the ISAC signals, which
may provide a guideline for researchers in the area of ISAC
technology.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Feng, Z. Fang, Z. Wei, X. Chen, Z. Quan, and D. Ji, “Joint radar
and communication: A survey,” China Communications, vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 1–27, 2020.
[2] M. M. S¸ahin and H. Arslan, “Multi-functional coexistence of radar-
sensing and communication waveforms,” in 2020 IEEE 92nd Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC2020-Fall).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[3] H. Hayvaci and B. Tavli, “Spectrum sharing in radar and wireless
communication systems: A review,” in 2014 International Conference
on Electromagnetics in Advanced Applications (ICEAA).
IEEE, 2014,
pp. 810–813.
[4] A. R. Chiriyath, B. Paul, and D. W. Bliss, “Radar-communications
convergence: Coexistence, cooperation, and co-design,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 1–12, 2017.
[5] F. Liu, C. Masouros, A. P. Petropulu, H. Grifﬁths, and L. Hanzo, “Joint
radar and communication design: Applications, state-of-the-art, and the
road ahead,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 6, pp.
3834–3862, 2020.
[6] J. A. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Masouros, R. W. Heath Jr, Z. Feng,
L. Zheng, and A. Petropulu, “An overview of signal processing
techniques for joint communication and radar sensing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2102.12780, 2021.
[7] H. Grifﬁths, L. Cohen, S. Watts, E. Mokole, C. Baker, M. Wicks, and
S. Blunt, “Radar spectrum engineering and management: Technical and
regulatory issues,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 85–
102, 2014.
[8] S. Quan, W. Qian, J. Guq, and V. Zhang, “Radar-communication
integration: An overview,” in The 7th IEEE/International Conference
on Advanced Infocomm Technology.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 98–103.
[9] R. M. Mealey, “A method for calculating error probabilities in a radar
communication system,” IEEE Transactions on Space Electronics and
Telemetry, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 37–42, 1963.
[10] M. Scharrenbroich and M. Zatman, “Joint radar-communications re-
source management,” in 2016 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[11] C. B. Barneto, T. Riihonen, M. Turunen, L. Anttila, M. Fleischer,
K. Stadius, J. Ryyn¨anen, and M. Valkama, “Full-duplex OFDM radar
with LTE and 5G NR waveforms: Challenges, solutions, and mea-
surements,” IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques,
vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 4042–4054, 2019.
[12] https://www.tonex.com/training-courses/introduction-to-6g-imt-2030/.
[13] S. Xu, B. Chen, and P. Zhang, “Radar-communication integration based
on DSSS techniques,” in 2006 8th international Conference on Signal
Processing, vol. 4.
IEEE, 2006.
[14] C. Sturm, T. Zwick, and W. Wiesbeck, “An OFDM system concept for
joint radar and communications operations,” in VTC Spring 2009-IEEE
69th Vehicular Technology Conference.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[15] C. Sturm, T. Zwick, W. Wiesbeck, and M. Braun, “Performance
veriﬁcation of symbol-based OFDM radar processing,” in 2010 IEEE
Radar Conference.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 60–63.
[16] Y. L. Sit, L. Reichardt, C. Sturm, and T. Zwick, “Extension of the
OFDM joint radar-communication system for a multipath, multiuser
scenario,” in 2011 IEEE RadarCon (RADAR).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 718–
723.
[17] Y. Zhou, H. Zhou, F. Zhou, Y. Wu, and V. C. Leung, “Resource
allocation for a wireless powered integrated radar and communication
system,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
253–256, 2018.
[18] S. Koslowski, M. Braun, and F. K. Jondral, “Using ﬁlter bank multicar-
rier signals for radar imaging,” in 2014 IEEE/ION Position, Location
and Navigation Symposium-PLANS 2014.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 152–157.
[19] R. Hadani, S. Rakib, M. Tsatsanis, A. Monk, A. J. Goldsmith,
A. F. Molisch, and R. Calderbank, “Orthogonal time frequency space
modulation,” in 2017 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[20] J. B. Sanson, D. Castanheira, A. Gameiro, and P. P. Monteiro, “Non-
orthogonal multicarrier waveform for radar with communications sys-
tems: 24 GHz GFDM radcom,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 128 694–
128 705, 2019.
[21] X. Yuan, Z. Feng, J. A. Zhang, W. Ni, R. P. Liu, Z. Wei, and C. Xu,
“Spatio-temporal power optimization for MIMO joint communication
and radio sensing systems with training overhead,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 514–528, 2020.
[22] X. Yuan, Z. Feng, W. Ni, Z. Wei, and R. P. Liu, “Waveform optimiza-
tion for MIMO joint communication and radio sensing systems with
imperfect channel feedbacks,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference
on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[23] J. A. Zhang, M. L. Rahman, K. Wu, X. Huang, Y. J. Guo, S. Chen, and
J. Yuan, “Enabling joint communication and radar sensing in mobile
networks—a survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 306–345, 2021.
[24] Z. Wang, K. Han, J. Jiang, Z. Wei, G. Zhu, Z. Feng, J. Lu, and
C. Meng, “Symbiotic sensing and communications towards 6G: vision,
applications, and technology trends,” in 2021 IEEE 94th Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC2021-Fall).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[25] D. K. P. Tan, J. He, Y. Li, A. Bayesteh, Y. Chen, P. Zhu, and W. Tong,
“Integrated sensing and communication in 6G: Motivations, use cases,
requirements, challenges and future directions,” in 2021 1st IEEE
International Online Symposium on Joint Communications & Sensing
(JC&S).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[26] J. Xiong, H. Yin, J. Zhu, and Y. Tang, “An overview of waveform
design for integrated sensing and communication,” in 2022 IEEE/CIC
International Conference on Communications in China (ICCC). IEEE,
2022, pp. 991–996.
[27] L. Hu, Z. Du, and G. Xue, “Radar-communication integration based
on OFDM signal,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Signal
Processing, Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), 2014, pp.
442–445.
[28] W. Cao, J. Zhu, X. Li, W. Hu, and J. Lei, “Feasibility of multi-carrier
modulation signals as new illuminators of opportunity for passive radar:
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing versus ﬁlter-bank multi-
carrier,” IET Radar, Sonar & Navigation, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1080–1087,
2016.
[29] R. Gerzaguet, N. Bartzoudis, L. G. Baltar, V. Berg, J.-B. Dor´e,
D. Kt´enas, O. Font-Bach, X. Mestre, M. Payar´o, M. F¨arber et al.,
“The 5g candidate waveform race: a comparison of complexity and
performance,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and
Networking, vol. 2017, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2017.
[30] P. Raviteja, K. T. Phan, Y. Hong, and E. Viterbo, “Interference
cancellation and iterative detection for orthogonal time frequency space
modulation,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 17,
no. 10, pp. 6501–6515, 2018.
[31] L. Gaudio, M. Kobayashi, G. Caire, and G. Colavolpe, “On the
effectiveness of otfs for joint radar parameter estimation and commu-
nication,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19,
no. 9, pp. 5951–5965, 2020.
[32] D. R. Wehner, “High resolution radar,” Norwood, 1987.
[33] S. Stein, “Algorithms for ambiguity function processing,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 588–599, 1981.
[34] Y. Zhao and S.-G. Haggman, “Sensitivity to doppler shift and carrier
frequency errors in OFDM systems-the consequences and solutions,” in
Proceedings of Vehicular Technology Conference-VTC, vol. 3.
IEEE,
1996, pp. 1564–1568.
[35] J. Johnston and A. Fairhead, “Waveform design and doppler sensitivity
analysis for nonlinear FM chirp pulses,” in IEE Proceedings F (Com-
munications, Radar and Signal Processing), vol. 133, no. 2.
IET,
1986, pp. 163–175.
[36] G. Franken, H. Nikookar, and P. Van Genderen, “Doppler tolerance
of OFDM-coded radar signals,” in 2006 European radar conference.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 108–111.
[37] S. H. Han and J. H. Lee, “Papr reduction of OFDM signals using a
reduced complexity PTS technique,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters,
vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 887–890, 2004.

22
[38] Y. Liu, G. Liao, J. Xu, Z. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Adaptive OFDM
integrated radar and communications waveform design based on in-
formation theory,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 21, no. 10, pp.
2174–2177, 2017.
[39] M. Li, W.-Q. Wang, and Z. Zheng, “Communication-embedded OFDM
chirp waveform for delay-doppler radar,” IET Radar, Sonar & Naviga-
tion, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 353–360, 2018.
[40] M. B. Alabd, B. Nuss, C. Winkler, and T. Zwick, “Partial chirp
modulation technique for chirp sequence based radar communications,”
in 2019 16th European Radar Conference (EuRAD).
IEEE, 2019, pp.
173–176.
[41] Z. Zhang, Y. Qu, Z. Wu, M. J. Nowak, J. Ellinger, and M. C. Wicks,
“RF steganography via LFM chirp radar signals,” IEEE Transactions
on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1221–1236,
2017.
[42] P. Striano, C. V. Ilioudis, C. Clemente, and J. J. Soraghan, “Per-
formance of a communicating radar using fsk and fractional fourier
transform for automotive applications,” in 2019 IEEE Radio and
Wireless Symposium (RWS).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–4.
[43] X. Tian, T. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and Z. Song, “Waveform design and
processing in OFDM based radar-communication integrated systems,”
in 2017 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in
China (ICCC).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[44] J. Zhao, K. Huo, and X. Li, “A chaos-based phase-coded OFDM signal
for joint radar-communication systems,” in 2014 12th international
conference on signal processing (ICSP).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1997–2002.
[45] S. H. Dokhanchi, M. R. B. Shankar, T. Stifter, and B. Ottersten,
“Multicarrier phase modulated continuous waveform for automotive
joint radar-communication system,” in 2018 IEEE 19th International
Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications
(SPAWC).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[46] F. Uysal, “Phase-coded FMCW automotive radar: System design and
interference mitigation,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 270–281, 2019.
[47] S. Y. Nusenu, W.-Q. Wang, and A. Basit, “Time-modulated FD-MIMO
array for integrated radar and communication systems,” IEEE Antennas
and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 1015–1019, 2018.
[48] J.-H. Kim, M. Younis, A. Moreira, and W. Wiesbeck, “A novel ofdm
chirp waveform scheme for use of multiple transmitters in sar,” IEEE
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 568–572,
2012.
[49] S.-J. Cheng, W.-Q. Wang, and H.-Z. Shao, “Spread spectrum-coded
OFDM chirp waveform diversity design,” IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 5694–5700, 2015.
[50] S. Sharma, M. Melvasalo, and V. Koivunen, “Multicarrier ds-cdma
waveforms for joint radar-communication system,” in 2020 IEEE Radar
Conference (RadarConf20).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[51] D. Sidney, “Pulse transmission,” May 18 1954, uS Patent 2,678,997.
[52] C. E. Cook, “Linear fm signal formats for beacon and communication
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems,
vol. AES-10, no. 4, pp. 471–478, 1974.
[53] T. Takahashi, Y. Kato, K. Isoda, Y. Kitsukawa, and M. Mitsumoto, “A
novel waveform for joint radar and communication systems,” in 2019
International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (ISAP). IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–3.
[54] D. Dash, A. Jayaprakash, J. Valarmathi, and G. R. Reddy, “Generalized
OFDM-LFM waveform design and analysis for multistatic airborne
radar,” in 2015 IEEE Power, Communication and Information Technol-
ogy Conference (PCITC).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 924–929.
[55] W.-Q. Wang, “An orthogonal frequency division multiplexing radar
waveform with a large time-bandwidth product,” Defence Science
Journal, vol. 62, no. 6, p. 427, 2012.
[56] M. Winkler, “Chirp signals for communication,” 1962., 1962.
[57] C.-H. Wang and O. Altintas, “A joint radar and communication
system based on commercially available FMCW radar,” in 2018 IEEE
Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–2.
[58] S. Dwivedi, A. N. Barreto, P. Sen, and G. Fettweis, “Target detec-
tion in joint frequency modulated continuous wave (fmcw) radar-
communication system,” in 2019 16th International Symposium on
Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 277–
282.
[59] X. Lv, J. Wang, Z. Jiang, and W. Wu, “A joint radar-communication
system based on OCDM-OFDM scheme,” in 2018 International Con-
ference on Microwave and Millimeter Wave Technology (ICMMT).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–3.
[60] K. Chen, Y. Liu, and W. Zhang, “Study on integrated radar-
communication signal of OFDM-LFM based on frft,” 2015.
[61] L. Hu, Z. Du, and G. Xue, “Radar-communication integration based
on OFDM signal,” in 2014 IEEE international conference on signal
processing, communications and computing (ICSPCC).
IEEE, 2014,
pp. 442–445.
[62] L. Qi, Y. Yao, B. Huang, and G. Wu, “A phase-coded OFDM signal
for radar-communication integration,” in 2019 IEEE International
Symposium on Phased Array System & Technology (PAST).
IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–4.
[63] Y. Zhang, Q. Li, L. Huang, and J. Song, “Waveform design for joint
radar-communication system with multi-user based on MIMO radar,”
in 2017 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf). IEEE, 2017, pp. 0415–
0418.
[64] C. Sahin, J. Jakabosky, P. M. McCormick, J. G. Metcalf, and S. D.
Blunt, “A novel approach for embedding communication symbols
into physical radar waveforms,” in 2017 IEEE Radar Conference
(RadarConf).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1498–1503.
[65] S. H. Dokhanchi, M. Alaee-Kerahroodi, B. S. Mysore R., and B. Otter-
sten, “Mono-static automotive joint radar-communications system,” in
2019 IEEE 30th Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor
and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[66] S.-j. Cheng, W.-Q. Wang, and H. Shao, “MIMO OFDM chirp waveform
design with spread spectrum modulation,” in 2014 IEEE China Summit
& International Conference on Signal and Information Processing
(ChinaSIP).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 208–211.
[67] H. Ma, X. Sun, and W. Jin, “Integrated waveform design based on
spread spectrum OFDM radar communication,” in 2019 IEEE 3rd
Advanced Information Management, Communicates, Electronic and
Automation Control Conference (IMCEC).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1258–
1263.
[68] T. Liang, Z. Li, M. Wang, and X. Fang, “Design of radar-
communication integrated signal based on OFDM,” in International
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Communications and Net-
works.
Springer, 2019, pp. 108–119.
[69] L. Tang, K. Zhang, H. Dai, P. Zhu, and Y.-C. Liang, “Analysis and
optimization of ambiguity function in radar-communication integrated
systems using mpsk-dsss,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters,
vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 1546–1549, 2019.
[70] X. Tian and Z. Song, “On radar and communication integrated system
using OFDM signal,” in 2017 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 0318–0323.
[71] S. H. Dokhanchi, M. B. Shankar, K. V. Mishra, T. Stifter, and
B. Ottersten, “Performance analysis of mmwave bi-static PMCW-based
automotive joint radar-communications system,” in 2019 IEEE Radar
Conference (RadarConf).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[72] S. H. Dokhanchi, B. S. Mysore, K. V. Mishra, and B. Ottersten,
“A mmwave automotive joint radar-communications system,” IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 55, no. 3, pp.
1241–1260, 2019.
[73] X. Shen, R. Yang, X. Li, and M. Huang, “The research on DS-OFDM
in integrated radar and communication,” in Wireless Communications,
Networking and Applications.
Springer, 2016, pp. 729–740.
[74] N. Michailow, I. Gaspar, S. Krone, M. Lentmaier, and G. Fettweis,
“Generalized frequency division multiplexing: Analysis of an alterna-
tive multi-carrier technique for next generation cellular systems,” in
2012 International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems
(ISWCS).
IEEE, 2012, pp. 171–175.
[75] Y. Ha, W. Niu, and N. Chi, “Post equalization scheme based on deep
neural network for a probabilistic shaping 128 QAM DFT-S OFDM
signal in underwater visible light communication system,” in 2019 18th
International Conference on Optical Communications and Networks
(ICOCN).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–3.
[76] D. Lee, A. Davydov, B. Mondal, G. Xiong, G. Morozov, and J. Kim,
“From sub-terahertz to terahertz: challenges and design considerations,”
in 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
Workshops (WCNCW).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–8.
[77] K. M. S. Huq, S. A. Busari, J. Rodriguez, V. Frascolla, W. Bazzi, and
D. C. Sicker, “Terahertz-enabled wireless system for beyond-5g ultra-
fast networks: A brief survey,” IEEE network, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 89–95,
2019.
[78] G. Berardinelli, “Generalized DFT-s-OFDM waveforms without cyclic
preﬁx,” Ieee Access, vol. 6, pp. 4677–4689, 2017.
[79] M. Shi, F. Wang, M. Zhang, Z. Wang, and N. Chi, “PAPR reduction of
2.0 gbit/s DFT-S OFDM modulated visible light communication system
based on interleaved sub-banding technique,” in 2017 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 337–342.

23
[80] L. Gaudio, M. Kobayashi, B. Bissinger, and G. Caire, “Performance
analysis of joint radar and communication using OFDM and OTFS,”
in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops
(ICC Workshops).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[81] P. Raviteja, K. T. Phan, Y. Hong, and E. Viterbo, “Orthogonal time
frequency space (otfs) modulation based radar system,” in 2019 IEEE
Radar Conference (RadarConf).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[82] W. Yuan, Z. Wei, S. Li, J. Yuan, and D. W. K. Ng, “Integrated
sensing and communication-assisted orthogonal time frequency space
transmission for vehicular networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03125,
2021.
[83] C. Sturm and W. Wiesbeck, “Waveform design and signal processing
aspects for fusion of wireless communications and radar sensing,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, no. 7, pp. 1236–1259, 2011.
[84] K. Wu, J. A. Zhang, X. Huang, and Y. J. Guo, “Integrating low-
complexity and ﬂexible sensing into communication systems,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2109.04109, 2021.
[85] A. V. Oppenheim, “Applications of digital signal processing,” Engle-
wood Cliffs, 1978.
[86] R. Prony, “Essai experimental–,-,” J. de l’Ecole Polytechnique, vol. 2,
1795.
[87] R. Schmidt, “Multiple emitter location and signal parameter estima-
tion,” IEEE transactions on antennas and propagation, vol. 34, no. 3,
pp. 276–280, 1986.
[88] R. Roy, A. Paulraj, and T. Kailath, “Esprit–a subspace rotation approach
to estimation of parameters of cisoids in noise,” IEEE transactions on
acoustics, speech, and signal processing, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1340–1342,
1986.
[89] J. Capon, “High-resolution frequency-wavenumber spectrum analysis,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1408–1418, 1969.
[90] L. L. Scharf and L. T. McWhorter, “Geometry of the cramer-rao
bound,” Signal Processing, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 301–311, 1993.
[91] Y. Zeng, Y. Ma, and S. Sun, “Joint radar-communication with cyclic
preﬁxed single carrier waveforms,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4069–4079, 2020.
[92] M. M. Ali and M. K. Alghrairi, “Minimizing of error detection using
bartlett-dct periodogram in cognitive radio networks.” J. Commun.,
vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 363–367, 2019.
[93] S. Dwivedi, A. Kota, and A. K. Jagannatham, “Optimal bartlett detector
based sprt for spectrum sensing in multi-antenna cognitive radio
systems,” IEEE signal processing letters, vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 1409–
1413, 2015.
[94] J. Sanson, A. Gameiro, D. Castanheira, and P. P. Monteiro, “Compari-
son of doa algorithms for MIMO OFDM radar,” in 2018 15th European
Radar Conference (EuRAD).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 226–229.
[95] M. Braun, C. Sturm, and F. K. Jondral, “Maximum likelihood speed and
distance estimation for OFDM radar,” in 2010 IEEE Radar Conference,
2010, pp. 256–261.
[96] R. Couillet and M. Debbah, “A maximum entropy approach to OFDM
channel estimation,” in 2009 IEEE 10th Workshop on Signal Processing
Advances in Wireless Communications, 2009, pp. 166–170.
[97] U. Tureli, H. Liu, and M. D. Zoltowski, “OFDM blind carrier offset
estimation: Esprit,” IEEE Transactions on communications, vol. 48,
no. 9, pp. 1459–1461, 2000.
[98] X. Chen, Z. Feng, Z. Wei, P. Zhang, and X. Yuan, “Code-division
OFDM joint communication and sensing system for 6G machine-type
communication,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021.
[99] L. Gaudio, M. Kobayashi, G. Caire, and G. Colavolpe, “Joint radar
target detection and parameter estimation with MIMO OTFS,” in 2020
IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf20).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[100] R. Tigrek, W. De Heij, and P. Van Genderen, “Relation between the
peak to average power ratio and doppler sidelobes of the multi-carrier
radar signal,” in 2009 International Radar Conference” Surveillance
for a Safer World”(RADAR 2009).
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[101] W. Li, Z. Xiang, and P. Ren, “Waveform design for dual-function radar-
communication system with golay block coding,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 184 053–184 062, 2019.
[102] R. F. Tigrek and P. Van Genderen, “A golay code based approach to
reduction of the papr and its consequence for the data throughput,” in
2007 European Radar Conference.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 146–149.
[103] X. Tian, T. Zhang, Q. Zhang, and Z. Song, “HRRP-based extended
target recognition in OFDM-based radcom systems,” in 2018 IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM).
IEEE, 2018, pp.
1–6.
[104] H. Zhao and W. Zou, “Judgement-based joint SLM and PTS algorithm
for PAPR suppression of radar communication integrated system,” in
2018 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China
(ICCC Workshops).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 131–135.
[105] S. Y. Le Goff, S. S. Al-Samahi, B. K. Khoo, C. C. Tsimenidis, and B. S.
Sharif, “Selected mapping without side information for papr reduction
in OFDM,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 8,
no. 7, pp. 3320–3325, 2009.
[106] X. Lv, J. Wang, Z. Jiang, and W. Jiao, “A novel PAPR reduction method
for OCDM-based radar-communication signal,” in 2018 IEEE MTT-S
International Microwave Workshop Series on 5G Hardware and System
Technologies (IMWS-5G).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–3.
[107] K. Rema, N. Rajeev, and M. Manoj, “MIMO OCDM with reduced
papr,” in 2017 International Conference on Intelligent Computing and
Control (I2C2).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[108] Y. L. Sit, C. Sturm, and T. Zwick, “Interference cancellation for dy-
namic range improvement in an OFDM joint radar and communication
system,” in 2011 8th European Radar Conference.
IEEE, 2011, pp.
333–336.
[109] ——, “One-stage selective interference cancellation for the OFDM
joint radar-communication system,” in 2012 The 7th German Mi-
crowave Conference.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–4.
[110] Y. L. Sit, B. Nuss, and T. Zwick, “On mutual interference cancellation
in a MIMO OFDM multiuser radar-communication network,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 3339–3348,
2017.
[111] Y. Zeng, Y. Ma, and S. Sun, “Joint radar-communication: Low com-
plexity algorithm and self-interference cancellation,” in 2018 IEEE
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM).
IEEE, 2018, pp.
1–7.
[112] Y. Zhang, Q. Wang, H. Qin, and J. Meng, “Adaptive self-interference
cancellation system for microwave lfmcw radar with optimal delay
matching,” in 2019 Joint International Symposium on Electromagnetic
Compatibility, Sapporo and Asia-Paciﬁc International Symposium on
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC Sapporo/APEMC).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 729–732.
[113] K. U. Mazher, T. Shimizu, R. W. Heath, and G. Bansal, “Automotive
radar using ieee 802.11 p signals,” in 2018 IEEE Wireless Communi-
cations and Networking Conference (WCNC).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[114] C. B. Barneto, M. Turunen, S. D. Liyanaarachchi, L. Anttila, A. Bri-
huega, T. Riihonen, and M. Valkama, “High-accuracy radio sensing in
5g new radio networks: Prospects and self-interference challenge,” in
2019 53rd Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1159–1163.
[115] H. Hellsten and E. Nilsson, “Multiple access radar using slow chirp
modulation,” in 2020 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf20).
IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–6.
[116] M. L¨ubke, J. Fuchs, V. Shatov, A. Dubey, R. Weigel, and F. Lurz,
“Combining radar and communication at 77 ghz using a cdma tech-
nique,” in 2020 IEEE MTT-S International Conference on Microwaves
for Intelligent Mobility (ICMIM).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–4.
[117] S. Hadizadehmoghaddam and R. S. Adve, “Simultaneous execution of
multiple radar tasks using OFDMA,” in 2017 IEEE Radar Conference
(RadarConf).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 0622–0626.
[118] S. Hadizadehmoghaddam, F. Yusufali, and R. S. Adve, “Interference-
aware power allocation in OFDMA radar,” in 2018 IEEE Radar
Conference (RadarConf18).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 0821–0826.
[119] M. Kurosawa, T. Nozawa, M. Umehira, X. Wang, S. Takeda, and
H. Kuroda, “Proposal of multiple access fmcw radar for inter-radar
interference avoidance¡? show [aq=”” id=” q1]”?” The Journal of
Engineering, vol. 2019, no. 21, pp. 7304–7308, 2019.
[120] S. Ishikawa, M. Kurosawa, M. Umehira, W. Xiaoyan, S. Takeda, and
H. Kuroda, “Packet-based fmcw radar using csma technique to avoid
narrowband interefrence,” in 2019 International Radar Conference
(RADAR).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–5.
[121] M. Goppelt, H.-L. Bl¨ocher, and W. Menzel, “Automotive radar–
investigation of mutual interference mechanisms,” Advances in Radio
Science, vol. 8, no. B. 3, pp. 55–60, 2010.
[122] A. Tang, S. Li, and X. Wang, “Self-interference-resistant ieee 802.11
ad-based joint communication and automotive radar design.”
IEEE,
2021.
[123] F. Lehmann, “A message-passing receiver for OFDM-based self-
interference-limited networks,” IEEE Transactions on vehicular tech-
nology, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 6136–6145, 2015.
[124] D. P. Zilz and M. R. Bell, “Statistical modeling of wireless communica-
tions interference and its effects on adaptive-threshold radar detection,”
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 54, no. 2,
pp. 890–911, 2017.

24
[125] F. Liu, C. Masouros, A. Li, H. Sun, and L. Hanzo, “MU-MIMO
communications with MIMO radar: From co-existence to joint trans-
mission,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 17,
no. 4, pp. 2755–2770, 2018.
[126] F. Liu, L. Zhou, C. Masouros, A. Li, W. Luo, and A. Petropulu, “To-
ward dual-functional radar-communication systems: Optimal waveform
design,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 66, no. 16, pp.
4264–4279, 2018.
[127] H. Hua, J. Xu, and T. X. Han, “Optimal transmit beamforming for inte-
grated sensing and communication,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.11871,
2021.
[128] Z. Zhang, Z. Du, and W. Yu, “Mutual-information-based OFDM wave-
form design for integrated radar-communication system in gaussian
mixture clutter,” IEEE Sensors Letters, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2019.
[129] Y. Chen, Y. Nijsure, C. Yuen, Y. H. Chew, Z. Ding, and S. Boussakta,
“Adaptive distributed MIMO radar waveform optimization based on
mutual information,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 1374–1385, 2013.
[130] M. F. Keskin, R. F. Tigrek, C. Aydogdu, F. Lampel, H. Wymeersch,
A. Alvarado, and F. M. Willems, “Peak sidelobe level based waveform
optimization for OFDM joint radar-communications,” in 2020 17th
European Radar Conference (EuRAD).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–4.
[131] S. Zhu, X. Li, R. Yang, and Y. Ding, “Adaptive waveform optimization
method for OFDM radar communication jamming,” in 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Consumer Electronics and Computer
Engineering (ICCECE).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 600–605.
[132] Y. Liu, G. Liao, Z. Yang, and J. Xu, “Multiobjective optimal waveform
design for OFDM integrated radar and communication systems,” Signal
Processing, vol. 141, pp. 331–342, 2017.
[133] M. Mousaei, M. Soltanalian, and B. Smida, “Comsens: Exploiting
pilot diversity for pervasive integration of communication and sensing
in MIMP-TDD-frameworks,” in MILCOM 2017-2017 IEEE Military
Communications Conference (MILCOM).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 617–622.
[134] Z. Wei, Y. Wang, L. Ma, S. Yang, Z. Feng, C. Pan, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang,
H. Wu, and P. Zhang, “5G PRS-based sensing: A sensing reference
signal approach for joint sensing and communication system,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2022.
[135] P. Kumari, J. Choi, N. Gonz´alez-Prelcic, and R. W. Heath, “Ieee 802.11
ad-based radar: An approach to joint vehicular communication-radar
system,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 67, no. 4,
pp. 3012–3027, 2017.
[136] G. Liu, H. Niu, M. Zheng, D. Bao, J. Cai, G. Qin, B. Wu, P. Li, and
N. Liu, “Integration of communication and sar radar based on OFDM
with channel estimation in high speed scenario,” in IGARSS 2019-
2019 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 2519–2522.
[137] C. D. Ozkaptan, E. Ekici, O. Altintas, and C.-H. Wang, “Ofdm pilot-
based radar for joint vehicular communication and radar systems,” in
2018 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC).
IEEE, 2018,
pp. 1–8.
[138] D. Bao, G. Qin, and Y.-Y. Dong, “A superimposed pilot-based inte-
grated radar and communication system,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
11 520–11 533, 2020.
[139] C.-H. Wang, O. Altintas, C. D. Ozkaptan, and E. Ekici, “Multi-range
joint automotive radar and communication using pilot-based OFDM
radar,” in 2020 IEEE Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC). IEEE,
2020, pp. 1–4.
[140] H. Soury and B. Smida, “Optimal pilot overhead for fdd full-duplex
communication and radar sensing (comsens),” in MILCOM 2017-2017
IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM).
IEEE, 2017,
pp. 725–730.
[141] R. Zhang, B. Shim, W. Yuan, M. Di Renzo, X. Dang, and W. Wu,
“Integrated sensing and communication waveform design with sparse
vector coding: Low sidelobes and ultra reliability,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 4489–4494, 2022.
[142] X. Wang, Z. Fei, J. Huang, and H. Yu, “Joint waveform and discrete
phase shift design for ris-assisted integrated sensing and communica-
tion system under cram´er-rao bound constraint,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1004–1009, 2021.
[143] M.
Babenko,
A.
S.
Redvanov,
M.
Deryabin,
N.
Chervyakov,
A. Nazarov, S. C. Al-Galda, I. Vashchenko, I. Dvoryaninova, and
E. Nepretimova, “Efﬁcient implementation of cryptography on points
of an elliptic curve in residue number system,” in 2019 International
Conference on Engineering and Telecommunication (EnT).
IEEE,
2019, pp. 1–5.
[144] Z. Xiao and Y. Zeng, “Waveform design and performance analysis
for full-duplex integrated sensing and communication,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1823–1837,
2022.
[145] L. Ma, C. Pan, Q. Wang, M. Lou, Y. Wang, and T. Jiang, “A down-
link pilot based signal processing method for integrated sensing and
communication towards 6G,” in 2022 IEEE 95th Vehicular Technology
Conference:(VTC2022-Spring).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–5.
[146] O. Li, J. He, K. Zeng, Z. Yu, X. Du, Y. Liang, G. Wang, Y. Chen,
P. Zhu, W. Tong et al., “Integrated sensing and communication in 6G
a prototype of high resolution thz sensing on portable device,” in 2021
Joint European Conference on Networks and Communications & 6G
Summit (EuCNC/6G Summit).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 544–549.
[147] W. Jiang, Z. Wei, B. Li, Z. Feng, and Z. Fang, “Improve radar
sensing performance of multiple roadside units cooperation via space
registration,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2022.
[148] P. Yin, X. Yang, Q. Liu, and T. Long, “Wideband distributed coherent
aperture radar,” in 2014 IEEE Radar Conference.
IEEE, 2014, pp.
1114–1117.
Zhiqing Wei (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
and Ph.D. degrees from the Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing,
China, in 2010 and 2015, respectively. He is an
Associate Professor with BUPT. He has authored
one book, three book chapters, and more than 50
papers. His research interest is the performance
analysis and optimization of intelligent machine net-
works. He was granted the Exemplary Reviewer of
IEEE WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS
in 2017, the Best Paper Award of WCSP 2018. He
was the Registration Co-Chair of IEEE/CIC ICCC 2018, the publication Co-
Chair of IEEE/CIC ICCC 2019 and IEEE/CIC ICCC 2020.
Hanyang Qu (Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in School of Electronic Engineering
and Optoelectronic Technology, Nanjing University
of Science and Technology (NJUST) in 2020. He is
currently pursuing his master’s degree with Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunication (BUPT).
His research interests include integrated sensing and
communication and high accuracy sensing.
Yuan Wang received her B.E. degree from Uni-
versity of Science & Technology Beijing, USTB,
Beijing, China. She is currently pursuing the M.E.
degree with the School of Information and Com-
munication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts
and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing, China.
Her research interests include integrated sensing and
communication.

25
Xin Yuan (Member, IEEE) received the B.E. de-
gree from Taiyuan University of Technology, Shanxi,
China, in 2013, and the dual Ph.D. degree from
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT), Beijing, China, and the University of Tech-
nology Sydney (UTS), Sydney, Australia, in 2019
and 2020, respectively. She is currently a Research
Scientist at CSIRO, Sydney, NSW, Australia. Her
research interests include machine learning and op-
timization, and their applications to UAV networks
and intelligent systems.
Huici Wu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D de-
gree from Beijing University of Posts and Telecom-
munications (BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2018. From
2016 to 2017, she visited the Broadband Commu-
nications Research (BBCR) Group, University of
Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada. She is now an
Associate Professor at BUPT. Her research interests
are in the area of wireless communications and
networks, with current emphasis on collaborative
air-to-ground communication and wireless access
security.
Ying Du is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
with University of Science and Technology of China.
She is the professor-level senior engineer of the
China Academy of Information and Communica-
tions Technology (CAICT). She is vice chair of
Standards and International Cooperation Working
Group of IMT-2030(6G) Promotion Group. She has
contributed to the research, evaluation and interna-
tional standardization of IEEE 802.16, 4G, 5G and
6G communication systems. She has authored or co-
authored more than 30 research papers or articles,
and over 40 patents in this area. She has hosted three National Major Projects
on mobile broadband system. Currently, she focuses on technology research,
standardization, and verﬁcaiton for 5G-Advanced and 6G systems.
Kaifeng Han (Member, IEEE) is a senior en-
gineer in the China Academy of Information and
Communications Technology (CAICT). Before that,
he obtained his Ph.D. degree from the University
of Hong Kong in 2019, and the B.Eng. (ﬁrst-class
hons.) from the Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications and Queen Mary University of
London in 2015, all in electrical engineering. His
research interests focus on integrated sensing and
communications, wireless AI for 6G. He is funded
by China Association for Science and Technology
(CAST) Young Talent Support Program. He received one best paper award
and published 40+ research papers in international conferences and journals.
Ning Zhang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D degree in Electrical and Computer Engineer-
ing from University of Waterloo, Canada, in 2015.
After that, he was a postdoc research fellow at
University of Waterloo and University of Toronto,
respectively. Since 2020, he has been an Associate
Professor in the Department of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering at University of Windsor, Canada.
His research interests include connected vehicles,
mobile edge computing, wireless networking, and
security. He is a Highly Cited Researcher (Web of
Science). He serves/served as an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, IEEE Transactions on
Cognitive Communications and Networking, and IEEE Systems Journal. He
also serves/served as a TPC chair for IEEE VTC 2021 and IEEE SAGC 2020,
a general chair for IEEE SAGC 2021, a chair for track of several international
conferences and workshops including IEEE ICC, VTC, INFOCOM Workshop,
and Mobicom Workshop. He received 8 Best Paper Awards from conferences
and journals, such as IEEE Globecom, IEEE ICC, IEEE ICCC, IEEE WCSP,
and Journal of Communications and Information Networks. He also received
IEEE TCSVC Rising Star Award and IEEE ComSoc Young Professionals
Outstanding Nominee Award. He has been an IEEE senior member since
2018.
Zhiyong Feng (M’08-SM’15) received her B.E.,
M.E., and Ph.D. degrees from Beijing University
of Posts and Telecommunications (BUPT), Beijing,
China. She is a professor at BUPT, and the director
of the Key Laboratory of the Universal Wireless
Communications, Ministry of Education, P.R.China.
She is a senior member of IEEE, vice chair of
the Information and Communication Test Committee
of the Chinese Institute of Communications (CIC).
Currently, she is serving as Associate Editors-in-
Chief for China Communications, and she is a
technological advisor for international forum on NGMN. Her main research
interests include wireless network architecture design and radio resource
management in 5th generation mobile networks (5G), spectrum sensing and
dynamic spectrum management in cognitive wireless networks, and universal
signal detection and identiﬁcation.