Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Smartphone-based platforms implementing
microﬂuidic detection with image-based
artiﬁcial intelligence
Bangfeng Wang1,3, Yiwei Li1,3, Mengfan Zhou1, Yulong Han2, Mingyu Zhang1,
Zhaolong Gao1, Zetai Liu1, Peng Chen1, Wei Du1, Xingcai Zhang
2
,
Xiaojun Feng1
& Bi-Feng Liu
1
The frequent outbreak of global infectious diseases has prompted the devel-
opment of rapid and effective diagnostic tools for the early screening of
potential patients in point-of-care testing scenarios. With advances in mobile
computing power and microﬂuidic technology, the smartphone-based mobile
health platform has drawn signiﬁcant attention from researchers developing
point-of-care testing devices that integrate microﬂuidic optical detection with
artiﬁcial intelligence analysis. In this article, we summarize recent progress in
these mobile health platforms, including the aspects of microﬂuidic chips,
imaging modalities, supporting components, and the development of soft-
ware algorithms. We document the application of mobile health platforms in
terms of the detection objects, including molecules, viruses, cells, and para-
sites. Finally, we discuss the prospects for future development of mobile
health platforms.
Disease diagnosis in resource-limited environments remains a sig-
niﬁcant challenge, since most existing biosensing technologies rely on
advanced infrastructure and well-trained personnel, which limits their
applications in point-of-care testing (POCT) scenarios. Ideally, a POCT
platform should have characteristics including ease of operation, short
analysis time, low price, high sensitivity, and speciﬁcity to meet the
requirements of health monitoring in a POCT setting1–9.
With the advances in optics technology, materials and software
engineering, electrical microchip technology and so on, smartphones
are becoming smaller and more powerful with an enhanced user
experience,
providing
a
promising
platform
for
POCT
developments10–16. In recent years, microﬂuidic accessories have
emerged to explore the potential of smartphones for POCT, especially
the microﬂuidic detection modules based on smartphone com-
plementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) cameras, which are
also known as the mobile health (mHealth) platform17,18. The World
Health Organization deﬁnes mHealth as the medical and public health
practice supported by mobile devices. Mobile devices include smart-
phones and tablets, as well as devices and wearables that provide real-
time patient monitoring. In this article, we mainly focus on the
advances in smartphone-based mHealth platforms that implement
microﬂuidic detection and image-based analysis.
The mHealth platforms take advantage of microﬂuidic technology
such as automation, integration, miniaturization and multi-functions,
which is ideal for health monitoring in a POCT setting. As the com-
puting power of digital devices such as computers and smartphones
signiﬁcantly increases, it facilitates the development of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence algorithms that require powerful computing and large
amounts of data. Recently, deep learning algorithms such as the con-
volutional neural network (CNN) algorithm have been widely applied
to image processing in mHealth19. The combination of microﬂuidic
accessories
and
artiﬁcial
intelligence
algorithms
has
inspired
researchers worldwide to come up with new POCT tools20–32. On the
one hand, mHealth takes advantage of the microﬂuidic approach to
Received: 23 March 2022
Accepted: 10 January 2023
Check for updates
1The Key Laboratory for Biomedical Photonics of MOE at Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics - Hubei Bioinformatics & Molecular Imaging Key
Laboratory, Systems Biology Theme, Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. 2School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 3These authors con-
tributed equally: Bangfeng Wang, Yiwei Li.
e-mail: 24212602@qq.com; xfeng@mail.hust.edu.cn; bﬂiu@mail.hust.edu.cn
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

measure traditional biomarkers more accurately, which are detected
by smartphone CMOS cameras and analyzed with machine learning
algorithms. On the other hand, unique patterns and features extracted
by machine learning algorithms from the data can reﬂect biomedical
information that is difﬁcult to obtain by traditional methods33–35.
At present, an ideal mHealth platform includes three parts (Fig. 1),
that is, a microﬂuidic chip, a mobile machine, and machine intelli-
gence. The microﬂuidic chip is responsible for biosample processing
and testing. The resulting signal is sensed by the mobile machine and
preprocessed by software installed on the smartphone. After data is
transmitted to the cloud server, it can be stored and further analyzed
by corresponding machine intelligence.
In this work, we reviewed the progress of research on mHealth
platforms in recent years, especially that regarding microﬂuidic chips
for testing and mobile machines for sensing data, including imaging
modalities and supporting components.
We will further discuss machine intelligence for analyzing data in
mHealth, particularly the rapid development of deep learning algo-
rithms. Current applications of mHealth will also be documented and
future development will be discussed.
Microﬂuidic chips for testing
It is essential to use microﬂuidic technology to realize the integration
and miniaturization of complex biological analysis on mHealth plat-
forms, especially those for applications in remote areas. In comparison
to the microﬂuidic chips commonly used in laboratories, those used
on mHealth platforms often have more limitations because many large
devices such as pumps and heaters cannot be directly used on them.
Therefore, in many cases, microﬂuidic chips are employed as simple
carriers containing blood36, tissue37, parasites38, and other biological
samples.
Besides being used as a slide, microﬂuidic chips could be designed
with simple reaction chambers for relatively complex detection.
Kanakasabapathy et al. developed a mHealth platform that could
detect the number of CD4 cells to diagnose Acquired Immune Deﬁ-
ciency Syndrome (AIDS)39. CD4 antibody was immobilized in a reaction
chamber. After CD4 cells were captured in the chamber, a photo was
acquired through the mobile phone camera, and an application pro-
gram was then activated to count the numbers of captured CD4 cells
for AIDS diagnosis. The design of microﬂuidic chips with reaction
chambers is simple and effective for many applications on mHealth
platforms. However, it is difﬁcult to realize automated detection on
such microﬂuidic chips because the detection process largely depends
on manual operation by the user, which greatly reduces the practic-
ability of mHealth platforms.
The lateral ﬂow device is also a cost-effective detection method
with a relatively low requirement for external equipment. The simple
and understandable signal ampliﬁcation and display mode allow users
to take photos with mobile phones for identiﬁcation and analysis
without microscopic imaging. For instance, Turbé et al. demonstrated
the use of deep learning to classify images of rapid Human Immuno-
deﬁciency Virus (HIV) tests, which were collected in rural South Africa
by ﬁeldworkers using newly developed image capture protocols with
the Samsung SM-P585 tablet7. Deep learning algorithms were trained
to classify tests aspositive or negative from a library of 11,374 images. A
pilot ﬁeld study of the algorithms deployed as a mobile application
demonstrated high levels of sensitivity (97.8%) and speciﬁcity (100%)
compared with traditional visual interpretation by humans and
reduced the number of false positives and negatives (Fig. 2a).
The capillary force can drive the ﬂuid without external equipment.
However, the uniform ﬂow rate of the lateral ﬂow device requires
several micrometer pore sizes of the paper, which limit the biomole-
cule capturing capability and assay sensitivity. Moreover, it is difﬁcult
for lateral ﬂow devices to realize multiplexed detection40. One of the
ways to improve the lateral ﬂow device is to ﬂow samples vertically
rather than in parallel, known as a vertical ﬂow assay (VFA). A typical
vertical ﬂow device contains a porous membrane with separated spots
for multiplexing assays simultaneously19 (Fig. 2b), and the detection
results can be readout by the naked eye or a smartphone reader, which
holds high potential for mHealth applications.
Fig. 1 | Architecture of machine learning-enabled mHealth platforms for POCT.
The microﬂuidic chip is responsible for biosample processing and testing. The
resulting signal is acquired by the mobile machine and preprocessed by software
installed on the smartphone. After data is transmitted to the cloud server, it can be
stored and further analyzed by machine intelligence. IoTs and AI denote internet of
things and artiﬁcial intelligence, respectively.
a
Lateral flow device
b
Vertical flow device
c Microfluidic capillary device
d Microfluidic finger-pump device
finger-pump
Fig. 2 | Microﬂuidic chips for testing. a A lateral ﬂow device (ﬁgure adapted with
permission from Turbé et al. 7). b A vertical ﬂow device (ﬁgure adapted with per-
mission from Ballard et al. 19). c A microﬂuidic capillary device (ﬁgure adapted with
permission from Ghosh et al. 47). d A microﬂuidic ﬁnger-pump device (ﬁgure
adapted with permission from Comina et al. 48).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
2

It is better to employ microﬂuidic chips designed with micro-
channels for more complex applications. Traditional micropumps are
usually too large to be integrated into mHealth platforms for ﬂuid
control. To overcome this issue, researchers have developed innova-
tive micropumps, such as capillary, ﬁnger, and passive vacuum
pumps41–46, for driving ﬂuid on mHealth platforms. Ghosh et al.
demonstrated a microﬂuidic chip containing a capillary pump for
microchannel capillary ﬂow assay (MCFA) on a mHealth platform47.
The immunoassay on the chip was entirely controlled by channel
geometry and surface properties without any external pumping
(Fig. 2c). Comina et al. presented an autonomous disposable system
integrating a ﬁnger pump supporting repeated pumping actions48, a
calibration range, and 3D-printed optics for universal coupling to
cellphone cameras (Fig. 2d). By integrating heater and other process
control units, it is possible to realize applications such as nucleic acid
detection on mHealth Platforms49–53. For instance, Gou et al. developed
a low-cost, portable, and robust mHealth platform for highly accurate
DNA quantitative analysis54, integrating thermal cycling control, on-
chip digital polymerase chain reaction, data acquisition, and result
analysis.
Microﬂuidic chips have been the dominant choice for sample
processing on mHealth platforms, which are also increasingly adapted
to artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms. POCT detection on mHealth plat-
forms in the early stage is to obtain intuitive detection results so that
inspectors can directly identify them. Therefore, in many early works,
even if the artiﬁcial intelligence algorithm is used, it is only simple
transplantation of image recognition, and there is no microﬂuidic chip
specially designed for artiﬁcial intelligence algorithm. In recent years,
more and more microﬂuidic chip designs have emerged for analysis by
artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms.
Mobile machines for sensing data
One of the essential factors in the mHealth platform is the hardware
structure, ensuring the quality of the obtained images or data. A
superior hardware structure can not only reduce the cost, but also
simplify the operation process, which is beneﬁcial in resource-limited
areas where medical diagnosis resources are scarce. A complete
mHealth platform based on microscope cameras should contain three
basic hardware structures, including mobile phones, imaging mod-
alities and supporting components.
As the core of the mHealth platform, the smartphone is the key to
the hardware structure. With the development of integrated circuit
(IC) design technology, the resolution of embedded CMOS image
sensors has greatly increased, allowing smartphones to detect bio-
markers on a relatively small scale with CMOS cameras55–57. In addition,
the computing capabilities of embedded central processing units
(CPUs) in smartphones have been enhanced rapidly. It is possible for
smartphones to process and analyze biomedical images in real time.
Current mHealth platforms are mostly designed according to various
parameters of mobile phones to take advantage of the mobile phone
system for POCT applications. For example, embedded adapters need
to be adjusted according to the size of the mobile phone. The external
lens must be designed according to the original focal length of the
mobile phone to achieve a good, clear ampliﬁcation. Differences in
CMOS components in mobile phones will lead to differences in
acquired images, which must be processed by the corresponding
algorithms before adaptation. The computing performance of the
mobile phone must meet the requirements of algorithms with a large
amount of computation.
To detect micro-scale objects with the smartphone camera, it is
necessary to develop accessories for optical magniﬁcation, including
3D-printed phone adapters, lenses, batteries, light sources, controllers,
and motors. In the following sections, hardware developments related
to mHealth platforms will be introduced in detail based on two
aspects: imaging modalities and supporting components. It is
expected to provide the readers with a guide for designing the
mHealth platform that is suitable for their own needs.
Imaging modalities
Currently, the imaging modalities for mHealth platforms can be
classiﬁed into two major categories, which are bright ﬁeld and
ﬂuorescence imaging. Bright ﬁeld imaging can be subdivided into
lens-free and lensed imaging. The microscopic image quality
obtained by different imaging modalities varies greatly, including
resolution, ﬁeld of view (FOV), imaging depth, and signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). Thus, these imaging modalities have their own advan-
tages in detecting objects of different scales, and an appropriate
imaging modality must be chosen according to the detection objects.
Once an imaging modality is determined, the corresponding hard-
ware structure, especially the optical structure, can be designed
accordingly, as well as a suitable software algorithm for analysis of
the resulting imaging data. Supplementary Table 1 summarizes the
advantages and disadvantages of current imaging modalities dis-
cussed in the rest of this section.
In bright ﬁeld imaging, since the illumination light enters the
objective lens after passing through the sample, the resulting image
contrast is relatively high, giving a clear morphological image of the
sample. It is usually used to observe objects with a clear structure on a
micron scale, such as cells, tissues and parasites.
As one of the bright ﬁeld imaging modalities, lens-free imaging
has been applied to the mHealth platform for its simple and compact
optical structure. Upon removal of the original lens from the mobile
phone, it directly uses the embedded CMOS image sensor for data
collection58–60. As a result, lens-free imaging system can provide a
relatively larger FOV than a lensed imaging system with higher image
resolution. For example, a mHealth platform was previously demon-
strated by Tseng et al.58 which employed holographic image recon-
struction to capture the amplitude and phase information of the
objects with the embedded CMOS sensor in a smartphone (Fig. 3a).
When the spatial and temporal coherence of the light source is good
enough, the fringes collected by the camera can be regarded as
interference fringes. In this work, the authors did not use expensive
laser components to generate coherent light sources. Instead, an LED
was used to emit incoherent light, which passed through an aperture
with a diameter of about 100 µM to generate spatial coherence. These
resulting interference fringes could then be used to obtain the inten-
sity and phase information of the object in the focusing plane to
reconstruct a holographic image with a relatively high resolution
through the diffraction image reconstruction algorithm. To further
miniaturize the size of the lens-free imaging system, Lee and Yang
a
Lens free imaging b
c Fluorescence imaging
50 um
Accessary
Imaging result
Bright field lens-
based imaging
Fig. 3 | Imaging modalities. a Schematic diagram of an optical accessary for lens-
free imaging and its imaging result (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Tseng
et al. 58). b Picture of an optical accessary for Bright ﬁeld lens-based imaging and its
imaging result (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Switz et al. 62). c Schematic
diagram of an optical accessary for ﬂuorescence imaging and its imaging result
(ﬁgure adapted with permission from Zhu et al. 197).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
3

reported the use of ambient illumination in the following work59, which
enabled shadow imaging without the need for LEDs or batteries. Sha-
dow imaging was relatively simple. It only required the projection of
the object on the CMOS sensor without the need for high coherence of
the light source. However, the resulting image resolution was relatively
low due to diffraction issues, which could be improved by manual
angle scanning and the use of a super-resolution reconstruction
algorithm.
Although a lens-free imaging system is simple and compact, it
takes a long time and a lot of computing resources to generate high-
resolution images with super-resolution reconstruction algorithms. In
addition, it involves the removal of the smartphone camera lens, which
may damage the integrity of the smartphone. Thus, it is likely to reduce
user experience for applications. In contrast, there is no such issue for
lensed imaging systems. The optical magniﬁcation (M) of a lensed
imaging system can be calculated as M = f 1
f 2, where f 1 is the focal length
of the built-in lens of the smartphone camera and f 2 is the focal length
of the external lens. The resolution of lensed imaging is inversely
proportional to its FOV. Therefore, the use of an external lens of a
shorter focal length can result in higher magniﬁcation and better
spatial resolution, but correspondingly, the FOV will be smaller. Since
the observation of particles of different speciﬁcations requires differ-
ent resolutions and FOV, it is necessary to make a trade-off between
the resolution and FOV. For example, Smith et al. described a mHealth
platform that used a single ball lens for magniﬁcation in place of a
microscopic objective61. It is cost-effective for constructing the
detection system, but images were obtained with signiﬁcant aberra-
tions that degraded the image quality over the bulk of the FOV. To
capture high-quality wide-ﬁeld microscopic images, Switz et al.
demonstrated that a reversed mobile phone camera lens could be used
together62 with an intact mobile phone camera to overcome the lim-
itations of the previous design (Fig. 3b). In addition to the above-
mentioned methods, it is also possible to use deep learning image
enhancement methods to improve image resolution and increase FOV
with ﬁeld-by-ﬁeld scanning. However, these methods are trading time
for space, which elongates the time for processing to enhance image
resolution or FOV.
In ﬂuorescence imaging, the light of a speciﬁc wavelength
irradiates the sample, and the emitted ﬂuorescence is collected
through the objective. As long as relevant imaging parts such as light
sources and ﬁlters can be installed onto the mobile phone as acces-
sories, ﬂuorescence imaging can also be conducted on mHealth
platforms. Compared to bright ﬁeld imaging, ﬂuorescence imaging
has higher sensitivity and speciﬁcity, and it is more suitable for
detecting micro- and nano-scale biological targets63. The lens for
ﬂuorescent imaging does not require high resolution but a relatively
large FOV (Fig. 3c). It is conducive to employing ﬂuorescence ima-
ging on mHealth platforms. In addition, the algorithms for proces-
sing ﬂuorescence images are less demanding than those for bright
ﬁeld imaging. Quantitative analysis can also be achieved by merely
using counting algorithms.
However, ﬂuorescence imaging often yields images of low con-
trast and it is difﬁcult to observe the shape of the detection objects.
The quality of the obtained ﬂuorescence images is related to the SNR.
To enhance the SNR, it is important to select an appropriate light
source and ﬁlter for ﬂuorescence imaging. Since traditional laser light
sources are expensive and cumbersome, low-cost ﬁlters and LEDs have
been the major choice for ﬂuorescence imaging on mHealth platforms.
The resulting images usually have strong background lights, and the
signal-to-noise ratio of the images is relatively low. Although image
quality can be further improved by denoising algorithms such as
machine learning algorithms, it is still inferior to those obtained by
bright ﬁeld imaging. Besides limited image quality, ﬂuorescence ima-
ging often requires sample preprocessing, and such operations might
not be friendly to untrained users.
Supporting components
After the imaging modality is determined, the supporting component
of the mHealth platform can be established. The physical components
of a mHealth platform typically include an optical imaging part, pro-
cess control unit, structural part, motor, heater, ﬁnger pump
and so on.
The optical imaging part is the basic component of a mHealth
platform, which is dedicated to generating the imaging data. The
microscopic lens is the core component of the optical imaging part
with speciﬁcations such as numerical aperture, magniﬁcation, imaging
resolution, FOV, and marginal effect. Different speciﬁcations may be
employed according to the scenario of applications, but typically, LEDs
and batteries are necessary for providing light sources. Filters are
required in ﬂuorescence imaging to provide excitation light.
Process control units such as the controller, motor, heater and
micropump are usually selected according to the imaging modality
and microﬂuidic chip operations. The controller is the kernel of the
process control unit, which generally uses a Micro Control Unit (MCU)
or embedded system to automatically control the whole process of
various integrated components, allowing operations such as USB and
Bluetooth communication, motor motion, heating, and ﬂow control.
Motors are often employed to achieve FOV scanning with high reso-
lution since the resolution of the microscopic lens is inversely pro-
portional to its FOV. For instance, D’Ambrosio et al. reported on a
mHealth testing instrument using a dynamic video method18, which
could achieve FOV scanning of blood parasites with a motor-based
automated stage (Fig. 4a). It could automatically record a video of the
test sample and calculate a differential image by averaging, subtract-
ing, and morphologically ﬁltering each frame of the video to obtain a
count of blood parasites. For mHealth systems involving nucleic acid
ampliﬁcation, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and loop-
mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation (LAMP), heaters must be used for
accurate temperature control. Mauk et al. previously described
nucleic acid-based ampliﬁcation tests (NAATs) mHealth platform for
a
Motor
b
Heater
c
Finger pump
d Removable components
Fig. 4 | Supporting components. a Motor for FOV scanning. FOV denotes ﬁeld of
view (ﬁgure adapted with permission from D’Ambrosio et al. 18). b Heater for
temperature control. PCM denotes phase-change material (ﬁgure adapted with
permission from Liao et al. 51). c Finger pump for ﬂow driving (ﬁgure adapted with
permission from Laksanasopin et al. 17). d Attachment with a port for inter-
changeable components interchanging (ﬁgure adapted with permission from
Zhu et al. 70).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
4

quantifying HIV viral load in blood samples64, which used a heater to
accurately control the reaction temperature (Fig. 4b). However, since
the batteries that powered the heater were too heavy to carry, some
researchers instead developed solar and chemical thermal heating
methods. A similar issue also occurred for the use of micropumps in
mHealth systems. The volume and energy consumption of micro-
pumps are usually too large to be adapted to the mHealth
platform65–69. To overcome this issue, Laksanasopin et al. eliminated
the use of a power-consuming electrical pump by employing a one-
push vacuum17, where a user mechanically activates a negative pres-
sure chamber to move a sequence of reagents prestored on a cassette
for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Fig. 4c).
After process control units are determined, a structural part is
required to integrate the functioning components into a working
accessory that can be adapted to a mobile phone. Currently, 3D-
printing technology is widely employed in laboratories for the quick
and cost-effective manufacture of structural components. Previously,
a smartphone-based blood analyzer was reported on by Zhu et al.
using 3D-printing technology to develop a port and three removable
components70 that could be assembled for white and red blood cell
counting and hemoglobin measurement (Fig. 4d). In this example, the
adaptation of the structural part to the smartphone uses the embed-
ded mode, where the mobile phone is wrapped within a 3D-printed
shell to ﬁx the position of the external optical component to the
mobile phone camera, and it is connected to the smartphone ports
such as type-C to use computing power and electric power. The
embedded mode has been the most common choice of researchers to
develop mHealth platforms. However, the embedded mode requires
customization of the structural part according to the overall dimen-
sions of the mobile phone. Since different mobile phones often have
different overall dimensions, it is difﬁcult for researchers to design a
universal part suitable for all mobile phones, let alone the possibility of
establishing a uniﬁed production standard to adapt to modern society.
Another approach to adapting the structural part to smartphones is
patch mode, where the structural part is attached to the smartphone
camera without connecting to the smartphone through various ports.
The patch mode can be applied to various mobile phones, and it is
suitable for developing miniaturized mHealth platforms with small
volumes. For example, Comina et al. demonstrated a quantitative
glucose meter that integrated ﬁnger pumps, unidirectional valves,
calibration references, and focusing optics on a disposable unibody
lab-on-a-chip device71. After the preparatory sequence had been acti-
vated, the device was placed on the front-facing camera of a mobile
phone, and the default video acquisition application was run for
quantitative analysis. After analysis, the device could be detached and
disposed of, rendering the phone intact for its regular use. In com-
parison to the embedded mode, the patch mode allows universal
adaptation of the developed mHealth platform to various mobile
phone models. However, it is difﬁcult for the patch mode to integrate
relatively complex process control units, resulting in limited available
detection means. As a common structural part, dark-box mode
reserves a small hole and creates a dark environment for the smart-
phone camera to image ﬂuorescent samples, which is adaptable to
various sizes of smartphones and can integrate other functional units.
Despite this, there are still limitations in current approaches for
adapting different smartphones. We expect modular smartphones to
be a very promising platform for both future mHealth and mobile
communication. Compared to the current mainstream all-in-one
phones, modular smartphones can be customized with hardware
conﬁgurations and accessories that can be changed at any time,
making them more conducive to meeting the customized require-
ments of different users. For the POCT ﬁeld, the heater for tempera-
ture control, electromagnet for bead ﬁxation, and microﬂuidic chip for
ﬂuid manipulations, can be used as smartphone modules; these
modules can be customized on the smartphones according to the
testing scenario. Thus, the modular smartphone not only solves the
difﬁculty in adapting mHealth accessories but also enables POCT
instruments to be custom equipped according to testing methods.
Machine intelligence for analyzing data
After the image data is collected by the integrated hardware, the col-
lected image needs to be processed by the software algorithm.
Therefore, the applicability of software algorithms directly determines
the detection accuracy of mHealth platforms. In general, there are
three types of software associated with mHealth platforms.
The ﬁrst type uses mobile software development platforms such
as Android studio to realize image acquisition, transmission and sto-
rage. Mainstream mobile phones use Android or iOS as the operating
system. Researchers can use the ofﬁcially recommended image sto-
rage or transmission library to call the corresponding interface
through Java language to complete software development.
The second type mainly uses the lower computer, such as MCU, to
accurately control the functioning components. Typically, assembly
language, C language and other development languages are used to
program functions for the underlying hardware using algorithms such
as proportional integral derivative (PID), fuzzy and adaptive control,
and reinforcement learning algorithms, which can accurately control
the motor, heater and micropump integrated on the mHealth
platform.
The above-mentioned two types of software do not involve
complex image processing. The third type of software focuses on
image processing and data analysis. They can be categorized into
general, traditional machine learning, and deep learning algorithms,
which will be discussed separately in the following sections.
General image processing algorithms
A general image processing algorithm is the most direct and easy-to-
use method to realize image preprocessing and image analysis. It does
not need a lot of data for model training like machine learning algo-
rithms. The general image processing algorithms used on mHealth
platforms are similar to those commonly used on computers. How-
ever, due to the lower computing power of mobile phones, the
mHealth platform prefers to use algorithms that do not require large
computing power. Since the acquired image quality is often low on the
mHealth platform due to its simple and cost-effective nature, it is
necessary to use general algorithms for image preprocessing such as
image enhancement, restoration, smooth denoising, graying and
binarization to improve the image quality before analysis. Its main
purpose is to enhance the authenticity of the image by eliminating
irrelevant information and restoring useful information so that the
image can be simpliﬁed to the greatest extent, facilitating the sub-
sequent use of general image processing or other algorithms for fea-
ture extraction, image segmentation, matching and recognition.
Image enhancement. As an image preprocessing method, the lens-
free image reconstruction algorithm is a necessary step for lens-free
imaging to obtain clear images. Current lens-free imaging has corre-
sponding
reconstruction algorithms, such as
the
pixel
super-
resolution method based on multi-angle illumination for shadow
imaging (Fig. 5a) and holographic image reconstruction algorithm for
lens-free holographic phase imaging. For example, Im et al. reported a
generic approach to enable molecular diagnostics on a mHealth plat-
form utilizing molecular-speciﬁc microbeads to generate unique dif-
fraction patterns of blurry beads, which could be recorded and
deconvoluted by digital processing60. To accurately detect bead-
bound target cells, they developed a processing algorithm for image
reconstruction that was based on the Rayleigh–Sommerfeld diffrac-
tion principle but extended to digitally retrieve both transmittance and
phase shift of objects through an iterative optimization. As a result,
cells and beads could be differentiated from transmittance and phase
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
5

correlation respectively. Subsequently, cells labeled with microbeads
could be automatically identiﬁed, and their individual bead counts
were recorded.
Region of interest locating. After improving the image quality, to
determine the speciﬁc region of interest (ROI) for analysis, location
algorithms must be used to eliminate the irrelevant information of
non-detection regions and locate the ROI. There are two commonly
used location algorithms, namely, geometric transformation and
image segmentation. Geometric transformation is to solve the pro-
blem of geometric distortion caused by imaging angle, perspective
relationship, and even the lens itself. For example, Lopez-Ruiz et al.
demonstrated a paper-based microﬂuidic colorimetric sensor for the
simultaneous determination of pH and nitrite concentration in water
samples. To locate the ROI in the microﬂuidic chip for colorimetric
detection, geometric transformation needed to be used for pre-
processing before extracting the color72. According to the reference
coordinates, the rotation matrix and scale factor could be obtained
through the location algorithm and used to correct the spatial dis-
tortion caused by different observation angles to determine the posi-
tion of each sensing area. Then, the H (hue) and S (saturation)
coordinates of the HSV color space are extracted and related to pH and
nitrite concentration, respectively. As another location algorithm,
image segmentation does not need to set reference coordinates in
advance for locating ROI. It only needs to locate according to the
difference in pixels between the detection area and irrelevant areas.
For example, the counting algorithm for extracting object quantity
often uses the image segmentation algorithm method, which is rela-
tively simple and often used for cell and ﬂuorescent marker counting,
such as red and white blood cells73 (Fig. 5b).
Quantitative analysis. After image preprocessing, we can continue to
use
general
image
processing
algorithms
to
extract
the
key
information from the processed image for biomedical detection and
analysis. For example, many studies directly use the color extraction
function in OpenCV for colorimetric analysis. Since colorimetric
detection is sensitive to external light, this processing method is dif-
ﬁcult to obtain accurate results. Therefore, colorimetric detection with
high accuracy often refers to the following process.
The ﬁrst step is color gamut conversion. The photos taken directly
by the camera are often stored in the form of RGB (red, green and blue)
color space. RGB color space is a hardware-oriented color space, which
is commonly used, but the images obtained in the natural environment
are easily affected by natural lighting and shading, that is, they are
sensitive to brightness. The three components of RGB color space are
closely related to brightness. Moreover, the sensitivity of human eyes
to these color components is different. In monochrome, human eyes
are the least sensitive to red and the most sensitive to blue. Therefore,
RGB color space is one with poor uniformity. If the color similarity is
directly measured by Euclidean distance, the result will have a large
deviation from human vision. For a certain color, it is difﬁcult for our
naked eyes to infer three more accurate RGB components to represent
it. Therefore, RGB color space is suitable for the display system but not
for image processing. In contrast, HSV (hue, saturation and value)
color space is used more in image processing74. It is closer to people’s
perception experience of color than RGB. It can intuitively express the
hue, brightness and brightness of color and facilitate color compar-
ison. Therefore, RGB color space needs to be converted to HSV color
space before color comparison.
The second step is to eliminate light inﬂuence. After color gamut
conversion, corresponding algorithms can be used to eliminate the
inﬂuence of illumination, such as the gray world algorithm and color
correction algorithm. The gray world algorithm assumes that the
average value of R, G and B of an image with many color changes tend
to the same gray value K. In the physical sense, the gray world algo-
rithm assumes that the mean value of the average reﬂection of natural
scenery to light is a ﬁxed value in general, which is approximately gray.
The gray world algorithm applies this assumption to the image to be
processed, which can eliminate the inﬂuence of ambient light from the
image and obtain the original scene image.
Finally, the use of the color extraction function can result in col-
orimetric detection with enhanced accuracy. Even though the above-
mentioned method is adopted, there is still room for improvement.
For example, the machine learning algorithm can be used to improve
the accuracy of detection. Alternatively, an external light source with
constant lighting conditions combined with a 3D-printed shell to iso-
late the inﬂuence of ambient light can greatly reduce the complexity of
the detection algorithm, which can be used for colorimetric as well as
ﬂuorescence detection. Previously, Nguyen et al. reported on a
mHealth platform that used CMOS to record the ﬂuorescence change
during real-time ﬂuorescence quantitative LAMP to generate ampliﬁ-
cation curves75 (Fig. 5c). With the logistic model-ﬁtting algorithm, the
reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation (RT-
LAMP) curve was ﬁtted and was displayed on a smartphone for real-
time quantitative analysis of nucleic acids.
Traditional machine learning algorithms
For mHealth platforms, the acquired images are often affected by
environmental factors due to the complexity of their operating
environment. Since the robustness and anti-interference of general
image processing algorithms are relatively weak, the analytical
results of these algorithms are often different under different
external light and acquisition environments. In this case, it is more
suitable to use machine learning algorithms that can eliminate
abnormal interference76–78.
Compared with the deep learning algorithm, the traditional
machine learning algorithm requires less data, computing power, time
and cost to train the model and is more interpretable. It is suitable for
Pixel super-resolution 
reconstruction algorithm
a
Result
b
Segmentation 
algorithm 
c
Logistic model 
fitting algorithm
10μm
30μm
Row image
Fig. 5 | General image processing algorithms for mHealth platforms. a Pixel
super-resolution reconstruction algorithm. The ﬁgure illustrates the use of a pixel
super-resolution reconstruction algorithm to make a low-resolution image clearer
(ﬁgure adapted with permission from Lee et al. 59). b Segmentation algorithm. The
ﬁgure illustrates the use of a segmentation algorithm to determine ROI (ﬁgure
adapted with permission from Zeng et al. 73). c The logistic model-ﬁtting algorithm.
The ﬁgure illustrates the use of the logistic model-ﬁtting algorithm for real-time
quantitative detection of nucleic acid (ﬁgure adapted with permission from
Nguyen et al. 75).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
6

research ﬁelds with high sample collection costs and complex collec-
tion steps. Common traditional machine learning algorithms include
support vector machine (SVM)79, bootstrap aggregation80, k-nearest
neighbor (KNN)81 and decision tree82. Although these methods have
different mathematical principles, they have some common proces-
sing steps, including (1) Establish the type of training examples; (2)
Converge a training set; (3) Resolve the input feature illustration of the
learned function/learned attribute; (4) Resolve the formation of the
learned function and comparable machine learning algorithm; (5)
Assimilate the design and execute the learning algorithm on the col-
lected training set; (6) Evaluate the accuracy/correctness of the
learned function. Among these, data acquisition, feature extraction
and model choosing are key factors of the supervised machine learn-
ing algorithms80.
There are some principles to follow in selecting the appropriate
model on mHealth platforms applying traditional machine learning or
deep learning. First, the model can be selected according to the
detection throughput of microﬂuidic chips, which determines the
amount of collected data. Different models have different levels of
complexity,
which
can
be
judged
according
to
the
Vapnik-
Chervonenkis Dimension (VC-dim). The learning ability of the model
is often positively correlated with the VC-dim, but when the data is
insufﬁcient for a model with a large VC Dimension, the effect is often
poor and overﬁtting happens easily83. When the detection throughput
is relatively low, the dataset is usually small. In this case, it is better to
use statistical machine learning. This is because although deep learn-
ing models have a stronger learning capability compared to traditional
models, they produce biases in estimating the actual data distribution
with insufﬁcient training sample and have a very high risk of over-
ﬁtting, while many statistical machine learning models have a higher
generalization capability under such conditions. In addition, few-shot
learning, with much development in recent years, is also a solution to
solve the problem of small datasets, which is very promising for low-
throughput mHealth platforms. In few-shot learning, Siamese Net-
works are frequently employed, which use two identical artiﬁcial
neural networks to build a coupled framework. In such a framework,
the contrastive loss function is used to learn from a small dataset84–86.
On the contrary, when the detection throughput is high and the
dataset is huge, it is better to choose the deep learning model, which
more easily achieves high accuracy with the huge dataset, while the
accuracy of traditional models could plateau as the volume of data
grows. Indeed, there are some candidate large-scale deep learning
models with high effectiveness, such as Generative Pretrained Trans-
former 3 (GPT-3), which perform very well in many tasks using massive
datasets and have very good prospects for application in high-
throughput mHealth platforms based on cloud computing.
Second, the form of data also needs to be considered. Image,
sequence, and graph data all have different processing methods. For
image data, CNN is a commonly used model with translation and
rotation invariance, which can accurately extract the features of ima-
ges, and it is also a very common model used in mHealth platforms. In
contrast, sequence- and graph-based models now have been used less
in mHealth platforms but are very promising directions to explore in
the future. For sequence data, RNN, LSTM, and transformer are very
effective models. The transformer, which is particularly effective, can
use a multi-head attention mechanism for parallel computing, has very
good effects for sequence data analysis, and is expected to be applied
to gene sequence analysis of mHealth. Graph data and related models,
on the other hand, are areas that have shown greater development in
recent years, such as Graph Attention Networks (GAT), which use
attention mechanisms to effectively predict relationships between
different nodes and can be used in mHealth to analyze interactions
between different compounds and proteins, as well as realize com-
bined diagnosis between different medical IoT edge devices to
determine a user’s health status87–89.
Third, the model can be selected based on qualitative or quanti-
tative analysis. For example, the classiﬁcation algorithm is generally
used for qualitative analysis, while the regression algorithm is used for
quantitative analysis. Clustering and dimension reduction are also the
basic tasks of machine learning. The model outputs corresponding to
these tasks are very different, as are the algorithms used.
In the following sections, examples of POCT detection using
machine learning algorithms will be discussed so that readers can
more easily understand the usage of machine learning algorithms.
Algorithms for denoising. For traditional machine learning algo-
rithms, images are rarely processed directly, but the corresponding
features are extracted through the general image processing algorithm
and then classiﬁed or regressed to obtain the ﬁnal analytical results.
There is often a large amount of interference in real detection envir-
onments. Thus, it is necessary to use the machine learning algorithm to
reduce noise before analysis and detection. For instance, signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) is often low in ﬂuorescence images obtained by
mHealth platforms due to strong background noise resulting from the
use of weak light illumination and low-cost ﬁlters. Corresponding
algorithms need to be used to reduce noise and improve SNR. Pre-
viously, Kuhnemund et al. demonstrated a cost-effective mobile-
phone-based
multimodal
microscope
for
on-site
molecular
diagnostics10 (Fig. 6a). A machine learning-based algorithm was
developed to process the acquired ﬂuorescence images to count
rolling circle ampliﬁcation products. It utilized a random forest
approach to differentiate real ampliﬁcation signals from background
noise, combining a bootstrap aggregation strategy and the random-
ness of the features to reduce overﬁtting.
In addition, Koydemir et al. presented a mHealth platform for the
detection and quantiﬁcation of Giardia lamblia cysts, one of the most
common
waterborne
parasites90.
A
custom-developed
machine
learning algorithm was developed to count and differentiate cysts
from other unwanted ﬂuorescent micro-objects. The machine learning
algorithm utilizes a bootstrap aggregating strategy to classify particles
using 71 different features extracted for each cyst candidate. In sub-
sequent works, they further studied the advantages and disadvantages
a
Algorithms for denoising
b Algorithms for quantitative analysis
Multimodal image fusion
Row image
Intermediate step
Result
Random forest
Image registration 
and alignment
Multimodal 
images
Feature extraction
Random forest
Number of RCPs
Fig. 6 | Traditional machine learning algorithms for mHealth platforms.
a Algorithms for denoising. The ﬁgure illustrates the use of a random forest
approach to differentiate real ampliﬁcation signals from background noise after
multimodal image fusion (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Kuhnemund et al.
10). b Algorithms for quantitative analysis. The ﬁgure illustrates the use of a random
forest algorithm for colorimetric analysis and high-precision pH measurements
(ﬁgure adapted with permission from Kim et al. 96).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
7

of machine learning algorithms, including SVM, bootstrap aggregation
and KNN. As a result, the bootstrap aggregation had the best perfor-
mance, accuracy and ﬁtting speed91. Surveilance et al. classiﬁed
nematodes by applying a similar method92. In their following works,
the recurrent neural network (RNN) algorithm was successfully used to
differentiate live and dead nematodes93.
Algorithms for quantitative analysis. Machine learning can perform
quantitative testing of samples directly. Solmaz et al. developed a
smartphone application employing machine learning classiﬁer algo-
rithms for quantifying peroxide content on colorimetric test strips.
The strip images were taken from ﬁve different Android-based
smartphones under seven different illumination conditions to train
binary (Least-Squares SVM) and multi-class (Random Forest) classiﬁers
and to extract the learning model94. The extracted learning model was
then embedded into a remote server that was accessed by a custom-
designed Android app for testing purposes using a Cloud-hosted ser-
vice. It turned out that the developed application was able to detect
the color change in peroxide strips with over 90% success rate for
primary
colors
with
inter-phone
repeatability
under
versatile
illumination.
It is relatively straightforward to use HSV gamut data and
machine learning algorithms to train classiﬁers for detection. How-
ever, with the increasing number of categories, the classiﬁcation
accuracy decreases signiﬁcantly. Even if different machine learning
models such as linear discriminant analysis (LDA) and Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks (ANN) were employed95, it is still difﬁcult to
improve the multi-classiﬁcation accuracy. This veriﬁes a viewpoint in
machine learning that the machine learning model only determines
the lower limit of accuracy, while data and features extracted from
data determine its upper limit. Therefore, we can only improve the
source of data and feature extraction to achieve more detailed and
accurate classiﬁcation. Feature selection is often based on the spe-
ciﬁc characteristics of different applications. For example, Kim et al.
developed a ﬂuorescent array with a Kaleidolizine (KIz) system for
pH classiﬁcation96 (Fig. 6b). To develop pH-responsive ﬂuorescent
compounds for array composition, various anilines and phenols were
introduced into the KIz core skeleton, allowing for the generation of
30 different colored ﬂuorescent compounds. They conﬁrmed that
each ﬂuorescent compound responded uniquely to pH changes.
Thus, by spotting compounds on cellulose paper, they generated 5 ×
6 ﬂuorescent sensor arrays for pH classiﬁcation. This small form
factor of the sensor array enabled the smartphone camera to effec-
tively capture ﬂuorescence pattern changes of the array elements
with respect to incubation with various pH buffers. Once images
were captured, they were passed through several software compo-
nents that extracted the color differences from the sensor array
image. A random forest-based machine learning model was then
used to classify the expected pH level of the buffer that the sensor
was exposed to. They applied the developed method to the elec-
tronic nose for detecting organic volatiles, which could successfully
distinguish 35 different volatile organic compounds97.
The above examples show that for microﬂuidic detection,
researchers can not only select features according to the character-
istics of samples but also combine feature signal ampliﬁcation with the
machine learning algorithm through a special microﬂuidic chip design
to improve the detection accuracy. In many cases, the mHealth plat-
form is a simple migration to traditional detection methods. Since
people are usually the main operators who analyze test data, the
detection principle and generated test data need to be intuitive and
easy to understand. Traditional machine learning can produce analysis
results from more complex data. However, it relies on the manual
extraction of data features. In contrast, the deep learning algorithm
can automatically extract data features, which opens up a new avenue
for developing mHealth platforms.
Deep learning algorithms
With the increasing amount of data, the recognition accuracy of the
traditional machine learning algorithm will reach a plateau, while deep
learning algorithms can start to give full play to their ability98. In recent
years, with the rapid development of information technology, the
progress of sensors has led to an increase in available data, and the
progress of electronic technology has led to advances in computing
power. Both facilitate the development of deep learning algorithms,
especially the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) algorithm applied
in the ﬁeld of biomedical imaging99.
Classical CNN algorithm includes the convolutional, pooling, and
fully connected layers and the activation function. The layer is the core
component of the ANN, which consists of fundamental neurons.
Compared with classical ANN, the layers of CNN have their own special
structure and function. The convolutional layer mirrors the structure
of the human visual cortex, which can extract features of images. The
pooling layer is used to aggregate features extracted by the convolu-
tional layer to reduce the computational burden. After feature
extraction, the fully connected layer will classify the data into various
classes. The activation function is to give neural network nonlinear
expression ability so that it can better ﬁt the results. Compared with
traditional machine learning, which requires professionals to manually
extract image features, CNN can realize automated extraction of image
features100–106.
By improving CNN architectures, including MobileNet, U-Net,
Inception, Xception and Residual Network (ResNet), CNN can be used
for various tasks, such as image enhancement, segmentation and
classiﬁcation, and regression detection. By realizing image processing
and analysis with multi-layer stacking, CNN can achieve classiﬁcation
and regression without feature extraction. Therefore, it is more sui-
table for bright ﬁeld imaging and morphology analysis.
Algorithms for image enhancement and segmentation. Due to the
compactand low-cost hardware structure of the mHealth platform, the
obtained images are often of low quality due to lens distortion such as
spherical and color aberration. General image processing algorithms
such as speciﬁc image degradation models can be used for image
restoration and enhancement. However, these methods are effective in
speciﬁc hardware settings and operation environments, which cannot
be employed universally due to batch differences and low operation
repeatability. To develop a universal algorithm to improve image
quality on mHealth platforms, Rivenson et al. pioneered the use of the
deep learning algorithm to correct lens distortion introduced by
mobile-phone-based microscopes107 (Fig. 7a), facilitating the produc-
tion
of high-resolution, denoised, and
color-corrected
images,
matching the performance of benchtop microscopes with high-end
objective lenses. This work inspired researchers to explore deep
learning algorithms for the development of mHealth platforms and
biomedical applications.
Besides image enhancement, image segmentation can also be
realized by the deep learning algorithm and combined with image
enhancement through the complementary neural network. Haan
et al. reported on a deep learning framework for the automated
screening of sickle cells in blood smears using a smartphone-based
microscope (Fig. 7b). Two distinct and complementary deep neural
networks employing the U-net architecture were used for image
analysis36. The ﬁrst one enhanced and standardized the blood smear
images to spatially and spectrally match the image quality of a
laboratory-grade benchtop microscope. The second one acted on
the output of the ﬁrst image enhancement neural network and was
used to perform the semantic segmentation between healthy and
sickle cells within a blood smear. The segmented images were then
used for the diagnosis of sickle cell disease. Blood samples of 96
patients with 32 positive cases were successfully tested by the
developed method, showing ~98% accuracy with an area-under-the-
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
8

curve (AUC) of 0.998. Although general image processing algorithms
can also be used for image segmentation, it often requires trained
experts who have knowledge of both medicine and image processing
to extract image features before compiling the algorithm. In con-
trast, CNN allows experts to mark the data and hand it over to pro-
grammers with limited knowledge of medicine or image processing.
Moreover, when the amount of data is relatively large, deep learning
algorithms are often more universal and accurate than general image
processing algorithms.
Algorithms for image classiﬁcation. Deep learning algorithms have
also been widely used for image classiﬁcation on mHealth platforms.
Compared with general image processing algorithms and traditional
machine learning algorithms, deep learning algorithms do not need
manual feature extraction and are more suitable for classifying images
with complex features that are difﬁcult for manual description and
extraction. Recently, Potluri et al. developed a mHealth platform for
automated ovulation tests using the deep learning algorithm by
detecting fern patterns in air-dried saliva on a microﬂuidic device.
Typically, images acquired by mHealth platforms are sent to a server
for processing by CNN, and the results will be sent back to the mobile
client device for display, taking advantage of the high performance of
the server and reducing the burden on the mobile device108. In this
work, the MobileNet architecture was used for the neural network to
classify salivary ferning images, which is a CNN architecture specially
designed for devices with low computing power, such as smartphones.
Different from the traditional neural network using standard 2D con-
volution, this network uses depth-wise separable convolution to con-
struct a neural network with a lightweight depth, allowing CNN-based
image analysis directly on mobile devices. This technique is called
model compressing, which
can decrease the
requirements of
computation by reducing the sizes of models. The model size is often
reduced by four model compression techniques, that is, pruning,
quantization, knowledge distillation, and low-rank factorization. Using
this technique, they were able to detect ovulation with an accuracy of
99.5% when tested with 200 images of human saliva collected during
the ovulating and non-ovulating phases of the menstrual cycle among
six women. More recently, the same research group reported a
nanoparticle-enabled smartphone system for rapid and sensitive virus
detection (Fig. 7c). Viral particles were captured on a microﬂuidic chip
and labeled with speciﬁcally designed platinum nanoprobes to induce
gas bubble formation in the presence of hydrogen peroxide109. The
formed bubbles were controlled to make distinct visual patterns,
allowing simple and sensitive virus detection on an Android smart-
phone with a trained CNN algorithm and without using any optical
hardware smartphone attachment. The CNN algorithm employed the
Inception v3 architecture, which was transfer learned using Google’s
TensorFlow framework, with images of microﬂuidic chips containing
bubbles analogous to virus samples. As a result, tests with 134 virus-
infected patient plasma/serum samples showed a detection sensitivity
of 98.97% and speciﬁcity of 91.89%.
Algorithms for regression. Regression is another common task that
can be accomplished using deep learning algorithms. For example,
Chen et al. reported the use of a microbubbling assay for the quanti-
ﬁcation of protein biomarkers by deep learning (Fig. 7d). Target pro-
teins were captured by the antibodies immobilized on paramagnetic
microbeads and further labeled with platinum nanoparticles110. After
the sandwich complexes were loaded on a microwell array via an
external magnetic ﬁeld, the formation of microbubbles in the presence
of hydrogen peroxide could be visualized. Both localization and
regression CNNs were used for image analysis, allowing successful
identiﬁcation of the boundaries of the microarray areas and micro-
bubble counting in seconds. Using this method, post-prostatectomy
surveillance of prostate-speciﬁc antigens could be achieved with a
detection limit of 0.060 pg mL-1 and early pregnancy detection using
βhCG could be achieved with a detection limit of 2.84 pg mL-1. Ballard
et al. reported on a deep learning-based framework to design and
quantify point-of-care sensors. A low-cost and rapid paper-based ver-
tical ﬂow assay was demonstrated for testing high-sensitivity C-Reac-
tive Protein19. CNN was used to select optimal spots and infer analyte
concentration from the multiplexed sensing channels, which greatly
improved the quantiﬁcation accuracy in comparison to a standard
multi-variable regression.
Algorithms for augmentation of image datasets. Deep learning
algorithms have shown high potential for image processing and ana-
lysis, revolutionizing the use of smartphones in mHealth diagnostics.
However, the high variability in cellphone image data acquisition and
the common need for large amounts of specialist-annotated images
for deep learning model training may limit the application of
smartphone-based diagnostics. For example, in the above-mentioned
work of Shaﬁee’s research group, a lot of time and resources were
spent on the preparation of microﬂuidic chips and virus detection to
obtain 15,057 images for CNN training111. To overcome this issue, they
further employed adversarial learning to augment the real image
dataset by generating 16,000 realistic synthetic microﬂuidic chip
images through style generative adversarial networks (GAN) (Fig. 7e).
The performance of the system was evaluated by detecting ﬁve dif-
ferent virus targets using 179 patient samples. The generalizability of
the system was demonstrated by rapid reconﬁguration to detect SARS-
CoV-2 antigens in nasal swab samples (n = 62) with 100% accuracy.
Besides GAN, another approach to reduce the requirement of
data volume for diagnostics is unsupervised learning without data
annotation, also known as comparative learning. Shaﬁee’s research
group utilized a medical domain adaptive neural network in both
Enhancement
a
Row 
image
Enhanced 
image
Segmentation
b
Row
image
Segmented 
image
Segmentation
network
20μm
Classification
c
Row
image
Classification
network
Positive
Negative
Row
image
Regression
network
Count:314
Augmentation of image dataset
d
e
Regression
Fig. 7 | Deep learning algorithms for mHealth platforms. a Image enhancement.
The ﬁgure shows the process of using deep learning to enhance low-quality images
captured by mobile phones (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Rivenson et al. 107).
b Image segmentation. The ﬁgure illustrates a deep learning workﬂow employing the
U-net architecture for sickle cell analysis (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Haan
et al. 36). c Image classiﬁcation. The ﬁgure illustrates the detection of an on-chip
bubble signal by using a CNN employing Inception v3 architecture (ﬁgure adapted
with permission from Draz et al. 109). d Regression. The ﬁgure illustrates the regres-
sion CNN structure for counting bubbles (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Chen
et al. 110). e Augmentation of the image dataset. The ﬁgure illustrates the structure of
GAN for generating realistic synthetic microﬂuidic chip images to augment the
image dataset (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Shokr et al. 111).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
9

semisupervised and unsupervised learning scenarios to effectively
capitalize on the largely unlabeled medical datasets, employing
Xception and Res-net architectures. Their work showed that adver-
sarial learning could be used to develop high-performing networks
trained on unannotated medical images of varying image quality, and
that it could be used with unlabeled data from unseen domain-
shifted datasets to adapt pretrained supervised networks to new
distributions, even when data from the original distribution are not
available. They successfully applied the system to low-quality images
acquired from inexpensive mobile optical systems to train networks
for the evaluation of human embryos, the quantiﬁcation of human
sperm morphology, and the diagnosis of malarial infections in the
blood13.
Applications
In mHealth platforms, small and low-cost imaging devices are difﬁcult
to achieve high-resolution and high-quality images with a large ﬁeld of
view. Therefore, it is necessary to select an appropriate imaging
modality, hardware structure, and algorithm according to the appli-
cation scenario and detection object. In this section, the applications
of mHealth platforms will be discussed in terms of the detection
objects, that is, molecules, viruses, cells, and parasites. Examples will
also be documented as a guide for readers to develop their own
mHealth platforms.
Molecules
Biological molecules, such as nucleic acids, proteins and metabolites,
have scales below the Abelian limit (200 nm). These molecules cannot
be directly imaged on mHealth platforms. Generally, a detection
strategy such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), ﬂuorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
is utilized to allow optical detection under the mobile microscope.
For nucleic acid detection, PCR and FISH are the two common
methods that are employed on mHealth platforms. Fluorescence
imaging is typically employed for result collection, and result analysis
could be accomplished with a ﬂuorescence detection or counting
algorithm based on machine learning.
PCR has been the gold standard for disease diagnoses, such as
inﬂuenza, HIV, and genetic diseases. With the rapid advances in nucleic
acid ampliﬁcation technologies, isothermal ampliﬁcation has drawn
the increasing attention of researchers. Loop-mediated isothermal
ampliﬁcation (LAMP) has been a particularly promising alternative to
PCR for nucleic acid detection on mHealth platforms. LAMP allows
DNA ampliﬁcation at 65 °C and the resulting ampliﬁcants can be
detected via means including the naked eye, ﬂuorescence, turbidity,
colorimetry, and electrochemistry. Thanks to its tolerance of crude
samples and critical reaction settings, extraction of pathogenic genes
or sample pretreatment can sometimes be bypassed for direct LAMP
reactions. Furthermore, LAMP offers a higher DNA synthesis rate and a
milder reaction condition than PCR, which is ideal for rapid point-of-
care detections with minimal setups. Hu et al. recently demonstrated a
smartphone-based droplet digital LAMP device that integrated rapid
nucleic acid extraction and digital LAMP for highly sensitive nucleic
acid detection within 60 min112. A portable microdroplet ﬂuorescence
detection device was developed based on smartphone imaging.
Quantiﬁcation of low-abundance cfDNA and detection of mutations
were successfully demonstrated.
FISH uses nucleic acid probes modiﬁed with chromogenic or
ﬂuorescent dyes to detect speciﬁc sequences on ﬁxed histological
specimens. The presence of the target nucleic acid sequence can be
detected and quantiﬁed by a microscope, and multiple analyses can be
performed based on the number of reporter molecules and micro-
scope ﬁlters. Kühnemund et al. demonstrated a mHealth platform that
permitted on-site molecular diagnostics with a cost-effective mobile-
phone-based multimodal microscope, which allowed next-generation
DNA sequencing reactions and in situ point mutation detection assays
in preserved tumor samples to be imaged and analyzed10.
As an interesting alternative to ﬂuorescence imaging, microbead
motion-based methods have opened a new avenue for nucleic acid
detection on mHealth platforms. Recently, Draz et al. demonstrated a
mHealth platform integrating cellphone-based optical sensing, LAMP
and metal nanoparticle motion for molecular detection of HIV-111
(Fig. 8a). The presence of HIV-1 RNA in a sample resulted in the for-
mation of large-sized amplicons that reduced the motion of metal
nanoparticles. The motion change could be accurately measured using
a cellphone system as the biomarker for target nucleic acid detection.
For detecting proteins such as antigens, ELISA is the common
strategy for signal ampliﬁcation. Previously, Barbosa et al. reported on
a power-free portable smartphone system for ELISA-based colori-
metric and ﬂuorescence quantitative detection of prostate-speciﬁc
antigen (PSA)113. The developed system allowed quantitation of PSA in
the range of 0.9 to 60 ng/ml with <7 % precision in 13 min using
enzymatic ampliﬁcation and a chromogenic substrate. The lower limit
of detection was further improved from 0.4 to 0.08 ng/ml in whole
blood samples with the use of a ﬂuorescence substrate. The binding
reaction between antibody and antigen can be directly used for pro-
tein detection. For example, Joh et al. developed a mHealth platform
that was comprised of a custom cellphone-based optical microscope
and an immunodiagnostic chip built upon a non-fouling polymer
brush-coating that could quantify the expression of protein bio-
markers directly from crude cell lysates114 (Fig. 8b). As a result, the
method could evaluate both the cellular morphology and molecular
expression of clinically relevant biomarkers directly from ﬁne-needle
aspiration of breast tissue specimens within 1 h.
For detecting ions, colorimetry is a simple and effective method
that allows optical detection via the mobile phone camera to quantify
ion concentration115–121. Microﬂuidic paper-based analytical devices
(μPADs) are a relatively simple and economical means for developing
POCT devices. Recently, Xiao et al. reported a stand-alone smart-
phone-based portable reader installed with a custom-designed APP,
which could accurately and reproducibly acquire ﬂuorescence change
from a paper-based microarray for simultaneous detection of Hg2+,
Pb2+, and Cu2+ in water samples122 (Fig. 8c).
The quick-response (QR) code is a widely used recognition tech-
nology, which has recently been combined with μPADs for colori-
metric detection due to its ability to quickly locate and recognize
encoded information, improving detection speed and increasing
detection tolerance. Recently, Katoh et al. integrated QR code recog-
nition into μPADs with distance-based colorimetric signaling, resulting
in a semiquantitative readout fully relying on straightforward barcode
Nucleic acids
a
b
Proteins
c
Ions
Detection scheme
Imaging result
50μm
200μm
30μm
Fig. 8 | Molecular diagnosis on mHealth platforms. a Nucleic acids detection. The
ﬁgure illustrates the detection of HIV-1 nucleic acids using a cellphone system
integrating cellphone-based optical sensing, loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁca-
tion, and micromotor motion (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Draz et al. 11).
b Protein detection. The ﬁgure illustrates the workﬂow for breast cancer diagnosis
using a mobile pathology platform (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Joh et al.
114). c Ion detection. The ﬁgure illustrates the workﬂow for the detection of Hg2+,
Pb2+, and Cu2+ in water samples (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Xiao et al. 122).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
10

reader solutions123. A model assay in the form of colorimetric copper
ion detection was demonstrated in the concentration range of
0.4–3.2 mM. Consistent results were achieved with a free barcode
reader APP independent of the smartphone model and environmental
light conditions.
Due to the excellent signal ampliﬁcation methods described
above, the above particles can be detected even if their sizes are below
the Abelian limit. By the indirect detection method, small particles can
interact with the detection light source to produce detection signals
that can be easily detected under ﬂuorescence imaging. However,
because of the portable and low-cost optical components (e.g., light
sources, ﬁlters) of the mHealth platform, the image SNR of the
mHealth ﬂuorescence imaging platform is often relatively low, so
denoising algorithms, such as machine learning algorithms, are
required to improve the detection accuracy. Owing to the high sensi-
tivity and speciﬁcity of ﬂuorescence imaging, analysis algorithms used
after preprocessing are often straightforward, and simple and count-
ing or ﬁtting algorithms will be used to complete the ﬁnal quantitative
detection.
Viruses
Most viral particles have scales below the Abelian limit, but some
special viral particles, such as coronavirus, are larger than it. Theore-
tically, when the size of the object is above the Abelian limit, it can be
directly imaged and analyzed by a microscopic system. However, due
to the limitation of the smartphone camera lens, the image quality
acquired by the mHealth platform often has problems such as aber-
ration and small FOV, resulting in an imaging resolution of >1 µm. As a
result, the virus cannot be directly imaged on mHealth platforms for
detection.
One strategy for detecting viruses on mHealth platforms is to
detect their speciﬁc nucleic acid after lysis utilizing approaches such as
PCR and LAMP. Another strategy is to directly detect the viral par-
ticles, which can also be accomplished by using the microbead
motion-based method with the aid of immunological reaction. For
example, Draz et al. reported the detection of Zika virus through
monitoring the catalytic-based motion of nanostructure under a
mobile optical system124. The presence of Zika virus in a testing
sample resulted in the accumulation of platinum-nanomotors on the
surface of polystyrene beads via immunological reaction, causing
their motion in hydroperoxide solution. As a result, the method
could detect Zika virus in samples with virus concentrations as low as
one particle/μL. Since the motion characteristics of microbeads are
easy to identify, the motion trajectory of microbeads can be cap-
tured directly in the bright ﬁeld and analyzed by the particle tracking
algorithm. In addition, ﬂuorescent microbeads can be used to cap-
ture motions in the dark.
Cells
Cells and bacteria are generally larger than 1 µm. Thus, they can be
detected on mHealth platforms by direct imaging. Sunny et al.
demonstrated a tele-cytology system in combination with an ANN-
based risk-stratiﬁcation model for early detection of oral poten-
tially malignant lesions (OPML)37 (Fig. 9a). Following automated
scanning of cytology slides, acquired images were uploaded to a
specialized web-based server for image preprocessing and ANN-
based analysis. The integration of image processing and ANN-
based risk-stratiﬁcation model improved the detection sensitivity
of malignant lesions and high-grade OPML. Zeinhom et al.
demonstrate a compact and lightweight optical device attached to
the existing camera module of a smartphone for detection of
Escherichia coli O157:H7125 (Fig. 9b). Based on the classical sand-
wich ELISA design, rapid and speciﬁc detection of E. coli O157:H7 in
foods was achieved within 2 h.
Semen analysis is the cornerstone of male infertility evaluation.
Previously,
Kanakasabapathy
et
al.
developed
an
automated
smartphone-based semen analyzer to quantify sperm concentration
and motility for point-of-care male infertility screening (Fig. 9c). From
a total of 350 clinical semen specimens, the developed mHealth plat-
form could analyze an unwashed, unprocessed liqueﬁed semen sample
with <5 s mean processing time, providing a semen quality evaluation
based on the World Health Organization guidelines with ~98%
accuracy126. In the following work, the authors further evaluated the
ability of the developed mHealth platform to provide information on
Hyaluronan Binding Assay score, sperm viability, and sperm DNA
fragmentation. Embryo assessment and selection is a critical step in an
in vitro fertilization procedure. Kanakasabapathy et al. reported the
development of two inexpensive and automated mHealth platforms
that utilized deep learning algorithm for rapid, reliable, and accurate
evaluations of embryo morphological qualities127 (Fig. 9d). Using a
layered learning approach, they showed that the network models
pretrained with high-quality embryo image data could be re-trained
with data recorded on low-cost, portable optical systems for embryo
assessment and classiﬁcation when relatively low-resolution image
data were used128,129.
Cell-scale objects are often larger than 1 µm, much greater than
the Abelian limit, so they can be imaged directly with bright ﬁeld
imaging. However, because of the limitations of the smartphone
microscope lens, the quality of microscopic images they take is not
good enough and always has problems such as small FOV, aberration,
and coma. Hardware structures with motors for ﬁeld-by-ﬁeld scanning
are often used to solve the problem of small FOV, and deep learning
methods for image enhancement are used to solve problems of
aberration and coma. At the same time, the direct method using bright
ﬁeld imaging lacks high speciﬁcity like that of ﬂuorescence imaging, so
deep learning is required for image segmentation and classiﬁcation to
perform the ﬁnal analysis of the image.
Cancer cell
a
Bacterium
b
Sperm
c
d
Embryo
Fig. 9 | Detection of cells on mHealth platforms. a Cancer cell detection. The
ﬁgure illustrates the design of a comparison study on the early detection of
potentially malignant oral lesions by conventional cytology, tele-cytology, and
ANN-based diagnoses (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Sunny et al. 37).
b Bacterium detection. The ﬁgure illustrates a portable smartphone-based device
with a sandwich immunosensor for E. coli O157:H7 detection (ﬁgure adapted with
permission from Zeinhom et al. 125). c Sperm detection. The ﬁgure shows an image
of the smartphone accessory and microﬂuidic chip for sperm detection (ﬁgure
adapted with permission from Kanakasabapathy et al. 126). d Embryo assessment.
The ﬁgure shows an exploded image of the stand-alone optical system and its
various components. The system is wirelessly controlled using a smartphone to
photograph embryos on a standard embryo culture dish. CMOS denotes com-
plementary metal oxide semiconductor (ﬁgure adapted with permission from
Kanakasabapathy et al. 127).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
11

Parasites
Parasite detection is closely related to food safety and personal health,
which can also be realized by direct imaging detection on mHealth
platforms130,131. The risk of host infection can be prevented by parasite
detection. For example, Giardia eggs can be transmitted through
drinking water or food, and the infected host will have symptoms such
as diarrhea. Recently, Shrestha et al. reported a smartphone micro-
scope method that could detect and quantify Giardia cysts and Cryp-
tosporidium oocysts in food and water samples (Fig. 10a). The method
was easy to implement, providing performance comparable to com-
mercially available microscopic methods.
After the host is infected, parasites can be detected in its feces,
urine, or blood according to the transmission mode of the parasites.
Previously, Slusarewicz et al. demonstrated the use of a cellular smart-
phone as an inexpensive device to photograph parasite eggs that were
labeled with a ﬂuorescent chitin-binding protein in feces (Fig. 10b). By
harnessing the computational power of the smartphone, parasite eggs
could be counted through image analysis. As a result, the Strongyle egg
counts generated by the smartphone system had a signiﬁcant linear
correlation with manual McMaster counts but with a lower coefﬁcient of
variation. Recently, Li et al. developed a cost-effective and automated
system for counting parasites in fecal samples without special sample
preparation or the need for a trained user. The system included an
inexpensive, portable, robotic microscope that could scan over the size
of an entire McMaster chamber and capture high-resolution bright ﬁeld
images without user intervention. The captured images were then
automatically segmented and analyzed using a trained CNN to separate
parasite eggs from background debris. Simple postprocessing of the
CNN output yielded both egg species and counts.
Testing of blood samples is necessary for identifying blood
parasites. For example, malaria is a life-threatening disease caused by
parasites that usually infect subjects through mosquito bites. After
infection, the parasite begins invading the host’s red blood and liver
cells, modifying the biochemistry and structural properties of the cells.
Pirnstill et al. reported a cost-effective, optical cellphone-based
transmission polarized light microscope system for malaria diagnosis
by imaging the malaria pigment known as hemozoin in blood samples
(Fig. 10c). The developed system was comparable to larger benchtop
polarized microscopy systems but at much lower cost and complexity.
The detection of malaria in ﬁxed and stained blood smears was suc-
cessfully demonstrated.
Conclusions and prospects
In this review, recent advances in the development of hardware and
software of mHealth platforms and their applications were docu-
mented. As illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 1, in the early stages of
development (before 2014), research on mHealth platforms was
mainly focused on the supporting component of the imaging parts and
modalities, which could be categorized into three types, that is, lens-
free imaging, bright ﬁeld lens-based imaging, and ﬂuorescence ima-
ging. Lens-free imaging often has a compact supporting component
and requires image reconstruction for analysis. The resolution and
FOV of lens-free imaging are directly related to the CMOS quality of the
mobile phone, and it involves the removal of the smartphone camera
lens, which may damage the integrity of the smartphone. Thus, cur-
rently, fewer and fewer mHealth platforms use lens-free imaging.
Fluorescence imaging has the advantages of high speciﬁcity, large
FOV, and wide-ﬁeld imaging. However, the testing samples usually
need to be pretreated with ﬂuorescence staining before imaging. It is
unfriendly to non-professional users to employ ﬂuorescence imaging
directly. In addition, since low-cost ﬁlters and LEDs are the major
choices for ﬂuorescence imaging on mHealth platforms for cost
reduction, the resulting images often have a low signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR). In contrast, bright ﬁeld lens-based imaging is widely employed
because microscopic modules can be easily adapted to mobile phone
cameras for high-quality imaging, and the resulting images can be
effectively analyzed by artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms such as CNN.
However, when the resolution is very high, the FOV of bright ﬁeld lens-
based imaging becomes smaller. Thus, a trade-off between resolution
and FOV is necessary according to application scenarios.
When imaging modalities became mature on mHealth platforms,
researchers started to explore mHealth platforms for different appli-
cation scenarios, such as blood cell and parasite detection, colorimetric
and ﬂuorescence detection of nucleic acids and proteins. At the same
time, more hardware structures such as process control components
and software algorithms such as colorimetric and dynamic video
detection algorithms were developed. With rapid advances in smart-
phone performance and detection strategies, mHealth platforms have
become simpler and more convenient, suitable for detecting a wide
range of biological samples with improved sensitivity and accuracy.
Since 2018, research on mHealth platforms has further migrated
to the development of software algorithms, such as deep learning
algorithms for image enhancement and classiﬁcation. The research
group of Shaﬁee has shown many good examples, including male
infertility tests (Fig. 9c), embryo assessments (Fig. 9d), and fern
pattern-based ovulation tests. The combination of deep learning
algorithms with mobile phone systems has opened a new avenue for
mHealth platforms to further expand their application ﬁelds. However,
machine learning algorithms, especially deep learning algorithms,
need a large amount of data for model training. Thus, when choosing
software algorithms for mHealth platforms, we should consider not
only the advantages of the algorithm but also the time and resources
that are required to generate the training set.
For future development, microﬂuidic-based detection methods
hold high potential for sensing and evolving into mHealth platforms
for mobile health monitoring. For example, localized surface plasmon
resonance132–147 (LSPR) doesn’t need a prism or other optical coupling
device to excite the sample and has a higher surface-to-volume ratio in
comparison to traditional surface plasmon resonance. The integration
of LSPR into mHealth platforms not only improves the portability of
the detecting device but also makes the detection results more accu-
rate and reliable by using deep learning algorithms. Liquid crystal (LC)-
based sensors show colorful signals that can be readily interpreted by
users without using expensive and bulky instrumentation under
ambient light148–152. Therefore, they have been considered as simple
and convenient methods that are suitable for routine analysis and on-
site applications.
Parasites in 
water and food
a
b
Parasites          
in feces
c
Parasites 
in blood
Accessary
Imaging result
400μm
Fig. 10 | Detection of parasites on mHealth platforms. a Detection of Giardia
cyst and Cryptosporidium (oo)cyst in food and water. The ﬁgure shows a
representative image of (oo)cysts acquired by a smartphone microscope with
a one mm ball lens and white LED light illumination (ﬁgure adapted with
permission from Shrestha et al. 198). b Detection of parasite eggs in feces. The
ﬁgure shows an example of a whole-ﬁeld image of a sample in a McMaster
chamber and image processing results during threshold segmentation (ﬁgure
adapted with permission from Slusarewicz et al. 199). c Detection of malaria in
blood. The ﬁgure shows an image of the mouse malaria strain blood smear
without polarized light using a Leica microscope with a ×40 magniﬁcation
objective (ﬁgure adapted with permission from Pirnstill et al. 200).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
12

Recently, increasing attention of researchers is drawn to the
integration of wearable devices with mHealth platforms153–161, where
biological information is collected by wearable devices and then han-
ded over to mHealth platforms for data analysis so as to realize real-
time health monitoring. More and more mobile phone hardware
resources such as near ﬁeld communication and ﬂashlight are applied
to mHealth platforms to improve their portability162. In addition, many
sensors embedded in smartphones such as gyroscopes and infrared
and temperature sensors, also have a high potential to be imple-
mented in mHealth platforms.
For machine intelligence, new models have emerged for image-
based artiﬁcial intelligence analysis. For example, the transformer and
pretrained models have been widely used in the computer vision area
in the past two years. These newly developed models optimize the
performance of deep neural networks from different aspects and
greatly improve the accuracy of recognition. They hold high potential
for applications in mHealth platforms.
When the high-performance model is relatively large, it usually
requires a high computing power, making it difﬁcult to deploy directly
to mobile phones and thus a major barrier to mHealth development.
Although algorithms deployed on cloud servers can analyze images
uploaded from mobile phones, which is also known as cloud-based
computing, it often suffers from higher latency and weaker privacy.
Recently, fog- and edge-based computing (the way data is computed
on gateways, routers or embedded devices) have attracted the atten-
tion of researchers with lower latency and higher data security, which
can be integrated with cloud-based computing and have promising
applications on mHealth platforms. In addition, although a lot of
existing proven algorithms have been employed on mHealth plat-
forms, few researchers developed new lightweight models speciﬁcally
for mHealth platforms. Most researchers only program functions using
canned algorithms in different applications. New lightweight models
speciﬁcally for mHealth platforms may be the breakthroughs for
existing challenges.
Above all, there is no doubt that mobile health monitoring is a
very promising ﬁeld. With the rapid development of the internet of
things technology163,164, mHealth platforms based on smartphones
have a wide range of application scenarios. It can be used for home
nursing and health monitoring of family members, for use in the
community medical station as the frontier of CDC, and ﬁeld food
safety detection. The collected data can be transmitted to the central
server for analysis, which can be used by doctors for remote diagnosis
of patients, scholars for pathological research, disease control ofﬁcials
for epidemic control, and improved theranostics165–196. We believe that
soon, mHealth platforms will become more convenient and reliable
with widespread applications.
References
1.
Gao, W. et al. Fully integrated wearable sensor arrays for
multiplexed in situ perspiration analysis. Nature 529, 509–514
(2016).
2.
Tang, Z. et al. A materials-science perspective on tackling COVID-
19. Nat. Rev. Mater. 5, 847–860 (2020).
3.
Reddy, B. et al. Point-of-care sensors for the management of
sepsis. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 640–648 (2018).
4.
Tang, H. et al. In Situ forming epidermal bioelectronics for daily
monitoring and comprehensive exercise. ACS Nano 16,
17931–17947 (2022).
5.
Yang, Y. et al. A laser-engraved wearable sensor for sensitive
detection of uric acid and tyrosine in sweat. Nat. Biotechnol. 38,
217–224 (2020).
6.
Lei, Z. et al. Bio-inspired ionic skin for theranostics. Adv. Funct.
Mater. 31, 2008020 (2021).
7.
Turbé, V. et al. Deep learning of HIV ﬁeld-based rapid tests. Nat.
Med. 27, 1165–1170 (2021).
8.
Kaminski, M. M., Abudayyeh, O. O., Gootenberg, J. S., Zhang, F. &
Collins, J. J. CRISPR-based diagnostics. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5,
643–656 (2021).
9.
Arumugam, S., Colburn, D. A. M. & Sia, S. K. Biosensors for per-
sonal mobile health: a system architecture perspective. Adv.
Mater. Technol. 5, 1–18 (2020).
10.
Kühnemund, M. et al. Targeted DNA sequencing and in situ
mutation analysis using mobile phone microscopy. Nat. Commun.
8, 1–8 (2017).
11.
Draz, M. S. et al. DNA engineered micromotors powered by metal
nanoparticles for motion based cellphone diagnostics. Nat.
Commun. 9, 4282 (2018).
12.
Wood, C. S. et al. Taking connected mobile-health diag-
nostics of infectious diseases to the ﬁeld. Nature 566,
467–474 (2019).
13.
Kanakasabapathy, M. K. et al. Adaptive adversarial neural net-
works for the analysis of lossy and domain-shifted datasets of
medical images. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5, 571–585 (2021).
14.
Zheng, G. et al. Instrumentation-compact digital microﬂuidic
reaction interface-extended loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁca-
tion for sample-to-answer testing of vibrio parahaemolyticus.
Anal. Chem. 93, 9728–9736 (2021).
15.
Gu, Y. et al. Three-dimensional transistor arrays for intra- and inter-
cellular recording. Nat. Nanotechnol. 17, 292–300 (2022).
16.
Li, Y., Liu, B. F. & Zhang, X. Wettability-patterned microchip for
emerging biomedical materials and technologies. Mater. Today
51, 273–293 (2021).
17.
Laksanasopin, T. et al. A smartphone dongle for diagnosis of
infectious diseases at the point of care. Sci. Transl. Med. 7,
273re1 (2015).
18.
D’Ambrosio, M. V. et al. Point-of-care quantiﬁcation of blood-
borne ﬁlarial parasites with a mobile phone microscope. Sci.
Transl. Med. 7, 286re4 (2015).
19.
Ballard, Z. S. et al. Deep learning-enabled point-of-care sensing
using multiplexed paper-based sensors. npj Digit. Med. 3,
1–8 (2020).
20.
Wang, S. et al. Machine-learning micropattern manufacturing.
Nano Today 38, 101152 (2021).
21.
Adlung, L., Cohen, Y., Mor, U. & Elinav, E. Machine learning in
clinical decision making. Med 2, 642–665 (2021).
22.
Zoabi, Y., Deri-Rozov, S. & Shomron, N. Machine learning-based
prediction of COVID-19 diagnosis based on symptoms. npj Digit.
Med. 4, 1–5 (2021).
23.
Zhang, K. et al. Clinically applicable AI system for accurate diag-
nosis, quantitative measurements, and prognosis of COVID-19
pneumonia using computed tomography. Cell 181,
1423–1433.e11 (2020).
24.
Rampasek, L. & Goldenberg, A. Learning from everyday images
enables expert-like diagnosis of retinal diseases. Cell 172,
893–895 (2018).
25.
Myszczynska, M. A. et al. Applications of machine learning to
diagnosis and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Nat. Rev.
Neurol. 16, 440–456 (2020).
26.
Liu, L. et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence-powered microﬂuidics for nano-
medicine and materials synthesis. Nanoscale 13, 19352–19366 (2021).
27.
Wong, D. & Yip, S. Machine learning classiﬁes cancer. Nature 555,
446–447 (2018).
28.
Goecks, J., Jalili, V., Heiser, L. M. & Gray, J. W. How machine
Learning will transform biomedicine. Cell 181, 92–101 (2020).
29.
Huang, L. et al. Machine learning of serum metabolic patterns
encodes early-stage lung adenocarcinoma. Nat. Commun. 11,
3556 (2020).
30.
Richens, J. G., Lee, C. M. & Johri, S. Improving the accuracy of
medical diagnosis with causal machine learning. Nat. Commun. 11,
1–9 (2020).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
13

31.
Im, H. et al. Design and clinical validation of a point-of-care device
for the diagnosis of lymphoma via contrast-enhanced micro-
holography and machine learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2,
666–674 (2018).
32.
Lynch, C. J. & Liston, C. New machine-learning technologies for
computer-aided diagnosis. Nat. Med. 24, 1304–1305 (2018).
33.
Ellett, F. et al. Diagnosis of sepsis from a drop of blood by mea-
surement of spontaneous neutrophil motility in a microﬂuidic
assay. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 207–214 (2018).
34.
Manak, M. S. et al. Live-cell phenotypic-biomarker microﬂuidic
assay for the risk stratiﬁcation of cancer patients via machine
learning. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 761–772 (2018).
35.
Ballard, Z., Brown, C., Madni, A. M. & Ozcan, A. Machine learning
and computation-enabled intelligent sensor design. Nat. Mach.
Intell. 3, 556–565 (2021).
36.
de Haan, K. et al. Automated screening of sickle cells using a
smartphone-based microscope and deep learning. npj Digit. Med.
3, 76 (2020).
37.
Sunny, S. et al. A smart tele-cytology point-of-care platform for
oral cancer screening. PLoS ONE 14, 1–16 (2019).
38.
Li, Y. et al. A low-cost, automated parasite diagnostic system via a
portable, robotic microscope and deep learning. J. Biophotonics
12, 1–11 (2019).
39.
Kanakasabapathy, M. K. et al. Rapid, label-free CD4 testing
using a smartphone compatible device. Lab Chip 17,
2910–2919 (2017).
40.
Jiang, N. et al. Lateral and vertical ﬂow assays for point-of-care
diagnostics. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 8, 1–19 (2019).
41.
Kokalj, T., Park, Y., Vencelj, M., Jenko, M. & Lee, L. P. Self-powered
imbibing microﬂuidic pump by liquid encapsulation: SIMPLE. Lab
Chip 14, 4329–4333 (2014).
42.
Park, J. & Park, J. K. Finger-actuated microﬂuidic device for the
blood cross-matching test. Lab Chip 18, 1215–1222 (2018).
43.
Yeh, E. et al. Self-powered integrated microﬂuidic point-of-
care low-cost enabling (SIMPLE) chip. Sci. Adv. 3, e1501645
(2017).
44.
Yao, Y. et al. A self-powered rapid loading microﬂuidic chip for
vector-borne viruses detection using RT-LAMP. Sens. Actuators B.
Chem. 333, 129521 (2021).
45.
Li, W. et al. Squeeze-chip: a ﬁnger-controlled microﬂuidic ﬂow
network device and its application to biochemical assays. Lab
Chip 12, 1587–1590 (2012).
46.
Iwai, K. et al. Finger-powered microﬂuidic systems using multi-
layer soft lithography and injection molding processes. Lab Chip
14, 3790–3799 (2014).
47.
Ghosh, S. et al. A new microchannel capillary ﬂow assay (MCFA)
platform with lyophilized chemiluminescence reagents for a
smartphone-based POCT detecting malaria. Microsyst. Nanoeng.
6, 2096–1030 (2020).
48.
Comina, G., Suska, A. & Filippini, D. A 3D printed device for
quantitative enzymatic detection using cell phones. Anal. Meth-
ods 8, 6135–6142 (2016).
49.
Lee, D., Chou, W. P., Yeh, S. H., Chen, P. J. & Chen, P. H. DNA
detection using commercial mobile phones. Biosens. Bioelectron.
26, 4349–4354 (2011).
50.
Jiang, L. et al. Solar thermal polymerase chain reaction for
smartphone-assisted molecular diagnostics. Sci. Rep. 4,
1–5 (2014).
51.
Liao, S. C. et al. Smart cup: a minimally-instrumented,
smartphone-based point-of-care molecular diagnostic device.
Sens. Actuators B Chem. 229, 232–238 (2016).
52.
Qiu, X. et al. A smartphone-based point-of-care diagnosis of H1N1
with microﬂuidic convection PCR. Microsyst. Technol. 23,
2951–2956 (2017).
53.
Wang, L. X. et al. On-chip RT-LAMP and colorimetric detection of
the prostate cancer 3 biomarker with an integrated thermal and
imaging box. Talanta 208, 120407 (2020).
54.
Gou, T. et al. Smartphone-based mobile digital PCR device for
DNA quantitative analysis with high accuracy. Biosens. Bioelec-
tron. 120, 144–152 (2018).
55.
Zheng, G., Lee, S. A., Yang, S. & Yang, C. Sub-pixel resolving
optoﬂuidic microscope for on-chip cell imaging. Lab Chip 10,
3125–3129 (2010).
56.
Bishara, W. et al. Holographic pixel super-resolution in portable
lensless on-chip microscopy using a ﬁber-optic array. Lab Chip 11,
1276–1279 (2011).
57.
Xiong, Z., Potter, C. J. & McLeod, E. High-speed lens-free holo-
graphic sensing of protein molecules using quantitative aggluti-
nation assays. ACS Sens 6, 1208–1217 (2021).
58.
Tseng, D. et al. Lensfree microscopy on a cellphone. Lab Chip 10,
1787–1792 (2010).
59.
Lee, S. A. & Yang, C. A smartphone-based chip-scale microscope
using ambient illumination. Lab Chip 14, 3056–3063 (2014).
60.
Im, H. et al. Digital diffraction analysis enables low-cost molecular
diagnostics on a smartphone. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112,
5613–5618 (2015).
61.
Smith, Z. J. et al. Cell-phone-based platform for biomedical device
development and education applications. PLoS ONE 6,
e17150 (2011).
62.
Switz, N. A., D’Ambrosio, M. V. & Fletcher, D. A. Low-cost mobile
phone microscopy with a reversed mobile phone camera lens.
PLoS ONE 9, e95330 (2014).
63.
Zhu, H., Yaglidere, O., Su, T. W., Tseng, D. & Ozcan, A. Cost-
effective and compact wide-ﬁeld ﬂuorescent imaging on a cell-
phone. Lab Chip 11, 315–322 (2011).
64.
Liu, C. et al. An isothermal ampliﬁcation reactor with an integrated
isolation membrane for point-of-care detection of infectious dis-
eases. Analyst 136, 2069–2076 (2011).
65.
Zeng, W. et al. Hand-powered vacuum-driven microﬂuidic gra-
dient generator for high-throughput antimicrobial susceptibility
testing. Biosens. Bioelectron. 205, 114100 (2022).
66.
Li, P. et al. Rapid determination of phase diagrams for biomole-
cular liquid–liquid phase separation with microﬂuidics. Anal.
Chem. 94, 687–694 (2022).
67.
Zhou, M. et al. A magnet-actuated microﬂuidic array chip for high-
throughput pretreatment and ampliﬁcation and detection of
multiple pathogens. Analyst 147, 2433–2441 (2022).
68.
Xiao, Y. et al. Multi-reagents dispensing centrifugal microﬂuidics
for point-of-care testing. Biosens. Bioelectron. 206, 114130
(2022).
69.
Wang, X. et al. Microﬂuidics-based strategies for molecular diag-
nostics of infectious diseases. Mil. Med. Res. 9, 1–27 (2022).
70.
Zhu, H. et al. Cost-effective and rapid blood analysis on a cell-
phone. Lab Chip 13, 1282–1288 (2013).
71.
Comina, G., Suska, A. & Filippini, D. Autonomous chemical sensing
interface for universal cell phone readout. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
54, 8708–8712 (2015).
72.
Lopez-Ruiz, N. et al. Smartphone-based simultaneous pH and
nitrite colorimetric determination for paper microﬂuidic devices.
Anal. Chem. 86, 9554–9562 (2014).
73.
Zeng, Y. et al. A low cost and portable smartphone microscopic
device for cell counting. Sens. Actuators A Phys. 274,
57–63 (2018).
74.
Woolf, M. S., Dignan, L. M., Scott, A. T. & Landers, J. P. Digital
postprocessing and image segmentation for objective analysis of
colorimetric reactions. Nat. Protoc. 16, 218–238 (2021).
75.
Nguyen, H. Q., Bui, H. K., Phan, V. M. & Seo, T. S. An internet of
things-based point-of-care device for direct reverse-transcription-
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
14

loop mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation to identify SARS-CoV-2.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 195, 0956–5663 (2022).
76.
Khurana, U., Nargesian, F., Samulowitz, H., Khalil, E. & Turaga, D.
Automating feature engineering. In Proc. 30th Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 1–2 (MIT Press, 2016).
77.
Shinde, P. P. & Shah, S. A review of machine learning and deep
learning applications. In Proc. 4th International Conference on
Computing Communication Control and Automation 1–6
(IEEE, 2018).
78.
Chauhan, V. K., Dahiya, K. & Sharma, A. Problem formulations and
solvers in linear SVM: a review. Artif. Intell. Rev. 52,
803–855 (2019).
79.
Chorowski, J., Wang, J. & Zurada, J. M. Review and performance
comparison of SVM- and ELM-based classiﬁers. Neurocomputing
128, 507–516 (2014).
80.
Praveena, M. & Jaiganesh, V. A literature review on supervised
machine learning algorithms and boosting process. Int. J. Comput.
Appl. 169, 32–35 (2017).
81.
Abu Alfeilat, H. A. et al. Effects of distance measure choice on
k-nearest neighbor classiﬁer performance: a review. Big Data 7,
221–248 (2019).
82.
Kotsiantis, S. B. Decision trees: A recent overview. Artif. Intell. Rev.
39, 261–283 (2013).
83.
Hu, X., Chu, L., Pei, J., Liu, W. & Bian, J. Model complexity of deep
learning: a survey. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 63, 2585–2619 (2021).
84.
Sung, F. et al. Learning to compare: relation network for few-shot
learning. In Proc. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition 1199–1208 (IEEE, 2018).
85.
Li, X., Sun, Z., Xue, J. H. & Ma, Z. A concise review of recent few-
shot meta-learning methods. Neurocomputing 456,
463–468 (2021).
86.
Wang, Y., Yao, Q., Kwok, J. T. & Ni, L. M. Generalizing from a few
examples. ACM Comput. Surv. 53, 1–34 (2021).
87.
Kim, J., Kim, T., Kim, S. & Yoo, C. D. Edge-labeling graph neural
network for few-shot learning. In Proc. IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition 11–20 (IEEE, 2019).
88.
Asif, N. A. et al. Graph neural network: a comprehensive review on
non-euclidean space. IEEE Access 9, 60588–60606 (2021).
89.
Scarselli, F., Tsoi, A. C. & Hagenbuchner, M. The
Vapnik–Chervonenkis dimension of graph and recursive neural
networks. Neural Netw. 108, 248–259 (2018).
90.
Koydemir, H. C. et al. Rapid imaging, detection and quantiﬁcation
of Giardia lamblia cysts using mobile-phone based ﬂuorescent
microscopy and machine learning. Lab Chip 15, 1284–1293 (2015).
91.
Koydemir, H. C. et al. Comparison of supervised machine learning
algorithms for waterborne pathogen detection using mobile
phone ﬂuorescence microscopy. Nanophotonics 6,
731–741 (2017).
92.
Surveilance, M., Bornhorst, J., Nustede, E. J. & Fudickar, S. Mass
surveilance of C. elegans—cmartphone-based DIY microscope
and machine-learning-based approach for worm detection. Sen-
sors 19, 1468 (2019).
93.
Fudickar, S., Nustede, E. J., Dreyer, E. & Bornhorst, J. Mask R-CNN
based C. elegans detection with a DIY microscope. Biosensors 11,
257 (2021).
94.
Solmaz, M. E. et al. Quantifying colorimetric tests using a smart-
phone app based on machine learning classiﬁers. Sens. Actuators
B Chem. 255, 1967–1973 (2018).
95.
Kim, H., Awofeso, O., Choi, S., Jung, Y. & Bae, E. Colorimetric
analysis of saliva–alcohol test strips by smartphone-based
instruments using machine-learning algorithms. Appl. Opt. 56,
84 (2017).
96.
Kim, H. et al. Fluorescent sensor array for high-precision pH
classiﬁcation with machine learning-supported mobile devices.
Dye. Pigment. 193, 109492 (2021).
97.
Kim, H. et al. Kaleidoscopic ﬂuorescent arrays for machine-
learning-based point-of-care chemical sensing. Sens. Actuators B
Chem. 329, 129248 (2021).
98.
Janiesch, C., Zschech, P. & Heinrich, K. Machine learning and deep
learning. Electron. Mark. 31, 685–695 (2021).
99.
Moen, E. et al. Deep learning for cellular image analysis. Nat.
Methods 16, 1233–1246 (2019).
100. Suzuki, K. Overview of deep learning in medical imaging. Radiol.
Phys. Technol. 10, 257–273 (2017).
101.
Zhang, Q. S. & Zhu, S. C. Visual interpretability for deep learning: a
survey. Front. Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng. 19, 27–39 (2018).
102.
Muhammad, S. et al. Medical image analysis using convolutional
neural networks a review. J. Med. Syst. 42, 1–13 (2018).
103.
Wang, X. et al. Chip-based high-dimensional optical neural net-
work. Nano Micro Lett. 14, 221 (2022).
104.
Hesamian, M. H., Jia, W., He, X. & Kennedy, P. Deep learning
techniques for medical image segmentation: achievements and
challenges. J. Digit. Imaging 32, 582–596 (2019).
105.
Nagendran, M. et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence versus clinicians: sys-
tematic review of design, reporting standards, and claims of deep
learning studies. BMJ 368, m689 (2020).
106.
Alzubaidi, L. et al. Review of deep learning: concepts, CNN archi-
tectures, challenges, applications, future directions. J. Big Data 8,
53 (2021).
107.
Rivenson, Y. et al. Deep learning enhanced mobile-phone micro-
scopy. ACS Photonics 5, 2354–2364 (2018).
108.
Potluri, V. et al. An inexpensive smartphone-based device for
point-of-care ovulation testing. Lab Chip 19, 59–67 (2019).
109.
Draz, M. S. et al. Virus detection using nanoparticles and deep
neural network-enabled smartphone system. Sci. Adv. 6,
1–13 (2020).
110.
Chen, H. et al. Quantitation of femtomolar-level protein bio-
markers using a simple microbubbling digital assay and bright-
ﬁeld smartphone imaging. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 58,
13922–13928 (2019).
111.
Shokr, A. et al. Mobile health (mHealth) viral diagnostics enabled
with adaptive adversarial learning. ACS Nano 15, 665–673
(2020).
112.
Hu, F. et al. Smartphone-based droplet digital LAMP device with
rapid nucleic acid isolation for highly sensitive point-of-care
detection. Anal. Chem. 92, 2258–2265 (2020).
113.
Barbosa, A. I., Gehlot, P., Sidapra, K., Edwards, A. D. & Reis, N. M.
Portable smartphone quantitation of prostate speciﬁc antigen
(PSA) in a ﬂuoropolymer microﬂuidic device. Biosens. Bioelectron.
70, 5–14 (2015).
114.
Joh, D. Y. et al. Cellphone enabled point-of-care assessment of
breast tumor cytology and molecular HER2 expression from ﬁne-
needle aspirates. npj Breast Cancer 7, 126 (2021).
115.
Shen, L., Hagen, J. A. & Papautsky, I. Point-of-care colorimetric
detection with a smartphone. Lab Chip 12, 4240–4243 (2012).
116.
Guan, L. et al. Barcode-like paper sensor for smartphone diag-
nostics: an application of blood typing. Anal. Chem. 86,
11362–11367 (2014).
117.
Priye, A., Ball, C. S. & Meagher, R. J. Colorimetric-luminance
readout for quantitative analysis of ﬂuorescence signals with
a smartphone CMOS sensor. Anal. Chem. 90, 12385–12389
(2018).
118.
Oncescu, V., O’Dell, D. & Erickson, D. Smartphone based health
accessory for colorimetric detection of biomarkers in sweat and
saliva. Lab Chip 13, 3232–3238 (2013).
119.
Martinez, A. W. et al. Simple telemedicine for developing regions:
camera phones and paper-based microﬂuidic devices for real-
time, off-site diagnosis. Anal. Chem. 80, 3699–3707 (2008).
120.
Yetisen, A. K. et al. Paper-based microﬂuidic system for tear
electrolyte analysis. Lab Chip 17, 1137–1148 (2017).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
15

121.
Kim, S. C., Jalal, U. M., Im, S. B., Ko, S. & Shim, J. S. A smartphone-
based optical platform for colorimetric analysis of microﬂuidic
device. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 239, 52–59 (2017).
122.
Xiao, M. et al. A smartphone-based sensing system for on-site
quantitation of multiple heavy metal ions using ﬂuorescent car-
bon nanodots-based microarrays. ACS Sens. 5, 870–878 (2020).
123.
Katoh, A., Maejima, K., Hiruta, Y. & Citterio, D. All-printed semi-
quantitative paper-based analytical devices relying on QR code
array readout. Analyst 145, 6071–6078 (2020).
124.
Draz, M. S. et al. Motion-based immunological detection of Zika
virus using Pt-nanomotors and a cellphone. ACS Nano 12,
5709–5718 (2018).
125.
Zeinhom, M. M. A. et al. A portable smart-phone device for rapid
and sensitive detection of E. coli O157:H7 in Yoghurt and Egg.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 99, 479–485 (2018).
126.
Al, K. An automated smartphone-based diagnostic assay for point-
of-care semen analysis. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 1–14 (2017). et.
127.
Kanakasabapathy, M. K. et al. Development and evaluation of
inexpensive automated deep learning-based imaging systems for
embryology. Lab Chip 19, 4139–4145 (2019).
128.
Bormann, C. L. et al. Deep learning early warning system for
embryo culture conditions and embryologist performance in the
ART laboratory. J. Assist. Reprod. Genet. 38, 1641–1646 (2021).
129.
Bormann, C. L. et al. Performance of a deep learning based neural
network in the selection of human blastocysts for implantation.
Elife 9, 1–14 (2020).
130.
Bogoch, I. I. et al. Evaluation of a mobile phone-based microscope
for screening of Schistosoma haematobium infection in rural
Ghana. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 96, 1468–1471 (2017).
131.
Coulibaly, J. T. et al. Accuracy of mobile phone and handheld light
microscopy for the diagnosis of schistosomiasis and intestinal
protozoa infections in Côte d’Ivoire. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 10,
1–10 (2016).
132.
Wang, X., Chang, T., Lin, G., Gartia, M. R. & Liu, G. L. Self-
referenced smartphone-based nanoplasmonic imaging platform
for colorimetric biochemical sensing. Anal. Chem. 89,
611–615 (2017).
133.
Ballard, Z. S. et al. Computational sensing using low-cost and
mobile plasmonic readers designed by machine learning. ACS
Nano 11, 2266–2274 (2017).
134.
Arzola-Flores, J. A. & Gonzalez, A. L. Machine Learning for
Predicting the Surface Plasmon Resonance of Perfect and Con-
cave Gold Nanocubes. J. Phys. Chem. C. 124, 25447–25454
(2020).
135.
Moon, G. et al. Machine learning-based design of meta-plasmonic
biosensors with negative index metamaterials. Biosens. Bioelec-
tron. 164, 112335 (2020).
136.
Zhao, C. et al. Scalable fabrication of quasi-one-dimensional gold
nanoribbons for plasmonic sensing. Nano Lett. 20,
1747–1754 (2020).
137.
Huang, L. et al. One-step rapid quantiﬁcation of SARS-CoV-2 virus
particles via low-cost nanoplasmonic sensors in generic micro-
plate reader and point-of-care device. Biosens. Bioelectron. 171,
112685 (2021).
138.
Cartier, J., Gomes, M., Carlos, L. & Casemiro, L. SmartSPR sensor:
Machine learning approaches to create intelligent surface plas-
mon based sensors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 172, 112760 (2021).
139.
Applications, R. Surface plasmonic sensors: sensing mechanism
and recent applications. Sensors 21, 1–30 (2021).
140.
Pipatpanukul, C. et al. Rh blood phenotyping (D, E, e, C, c)
microarrays using multichannel surface plasmon resonance ima-
ging. Biosens. Bioelectron. 102, 267–275 (2018).
141.
Dang, T. et al. Protein binding kinetics quantiﬁcation via coupled
plasmonic-photonic resonance nanosensors in generic micro-
plate reader. Biosens. Bioelectron. 142, 111494 (2019).
142.
Bian, J. et al. Nanoscale biosensing using a smartphone reader.
Nanoscale 11, 12471–12476 (2019).
143.
Moon, G., Son, T., Lee, H. & Kim, D. Deep learning approach for
enhanced detection of surface plasmon scattering. Anal. Chem.
91, 9538–9545 (2019).
144.
Toma, M. Plasmonic coloration of silver nanodome arrays for a
smartphone-based plasmonic biosensor. Nanoscale Adv. 1,
3699–3708 (2019).
145.
Fan, Z. et al. Smartphone biosensor system with multi-testing unit
based on localized surface plasmon resonance integrated with
microﬂuidics chip. Sensors 20, 446 (2020).
146.
Moitra, P., Alafeef, M., Dighe, K., Frieman, M. B. & Pan, D. Selective
naked-eye detection of SARS-CoV ‑ 2 mediated by N Gene tar-
geted antisense oligonucleotide capped plasmonic nano-
particles. ACS Nano 14, 7617–7627 (2020).
147.
Yan, R., Wang, T., Jiang, X. & Zhong, Q. Design of high-
performance plasmonic nanosensors by particle swarm optimi-
zation algorithm combined with machine learning. Nanotechnol-
ogy 31, 375202 (2020).
148.
Zhao, Y., Mahajan, N., Lu, R. & Fang, J. Liquid-crystal imaging of
molecular-tilt ordering in self-assembled lipid tubules. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 102, 7438–7442 (2005).
149.
McUmber, A. C., Noonan, P. S. & Schwartz, D. K. Surfactant-DNA
interactions at the liquid crystal-aqueous interface. Soft Matter 8,
4335–4342 (2012).
150.
Moreno-Razo, J. A., Sambriski, E. J., Abbott, N. L., Hernández-Ortiz,
J. P. & De Pablo, J. J. Liquid-crystal-mediated self-assembly at
nanodroplet interfaces. Nature 485, 86–89 (2012).
151.
Miller, D. S., Wang, X., Buchen, J., Lavrentovich, O. D. & Abbott, N.
L. Analysis of the internal conﬁgurations of droplets of liquid
crystal using ﬂow cytometry. Anal. Chem. 85, 10296–10303
(2013).
152.
Cao, Y., Yu, H., Abbott, N. L. & Zavala, V. M. Machine learning
algorithms for liquid crystal-based sensors. ACS Sens. 3,
2237–2245 (2018).
153.
Min, J., Sempionatto, J. R., Teymourian, H., Wang, J. & Gao, W.
Wearable electrochemical biosensors in North America. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 172, 112750 (2021).
154.
Zhou, Z. et al. Luminescent wearable biosensors based on gold
nanocluster networks for “turn-on” detection of Uric acid, glu-
cose and alcohol in sweat. Biosens. Bioelectron. 192, 113530
(2021).
155.
Sekine, Y. et al. A ﬂuorometric skin-interfaced microﬂuidic device
and smartphone imaging module for: In situ quantitative analysis
of sweat chemistry. Lab Chip 18, 2178–2186 (2018).
156.
Ardalan, S., Hosseinifard, M., Vosough, M. & Golmohammadi, H.
Towards smart personalized perspiration analysis: An IoT-
integrated cellulose-based microﬂuidic wearable patch for
smartphone ﬂuorimetric multi-sensing of sweat biomarkers. Bio-
sens. Bioelectron. 168, 112450 (2020).
157.
Song, Y. et al. Wireless battery-free wearable sweat sensor pow-
ered by human motion. Sci. Adv. 6, eaay9842 (2020).
158.
Moonen, E. J. M. et al. Wearable sweat sensing for prolonged,
semicontinuous, and nonobtrusive health monitoring. View 1,
20200077 (2020).
159.
Gao, W., Ota, H., Kiriya, D., Takei, K. & Javey, A. Flexible electronics
toward wearable sensing. Acc. Chem. Res. 52, 523–533 (2019).
160.
Yang, Y. & Gao, W. Wearable and ﬂexible electronics for continuous
molecular monitoring. Chem. Soc. Rev. 48, 1465–1491 (2019).
161.
Yu, Y. et al. Biofuel-powered soft electronic skin with multiplexed
and wireless sensing for human-machine interfaces. Sci. Robot. 5,
1–14 (2020).
162.
Teengam, P. et al. NFC-enabling smartphone-based portable
amperometric immunosensor for hepatitis B virus detection. Sens.
Actuators B Chem. 326, 128825 (2021).
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
16

163.
Shi, B. et al. Split-ring structured all-inorganic perovskite photo-
detector arrays for masterly internet of things. Nano Micro Lett. 15,
3 (2023).
164.
Yang, Y. et al. A non-printed integrated-circuit textile for wireless
theranostics. Nat. Commun. 12, 4876 (2021).
165.
Zhang, X. et al. Lipid nanomaterials-based RNA therapy and can-
cer treatment. Acta Pharm. Sin. B. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.
2022.10.004 (2022).
166.
Tang, Z. et al. Insights from nanotechnology in COVID-19 treat-
ment. Nano Today 36, 101019 (2021).
167.
Yang, Z. et al. Fighting immune cold and reprogramming immu-
nosuppressive tumor microenvironment with red blood cell
membrane-camouﬂaged nanobullets. ACS Nano 14,
17442–17457 (2020).
168.
Xiao, W. et al. Breast cancer subtypes and the risk of distant
metastasis at initial diagnosis: A population-based study. Cancer
Manag. Res. 10, 5329–5338 (2018).
169.
Lopez-Cantu, D. O. et al. From bench to the clinic: the path to
translation of nanotechnology-enabled mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vac-
cines. Nano Micro Lett. 14, 41 (2022).
170.
Wang, X. et al. Imparting reusable and SARS-CoV-2 inhibition
properties to standard masks through metal-organic nanocoat-
ings. J. Hazard. Mater. 431, 128441 (2022).
171.
Yang, J. et al. Biologically modiﬁed nanoparticles as theranostic
bionanomaterials. Prog. Mater. Sci. 118, 100768 (2021).
172.
Wang, Y., Lu, L., Zheng, G. & Zhang, X. Microenvironment-
controlled micropatterned microﬂuidic model (MMMM) for bio-
mimetic in situ studies. ACS Nano 14, 9861–9872 (2020).
173.
Gao, D. et al. Targeting hypoxic tumors with hybrid nanobullets for
oxygen-independent synergistic photothermal and thermo-
dynamic therapy. Nano Micro Lett. 13, 99 (2021).
174.
Bhamla, M. S. et al. Hand-powered ultralow-cost paper centrifuge.
Nat. Biomed. Eng. 1, 1–7 (2017).
175.
Kim, W. Y. et al. Mitochondrial H2Sn-mediated anti-inﬂammatory
theranostics. Nano Micro Lett. 13, 168 (2021).
176.
Hu, T. et al. Layered double hydroxide-based nanomaterials for
biomedical applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 51, 6126–6176 (2022).
177.
Yang, Y. et al. New epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) nanocom-
plexes co-assembled with 3-mercapto-1-hexanol and β-
lactoglobulin for improvement of antitumor activity. J. Biomed.
Nanotechnol. 13, 805–814 (2017).
178.
Zhu, Y. et al. Emerging porous organic polymers for biomedical
applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 51, 1377–1414 (2022).
179.
Li, J. et al. 2D MOF periodontitis photodynamic ion therapy. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 143, 15427–15439 (2021).
180.
Liu, X. et al. NIR-II-enhanced single-atom-nanozyme for sustain-
able accelerating bacteria-infected wound healing.Appl. Surf. Sci.
612, 155866 (2023).
181.
Parekh, G. et al. Nano-carriers for targeted delivery and biomedi-
cal imaging enhancement. Ther. Deliv. 9, 451–468 (2018).
182.
Koo, S. et al. Harnessing GLUT1‐targeted pro‐oxidant ascorbate for
synergistic phototherapeutics. Angew. Chem. 61,
e202110832 (2022).
183.
Zhou, M. et al. pH-sensitive poly (β-amino ester) s nanocarriers
facilitate the inhibition of drug resistance in breast cancer cells.
Nanomaterials 8, 952 (2018).
184.
Wang, Y. et al. Immunogenic-cell-killing and immunosuppression-
inhibiting nanomedicine. Bioact. Mater. 6, 1513–1527 (2021).
185.
Zhou, X. et al. Antibacterial cascade catalytic glutathione-
depleting MOF nanoreactors. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 14,
11104–11115 (2022).
186.
Jangili, P. et al. DNA‐damage‐response‐targeting mitochondria‐
activated multifunctional prodrug strategy for self‐defensive
tumor therapy. Angew. Chem. 134, e202117075 (2022).
187.
Zhang, X. et al. Polyphenol and self-assembly: metal polyphenol
nanonetwork for drug delivery and pharmaceutical applications.
Future Drug Discov. 1, FDD7 (2019).
188.
Ruan, H, et al. Click chemistry extracellular vesicle/peptide/che-
mokine nanocarriers for treating central nervous system injuries.
Acta Pharm. Sin. B https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2022.06.
007 (2022).
189.
Zhong, D. et al. Orally deliverable strategy based on microalgal
biomass for intestinal disease treatment. Sci. Adv. 7,
eabi9265 (2021).
190.
Zhang, D. et al. Microalgae-based oral microcarriers for gut
microbiota homeostasis and intestinal protection in cancer
radiotherapy. Nat. Commun. 13, 1413 (2022).
191.
Ji, X. et al. Capturing functional two-dimensional nanosheets from
sandwich-structure vermiculite for cancer theranostics. Nat.
Commun. 12, 1124 (2021).
192.
Huang, X. et al. Nanotechnology-based strategies against SARS-
CoV-2 variants. Nat. Nanotechnol. 17, 1027–1037 (2022).
193.
Yang, Z. et al. Thermal immuno-nanomedicine in cancer. Nat. Rev.
Clin. Oncol. 20, 116–134 (2023).
194.
Huang, X. et al. The landscape of mRNA nanomedicine. Nat. Med.
28, 2273–2287 (2022).
195.
Lin, H. et al. A programmable epidermal microﬂuidic valving
system for wearable bioﬂuid management and contextual bio-
marker analysis. Nat. Commun. 11, 1–12 (2020).
196.
Michael, I. et al. A ﬁdget spinner for the point-of-care diagnosis of
urinary tract infection. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 4, 591–600 (2020).
197.
Zhu, H., Mavandadi, S., Coskun, A. F., Yaglidere, O. & Ozcan, A.
Optoﬂuidic ﬂuorescent imaging cytometry on a cell phone. Anal.
Chem. 83, 6641–6647 (2011).
198.
Shrestha, R. et al. A smartphone microscopic method for simul-
taneous detection of (Oo)cysts of cryptosporidium and giardia.
PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 14, 1–19 (2020).
199.
Slusarewicz, P. et al. Automated parasite faecal egg counting
using ﬂuorescence labelling, smartphone image capture and
computational image analysis. Int. J. Parasitol. 46, 485–493
(2016).
200. Pirnstill, C. W. & Coté, G. L. Malaria diagnosis using a mobile phone
polarized microscope. Sci. Rep. 5, 1–13 (2015).
Acknowledgements
X.Z. and Y.H. acknowledge the support from Harvard/MIT. X.F.
acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 31870854). B.L. acknowledges the
ﬁnancial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 22074047). Y.L. acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 32171248 and
12102142) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Uni-
versities, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
(2021GCRC056). W.D. acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 31870856) and
the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant
No. 2017YFA0700403). P.C. acknowledges the ﬁnancial support from
the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant
No. 2021YFA1101500). All others gratefully acknowledge the ﬁnancial
supports from the above-mentioned fundings.
Author contributions
X Z., B.W., X.F. and Y.L. drafted the manuscript and B.W., X.F., Y.L., M.Z.,
Y.H., M.Z., Z.G., Z.L, P.C., W.D., X.Z. and B.L. contributed in ﬁnalizing the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
17

Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Xingcai Zhang, Xiaojun Feng or Bi-Feng Liu.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks Samuel Sia, Jie
Yang, Frances Ligler and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their
contribution to the peer review of this work
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Review article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36017-x
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:1341 
18