Vol.:(0123456789)
Artificial Intelligence Review (2023) 56:13521–13617
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10466-8
1 3
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress, 
applications, advantages, and challenges
Shams Forruque Ahmed1 · Md. Sakib Bin Alam2 · Maruf Hassan1 · 
Mahtabin Rodela Rozbu3 · Taoseef Ishtiak4 · Nazifa Rafa5 · M. Mofijur6,7 · 
A. B. M. Shawkat Ali8,9 · Amir H. Gandomi10,11 
Published online: 17 April 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Deep learning (DL) is revolutionizing evidence-based decision-making techniques that can 
be applied across various sectors. Specifically, it possesses the ability to utilize two or more 
levels of non-linear feature transformation of the given data via representation learning in 
order to overcome limitations posed by large datasets. As a multidisciplinary field that is 
still in its nascent phase, articles that survey DL architectures encompassing the full scope 
of the field are rather limited. Thus, this paper comprehensively reviews the state-of-art DL 
modelling techniques and provides insights into their advantages and challenges. It was 
found that many of the models exhibit a highly domain-specific efficiency and could be 
trained by two or more methods. However, training DL models can be very time-consum-
ing, expensive, and requires huge samples for better accuracy. Since DL is also suscepti-
ble to deception and misclassification and tends to get stuck on local minima, improved 
optimization of parameters is required to create more robust models. Regardless, DL has 
already been leading to groundbreaking results in the healthcare, education, security, com-
mercial, industrial, as well as government sectors. Some models, like the convolutional 
neural network (CNN), generative adversarial networks (GAN), recurrent neural network 
(RNN), recursive neural networks, and autoencoders, are frequently used, while the poten-
tial of other models remains widely unexplored. Pertinently, hybrid conventional DL archi-
tectures have the capacity to overcome the challenges experienced by conventional models. 
Considering that capsule architectures may dominate future DL models, this work aimed to 
compile information for stakeholders involved in the development and use of DL models in 
the contemporary world.
Keywords  Deep learning · Deep learning architecture · Neural network · Boltzmann 
machine · Deep belief network · Autoencoders
 *	 Shams Forruque Ahmed 
	
shams.ahmed@auw.edu.bd; shams.f.ahmed@gmail.com
 *	 Amir H. Gandomi 
	
gandomi@uts.edu.au
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

13522
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
1  Introduction
Developing machines with the ability to ‘think’ has been a long-running aspiration of 
inventors throughout history. The popular idea of replicating intelligent human behavior 
arranged as processes in machines (Dick 2019) has fueled researchers’ imaginations. In the 
present time, artificial intelligence (AI) is a thriving and rapidly changing field with vari-
ous applications in society and economics, such as understanding speech or images, textual 
analysis, and in supporting an actively growing research body (Lu et al. 2018). Machine 
learning (ML), a part of AI, is a multidisciplinary field spanning computer science, sta-
tistics, and data science that addresses the need for computers to improve automatically 
through experience and by the use of data (Jordan and Mitchell 2015). ML is advancing 
evidence-based decision-making in the fields of healthcare, education, national security, 
finance, economics, manufacturing, and marketing (Jordan and Mitchell, 2015), specifi-
cally by implementing various approaches to teach computers to achieve tasks. However, 
conventional ML techniques cannot efficiently process raw data and require mindful engi-
neering and great expertise (Lecun et al. 2015). In the real world, every piece of data may 
be influenced by different factors of variations, thus requiring humans to factor in those 
variations and decide whether to incorporate them or not. Overcoming such flaws, deep 
learning (DL) has recently emerged as a promising approach in ML (Lecun et al. 2015), 
currently dominating the majority of the works in the field of ML (Alpaydin 2020).
While it may appear as a seemingly new concept, the idea of DL can be traced back to 
the 1940s and subsequently underwent roughly three waves of development with the most 
recent current revival beginning in 2006 (Goodfellow et al. 2016). During the first wave 
between 1940 and 1960, DL was known as cybernetics, then it gained popularity again in 
the 1980s-1990s as connectionism. Fundamental methods such as radial basis function net-
works and multilayer perceptrons were employed in 2014 to solve the problem of design-
ing mobile adaptive tracking controllers (Tzafestas 2014). These two neural networks were 
found suitable for decision-making and control. Later, Sengupta et  al. (Sengupta et  al. 
2020) pointed out a few reasons why DL rose to prominence in the twenty-first century, 
including the surge of “big data” with quality labels, improvements in regularization tech-
niques, development of near-perfect optimization algorithms, creation of niche software 
platforms that can enable the integration of architectures, and advancements in paral-
lel computing power and multi-core, multi-threaded execution. In fact, big data became 
a huge issue for conventional ML algorithms along with the increasing size of the net-
work, whereby the performance of old algorithms either became overloaded or deteriorated 
(Khamparia and Singh 2019). The enhanced performance of DL can be attributed to its 
ability to utilize two or more levels of non-linear feature transformation of the given data 
(Zeiler and Fergus 2014).
Deep learning allows computational models with multiple layers to gradually extract 
higher-level features from the raw input (Alpaydin 2020; Deng and Yu 2014). The “deep” 
in DL, therefore, denotes a high credit assignment path (CAP) depth, which has been 
assigned a value of 2 by most researchers (Sugiyama 2019; Telikani et al. 2021; Kashyap 
et al. 2021; Mousavi and Gandomi 2021; Tahmassebi et al. 2018a, b, 2019, 2020; Jayara-
man et  al. 2020; Kumar et  al. 2019). Deep learning enables computers to learn com-
plex concepts by forming them out of simple ones. Goodfellow et al. (2016) adequately 
explained that, “Deep learning is a particular kind of machine learning that achieves great 
power and flexibility by learning to represent the world as a nested hierarchy of concepts, 
with each concept defined in relation to simpler concepts, and more abstract representations 

13523
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
computed in terms of less abstract ones” (Goodfellow et al. 2016). DL is primarily based 
on artificial neural networks, a type of computing system roughly mimicking the biological 
neural networks of animal brains (Chen et al. 2019), and may employ supervised, unsuper-
vised, or semi-supervised representation learning (Bengio et al. 2013; Lecun et al. 2015; 
Schmidhuber 2015). Representation learning, also known as feature learning, sets DL apart 
from other techniques in ML. Unlike manual feature engineering, feature learning enables 
computers to spontaneously find the representations required for the classifications from 
raw data (Bengio et al. 2013). DL, therefore, relies on very little hand-tuning and has the 
ability to analyze the rapidly increasing computations and data. The requirement for man-
ual engineering is only restricted to operations, such as altering the numbers and sizes of 
layers, to yield different degrees of abstraction (Bengio et al. 2013; Lecun et al. 2015).
The applications of DL span various disciplines and sectors. To begin with, DL has 
exhibited remarkable performance in image recognition (Carrio et al. 2017; Krizhevsky 
and Hinton 2017; Lecun et al. 2015; Szegedy et al. 2015; Tompson et al. 2014; Wei et al. 
2019), displayed potential in image restoration (Schmidt 2014), and demonstrated ground-
breaking results in speech recognition (Cireşan et al. 2012; Deoras et al. 2011; Hinton et al. 
2012; Lecun et al. 2015; Sainath et al. 2013). It is currently used in the speech recognition 
systems of major day-to-day products (Case et al. 2014; Deng and Yu 2014; Lemley et al. 
2017) as well as in the operation of unmanned vehicles (Carrio et al. 2017). The area of 
language processing has also been harnessing the benefits of DL (Deng and Yu 2014), in 
which DL contributes to natural language understanding and translation (Collobert et al. 
2011; Mesnil et al. 2015; Sutskever et al. 2014), query response (Bordes et al. 2014), sen-
timent analysis, text classification, information recovery (Huang et al. 2013; Shen et al. 
2014), and writing style recognition (Brocardo et al. 2017), just to name a few. DL has 
also been revolutionizing the health sector (Miotto et al. 2018), particularly yielding far-
reaching implications for drug discovery and design and in effectively predicting interac-
tions of potential drugs with molecules of interest (Ma et al. 2015). DL’s ability to acquire 
end-to-end learning models from complex, unstructured, diverse, and poorly annotated 
data has also led to advancements in biomedical research (Collobert et al. 2011; Naylor 
2018; Ravì et al. 2017). With its high image recognition skills, DL has been applied in 
clinical imaging, such as neuroimaging (Sui et al. 2020), and has shown great promise in 
the identification and detection of lesions, cancer cells, and different organs, as well as in 
image enhancement (Cao et al. 2019; Litjens et al. 2017; Wieslander et al. 2017). Bio-
informatics has also applied DL for predicting gene ontology annotations, understanding 
the functions of different genes (Chicco et al. 2014), and most importantly for anticipating 
how mutations in non-coding DNA affect gene expressions and susceptibility to diseases 
(Leung et al. 2014; Xiong et al. 2016).
DL’s applications range far beyond science. For example, the military has taken advan-
tage of the highly efficient image and object recognition ability of DL for various opera-
tions (Mendis et al. 2016; Yang et al. 2018). Businesses have applied DL for improving 
their customer relationship management, where it allows for the estimation of the customer 
lifetime value that would result from possible direct marketing activities (Tkachenko 2015). 
The recommendation systems in various commercial products utilize DL to understand and 
predict user preferences (Da’u and Salim 2020; Feng et al. 2019; Oord et al. 2013). Simi-
larly, it has been also used in targeting an appropriate audience for mobile advertisements 
(De et al. 2017). Furthermore, DL utilizes both supervised and unsupervised learning in 
financial fraud detection and anti-money laundering by identifying anomalies and abnor-
mal money transactions (Paula et al. 2016). While DL has been helping to advance several 
fields of research, society, and the economy, it can also be exploited for malicious attempts. 

13524
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
For instance, DL has been drawing criticisms for compromising cybersecurity as it is sus-
ceptible to attacks by hackers and to deceit (Li et al. 2019a, b, c, d; Norton and Qi 2017; 
Papernot et al. 2016). Nevertheless, DL modelling architectures suffer from some errors; 
in several instances, DL was found to misclassify or randomly classify images (Nguyen 
et al. 2015; Szegedy et al. 2015). To tackle these issues, it is pertinent to design models that 
internally create states that are equivalent to image-grammar (Zhu and Mumford 2006). In 
addition, Mühlhoff (2020) has argued that despite its much-extolled advantage of requiring 
minimal hand-tuning, DL, in fact, relies on microwork by humans, thereby calling it “a 
form of distributed orchestration of human cognition through networked media technol-
ogy” (Mühlhoff 2020).
The uses of DL technologies in the contemporary world and their potential for further 
applications cannot be disregarded, despite some limitations. Many scholarly works have 
been undertaken to comprehensively review the applications of DL technologies across 
different sectors. Most review works focus on specific areas and implementations of DL 
(Arulkumaran et al. 2017; Gheisari et al. 2017; Pouyanfar et al. 2018; Vargas et al. 2017). 
Other reviews have surveyed DL architectures and algorithms in the context of specific 
applications, such as speech emotion recognition (Fayek et al. 2017; Pandey et al. 2019), 
text classification (Zulqarnain et  al. 2020), early diagnosis of Alzheimer’s (Ortiz et  al. 
2016), electronic health records (Roberto et al. 2020; Xiao et al. 2018), medical image 
analysis (Akkus et al. 2017; Cao et al. 2019; Liu et al. 2019; Shoeibi et al. 2020), time 
series forecasting (Lara-ben and Carranza-garc 2021), aircraft maintenance, repair, and 
overhaul (Rengasamy et al. 2018), and land cover mapping (Pashaei and Kamangir 2020). 
With DL having gained momentum only recently, review articles on DL architectures 
encompassing the full scope of the field are still lacking. Dixit et al. (Dixit et al. 2018) 
provided a brief overview of seven of the most widely used DL architectures (deep neu-
ral networks, deep belief networks, recurrent neural networks, deep Boltzmann machine, 
restricted Boltzmann machine, deep autoencoders, and convolutional neural networks), a 
list of DL libraries, and some of the most common applications. However, as is perceiv-
able, their paper is not a comprehensive review of existing architectures. In addition to the 
models discussed by Dixit et al. (2018), Sengupta et al. (2020) have covered generative 
adversarial neural networks and highlighted tests that can be undertaken before implement-
ing different neural networks in safety–critical systems. Shrestha et al. (Shrestha 2019) pro-
vided a rigorous overview of the neural networks and DNNs and found certain limitations 
that constrain training, such as overfitting, long training time, and high susceptibility to 
getting stuck in the local minima.
Khamparia and Singh (2019) contributed perhaps one of the most important studies 
on DL architectures, even though it is limited to neural networks. Their meta-analysis 
critically reviewed twelve DL modelling techniques and found that advanced DL archi-
tectures that are combinations of a few conventional architectures are far more robust 
than their conventional counterparts. A comprehensive list of DL architectures and 
their related applications was also presented. Nevertheless, as a continuously expand-
ing and developing field, there is a need to critically review and compile information 
on the state-of-art DL modelling techniques. Therefore, by first delving into a brief 
discussion on DL as a subset of ML, this paper comprehensively reviews all of the 
available DL modelling techniques. While these modelling techniques have many ben-
efits across multiple disciplines, they are not without limitations. Therefore, this paper 
also highlights the advantages and drawbacks of these models and concludes with 
future perspectives on DL models, providing directions for enhancing the architecture 
designs and increasing the implementation of DL technologies across more sectors. 

13525
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Overall, this paper aims to disseminate essential information on the constantly evolv-
ing field of deep learning and direct future research towards improving existing model-
ling techniques.
2  Methodology for selecting, collecting, and analyzing pertinent data
This review utilized an integrative literature method to analyze almost all available 
deep learning modelling approaches, as well as their current progress, applications, 
advantages, and challenges. Throughout this method, relevant and reliable papers were 
selected, collected, filtered, carefully evaluated and analyzed. The database was found 
using credible websites, e.g. Scopus and refereed journals from reputable publish-
ers such as Nature, Elsevier, Taylor & Francis, Springer, Wiley, ACS, Inderscience, 
MDPI, Frontiers, and Sage. Relevant keywords such as “Deep learning”, “Deep learn-
ing architecture”, “Deep learning modelling”, “Advantages of deep learning”, “Chal-
lenges of deep learning”, “Future of deep learning”, and each deep learning model 
such as “Vector space model”, “Convolutional neural network”, “Recurrent neural 
network” and so on, were used to find out publications related to the present work. 
Through the Scopus database, 186,154 papers published within the last five years were 
identified. The references and bibliographies of the aforementioned publications were 
sifted and compiled in order to locate more relevant papers. The following criteria 
were used to thoroughly scan and categorize the abstract, introduction, and conclusion 
from selected papers:
	
(i)	 Preliminary consideration was given to only peer-reviewed articles from reputable 
publishers and websites
	 (ii)	 Researchers who are actively engaged in the relevant research field were chosen and 
collected
	 (iii)	 The selected publications were evaluated for their balance between modern studies 
and prior research
	 (iv)	 Referring to websites that employ the aforementioned keywords commercially
	 (v)	 The most recent and cutting-edge algorithms relevant to the present work were 
emphasised
	 (vi)	 Some publications of relevance that were cited in recent studies were rigorously 
retrieved as the original source of the studies.
The above criteria assisted in selecting 748 papers that are more relevant. Through-
out the entire review process of available relevant papers, several questions were 
raised. To answer these questions, some other references were sourced and examined 
for further clarification and improvement. Papers for the present study were chosen 
based on a set of inclusion and exclusion criteria, which are illustrated in Table 1. A 
total of 419 articles were finally selected by applying the exclusion criteria. Although 
the exclusion criteria appeared to provide a solid foundation to find peer-reviewed 
and high-quality academic articles, some of the characteristics of the exclusion crite-
ria appeared to be biased and skewed, making it difficult to discover high-quality aca-
demic journals. The authors conducted a test–retest procedure to overcome this issue.

13526
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
3  Deep learning
Deep learning (DL) is considered an evolution of machine learning (ML) that incorpo-
rates algorithms to learn from data to accomplish some tasks without being explicitly 
programmed (Lecun et al. 2015). Both ML and DL are a subset of artificial intelligence 
(AI). ML powers a wide range of automated functions in various businesses, from data 
security services hunting down malware to finance specialists looking for trade warn-
ings. It has also a wide variety of applications in modern society, such as: developing 
intelligent personal assistants for finding helpful information (Dhyani and Kumar 2019), 
recommender systems that can suggest relevant items to the users (Zhang et al. 2019), 
machine translation to provide the most accurate translation of any text in any language 
(Poliak et al. 2018), and predicting the class of object in an image (Chen et al. 2018a; 
b). The way machines can learn new techniques becomes interesting whenever deep 
learning techniques are employed. The effectiveness of traditional machine-learning 
approaches is comparatively lower than DL techniques, as illustrated in Fig. 1, consid-
ering that they require a large volume of data to provide significant results. For a long 
time, designing a feature extractor for machine learning systems demanded hand-crafted 
features to simplify the learning process. However, such feature extraction techniques 
need human expertise and significant domain understanding.
Table 1   Inclusion and exclusion criteria to select papers for the present review
Inclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria
The publications chosen are all academic and peer-
reviewed
Even if they are academic or peer-reviewed, publica-
tions lacking a robust discussion are not included
The publications should be pertinent to the topic of 
the present study
Publications that lack information about the afore-
mentioned keywords are not selected
The papers should be capable of answering the 
research questions
The results of any literature that showed a high level 
of repetition were filtered out
Any additional information that appears pertinent 
and valuable is also selected
Any literature with insufficient references and con-
texts was not considered
Fig. 1   Performance of deep 
learning against traditional learn-
ing (Ng 2015)

13527
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Deep learning allows machines to learn from their mistakes and comprehend the world 
as a hierarchy of concepts. In this learning process, the machines learn from data using 
a general-purpose learning algorithm, thus needing less human expertise to describe all 
the knowledge that the machine requires expressly. The models of DL employ a layered 
network architecture, known as an artificial neural network (ANN) (Schmidhuber 2015), 
which is modelled after the human brain’s analogous networks. The embedding of lay-
ers results in a significantly more efficient learning experience than traditional machine 
learning models. The ability of deep learning to achieve high-level features from a mas-
sive amount of input data, referred to as feature engineering, distinguishes it from machine 
learning. As a result, deep learning is gaining popularity with innovative applications in 
natural language processing (NLP), computer vision, and predictive modelling (Ahmad 
et al. 2019).
4  Deep learning modelling techniques
Deep learning modelling techniques enable computational models to learn feature 
representation in data using multiple processing layers and several levels of abstrac-
tion (Lecun et al. 2015). Artificial neural networks (ANNs) provide the foundation of 
advanced deep learning models (Schmidhuber 2015) and perform well in a variety of 
domains. However, ANNs suffer from certain drawbacks, such as no guaranteed con-
vergence to an optimal solution and being prone to overfitting the training data. There-
fore, researchers have tried to find solutions using deep architecture. The term “deep” 
in “deep learning” was motivated by the number of processing layers through which 
the data must pass in the network. A deep learning model is made up of multiple layers 
that stack up on top of each other (Fig. 2). The first layer (input) consists of units con-
taining values fed to every neuron in the first hidden layer, then the predicted results 
come out of the model from the output (final) layer. The number of units in this layer 
equals the number of output classes desired. The hidden layers placed between the 
input and output layers apply weights to the inputs and pass them through an activa-
tion function. The activation function is used to help the network add non-linearity and 
learn complex relationships in the data. The backpropagation algorithm computes the 
Fig. 2   a Conventional neural 
network b Deep learning neural 
network (Oka et al. 2021)

13528
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
error between the predicted result and the desired class in the output layer, then pro-
ceeds to the hidden layer to reduce the loss by adjusting the weights. This process is 
repeated until the output is accurate enough to be useful.
Considering the concepts of neural networks discussed above, several deep learn-
ing modelling techniques are built as described in the following subsections. These 
techniques have various applications, such as the detection, classification of objects 
in images and video data (Lea et al. 2016), finding sentiment and emotion from text 
data (Jin Wang et  al. 2016a; Hassan et  al. 2018; Majumder et  al. 2019), audio pro-
cessing applications like speech recognition (Rao et al. 2018a; b), and neural machine 
translation (NMT) with translation between different languages (Sutskever et al. 2014). 
Developing a deep learning-based model in these fields requires the pre-processing 
of raw data, feature selection, optimal parameter determination, and the evaluation of 
classification accuracy and convergence speed. This section covers different types of 
deep learning modelling approaches and explains their underlying mathematical con-
cepts, advancements, latest implementations, and applications in various fields.
4.1  Vector space model
The vector space model (VSM) is an arithmetic model in which texts are represented as 
vectors. It has been successfully applied in information filtering, information retrieval, 
and other areas (Abualigah and Hanandeh, 2015; Van Gysel et  al. 2018; Mitra and 
Craswell 2017). The vector elements describe the weights or importance of every word 
in a document. The cosine similarity technique can be applied to find the degree of 
similarity between two documents (Günther et  al. 2016). In the vector space model 
shown below, documents are described as a term-document matrix (Shi et al. 2018) or 
a term-frequency matrix, where the rows represent the documents and the terms are 
defined by the columns. Words, sentences, or phrases are often used as terms, each of 
which depends on the application and context. Each cell signifies the term’s weight in 
a document, and if a term is present in the document, the cell value will be non-zero.
Suppose there is a document Dk and a query q . The cosine similarity formula can be 
used to find the similarity between Dk and q using the formula:
The query and document vectors are not correlated if the cosine value gives zero in 
Eq. (1). The vector space model assumes that the terms are independent of each other. 
As a result, the model ignores the possibility of semantically related index terms.
⎡
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢⎣
D1
D2
⋯
Dn
T1
w11
w12
⋯
w1n
T2 … Tt
w21 … wt1
w22 … w11
⋯⋯⋯
w2n ⋯wtn
⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥⎦
(1)
푐표푠Dk, q =
∑N
i=1wi,jwi,q
∑N
i=1wi,j2
∑N
i=1wi,q2

13529
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
4.1.1  Word embedding
In recent years, research interest in the concept of using a vector representation of words 
and word embedding has increasingly progressed. The latter has been often utilized in 
advanced natural language processing applications, such as information retrieval, question 
answering (Zhou et al. 2016), and machine translation (Zhang et al. 2017a; b, c). Word 
embedding is a method of generating vectors and mapping them to associated words. 
Tomas Mikolov’s word2vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) models can generate high-dimensional 
vector representations of words when training on a large text dataset (Demeester et  al. 
2016). These vectors are capable of capturing syntactic and semantic information. In its 
simplest form, a word2vec model involves the training of a simple neural network to com-
plete a task and includes only one hidden layer in the neural network, as shown in Fig.. 
The goal is to simply learn the hidden layers’ weights, which are used as word vectors in 
many applications (Zhang et al. 2015). The size of the input layer depends on the number 
of words in the vocabulary for training, where one neuron represents one word. The hidden 
layer size is defined by how many dimensions we want to keep in the resulting word vec-
tors. It is suggested that the dimensionality of the vectors be set between 100 and 1000 in 
the original model (Demeester et al. 2016). Higher dimensionality provides high quality of 
word embedding, while the output layer has the same size as the input layer.
To train the embedded weights, the continuous bag of words (CBOW) and skip-gram 
are two useful techniques. Given a target word, the skip-gram model attempts to predict 
alternative context words. Here, input to hidden layer connections remains the same as the 
word2vec fully connected network. However, a simple modification is made in the hid-
den to output layer connection to give space for the selected number of context words. 
Contrariwise, the CBOW model aims to predict target words given a set of context words, 
the number of which depends on the setting of the window size. For example, in the sen-
tence, “the quick brown fox jumped over the lazy dog.”, ‘the’ and ‘brown’ might be used 
as context words and ‘quick’ as the target word. A tweak to the neural network architecture 
is required in this scenario as is a simple modification to adjust the input to hidden layer 
connection C times. Here, C is the number of context words. By adding these configura-
tions to the network, the hidden layer’s output can be found by taking the mean of the 
context words. The steps after calculating the hidden layer remain precisely the same. A 
text classification system was proposed by Ali et al. (2019) for retrieving transportation 
sentiment from social networking and news sites. The authors combined a topic2vec and 
word2vec to create a word embedding model that describes the documents using a low 
dimensional vector but keeps the semantic meanings. The model obtains a sentiment clas-
sification accuracy of 93% with transportation datasets, outperforming topic2vec document 
representation approaches. The model treats the unimportant words as sentiment words 
that cause decreasing classification performance. However, sophisticated data pre-process-
ing is needed to improve classification accuracy (see Figs. 2, 3).
4.1.2  Sentence embedding
The sentence embedding model aims to produce a fixed-length continuous vector repre-
senting the entire input. A rough sense of the relative locations of the sentence vectors 
in the original vector space can be obtained from the figure. Similar sentences are close 
together in summary-vector space. Skip-thought is one of the popular sentence embedding 

13530
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
models that demonstrates significant results in several tasks, including semantic similarity, 
paraphrase detection, image annotation (how well the sentences describe an image), and 
classifications (Kiros et al. 2015).
Vector representation, which is used for words, phrases, sentences, paragraphs, docu-
ments, or even images, can be generalized as representing “thoughts.” On the other hand, 
the skip-thought model abstracts skip-gram architecture to the sentence level (Kiros et al. 
2015). The idea behind this model is that the context words embed a word’s meaning. The 
model tries to map sentences with common syntactic and semantic information into simi-
lar vectors by reconstructing the neighbouring sentence. The skip-thought model has three 
main parts: encoder, previous decoder, and next decoder, as shown in Fig. 4.
In Fig. 4, given a sentence si at index i , the encoder produces a fixed-length representa-
tion zi . It needs to access the word embedding layer (also called the lookup table layer) that 
maps each word into a corresponding vector. Inside an encoder, a recurrent neural network 
(RNN) with the gated recurrent unit (GRU) or long short-term memory (LSTM) activation 
is fed every word sequentially in a sentence. This encoder captures the temporal patterns 
of sequential word vectors. The previous decoder takes the embedding zi from the encoder 
and “tries” to generate the proceeding sentence si−1 . This decoder uses another recurrent 
network that generates the sentence sequentially and shares the same lookup table layer 
from the encoder. The next decoder takes the embedding zi from the encoder and “tries” to 
generate the subsequent sentence si+1 . This decoder also uses a recurrent network similar to 
the previous decoder. The encoder is the end result of the skip-thought model as it contains 
syntactic and semantic information.
Fig. 3   Illustration of word2vec fully connected neural network (Orkphol and Yang 2019)
Fig. 4   Skip-thought model overview (Hassan et al. 2018)

13531
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Due to the vast amount of textual data surfacing online, the demand for text summa-
rization is continuously increasing worldwide. As a result, the necessity of natural lan-
guage processing (NLP) models arises to extract the essential and valuable information 
from the long text while maintaining critical information. Mohd et al. (2020) introduced 
a text summarizer that obtains the features of a long text document using different tech-
niques, such as Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) and Term Frequency-Inverse Docu-
ment Frequency (TF-IDF), which represents each sentence as a numerical vector. Simi-
lar vectors are aggregated together using a genetic algorithm. Lastly, the LDA technique 
was utilized to obtain the center sentence of each cluster to be included in the resulting 
summary. The macro-average of precision from the experimental results was found to 
be 34%, which is higher than the benchmark standard. However, the technique was per-
formed on only one dataset, and thus the precision may not be feasible.
Different types of difficulties, such as combining syntactic information or identi-
fying different labels for the document classification task, are acknowledged using 
DocBERT. The DocBERT is a document classification model based on Bidirectional 
Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) (Adhikari et al. 2019). The gen-
eral idea is to use a fully connected layer to filter the representation obtained from the 
common language specification (CLS) token and then employ a SoftMax layer to con-
vert 768-dimensional encoding to class distribution. Adhikari et  al. (2019) reported 
the state-of-the-art results on four popular datasets, attempting to address the BERT 
model’s high computational expense and reduce the parameters by 30-fold. The average 
document length was found to be less than BERT, while the maximum length was 512. 
However, BERT can outperform non-contextual embeddings on various tasks, such as 
the clinical domain. Si et al. (2019) explored the performance of classic word embed-
ding approaches (word2vec, GloVe) and contextualized methods (BERT) on a clinical 
concept extraction task. The output of the BERT model was fed into a bi-LSTM, which 
showed that contextual embeddings play a significant role in achieving better perfor-
mance (F1-measures of 93.18) on various benchmark tests in the datasets like SemEval.
4.1.3  Graph embedding
Graph embedding is a technique for transforming a whole graph into a single vector 
while preserving the graph’s relevant information. The resulting vectors contain highly 
informative features that can be used for the task, such as node classification, ranking, 
alignment, link prediction, clustering, and visualization. The primary goal of graph 
embedding techniques is to reflect high-dimensional points into a residual continuous 
vector space with low dimensions (Fig. 5). As a result, it is easy to compute the node 
similarity using the dot product or cosine distance formula. Graph analytics is also con-
siderably faster and more accurate than computing in the high-dimensional complex 
graph domain.
Although matrix-factorization approaches have been proposed to represent a node 
earlier, they are significantly affected by conventional dimension reduction techniques. 
Comparatively, recent techniques focus on learning node embeddings using random 
walk characteristics. A graph structure can be translated into a sample collection of lin-
ear sequences using the DeepWalk model (Perozzi et al. 2014), which employs hierar-
chical SoftMax techniques as the loss function. The primary concept underlying this 
method is to learn embeddings, and therefore (Hamilton et al. 2017):

13532
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
where Pg, T(vj|vi) denotes the probability of visiting from vertex vi to vj on a length-T 
;andDEC(zi, zj
)
 is a function that takes the node embeddings zi and zj and uses them to 
decode the graph metrics.
A hypergraph embedding method, LBSN2Vec, was developed by Yang et al. (2019) for 
location-based social network (LBSN) data that enhances friendship and location predic-
tion task effectiveness. LBSN provides services to the users to publish their location and 
location-related contents like photos or notes. Encoding both users and places into low-
dimensional vectors produces hyperedges by sampling friendships and checking-in using 
a random walk. The model chooses two nodes from the sample graph and then feeds the 
nodes into a model similar to skip-gram to generate low-dimensional vectors represent-
ing the nodes. The authors revealed that the LBSN2Vec model outperforms the baseline 
graph embeddings in predicting the friendship of two individuals and location predic-
tion by 32.95% and 25.32%, respectively. However, the study was limited to random walk 
approaches for the location prediction task in the hypergraph. Further research is thus 
required to take advantage of the meta-graph or hypergraph for the deep learning-based 
recommendation model.
4.2  Convolutional neural network
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are particularly useful to reduce the number of 
parameters in an ANN. This has inspired researchers and practitioners to consider adopt-
ing larger models to accomplish tasks that were previously difficult to handle with regular 
ANNs. The CNN model is influenced by an animal’s visual cortex and is intended to learn 
low-level to high-level features from the data received gradually. For example, the model 
first detects the low-level edge in the first layer in the image classification task and then the 
high-level features like shapes and faces in an image (see Fig. 5).
(2)
DECzi, zj
 ≜
ezT
i zj
∑
vk∈VezT
i zk ≈Pg, T(vjvi)
Fig. 5   Graph embedding (Xu 2020)

13533
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
To understand the architecture of CNN, we explain the essential CNN model compo-
nents. A CNN model is comprised of three primary layers: convolution, pooling, and fully 
connected layers. The first two layers generate features from the input, while the third layer, 
the fully connected layer, connects the extracted features to the final output. The convo-
lution layers retrieve the high-level characteristics from the data provided. The primary 
objective is to compute different feature maps by projecting a tiny array of numbers called 
a "kernel" to the input data. The input is also known as a tensor. An element-wise product 
between each kernel element and the input tensor is performed at each position of the ten-
sor. Then, the summation of these values is calculated and applied to the associated index 
of the output tensor (Fig. 6). Multiple kernels are used to repeat this process to produce an 
arbitrary number of feature maps. Each feature map represents distinct input tensors’ char-
acteristics, and each kernel can be considered as a different feature generator. The size and 
number of kernels are two primary hyperparameters that describe the convolution opera-
tion. Usually, the kernels’ size is 3 × 3, but it can also be 5 × 5 or 7 × 7. The number of ker-
nels is chosen arbitrarily depending on the depth of the output feature maps. Mathemati-
cally, convolution operation can be defined by the following equation (Khan et al. 2020):
where f k
l  is the output feature map of the k-th convolution operation of the l-th layer. This 
can be computed as Fk
l = [f k
l (1, 1), … f k
l (p, q), … f k
l (P, Q)] , where ic is the input tensor 
and ic(x, y) is an element of that tensor. These values will be element-wise multiplied by 
ek
l (u, v) , the k-th convolutional kernel of the l-th layer.
CNN introduces non-linearity to the network by applying a non-linear activation func-
tion. Previously, the popular choice was non-linear activation functions, including sig-
moid or tangent functions (LeCun et al. 2012). However, to resolve the vanishing gradi-
ent problem (Nwankpa et al. 2018) of the sigmoid and tangent function, Rectified Linear 
Unit (ReLU) and its variants, such as leaky ReLU and Parametric Rectified Linear Unit 
(PReLU), are used. One of the recently proposed activation functions named Mish outper-
forms ReLU and other typical activation functions in many deep networks across bench-
mark datasets (Misra 2019). The activation function of the convolutional feature map can 
be computed as:
(3)
f k
l (p, q) =
∑
c
∑
x,y
ic(x, y) ⊙ek
l (u, v)
Fig. 6   Convolution operation

13534
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
where Fk
l  is the output of a convolutional operation that goes to an activation function g(); 
and ak
l is the non-linear output of the k-th input feature map in the l-th layer.
The extracted features from the convolutional and pooling layers are flattened to 
a one-dimensional array of numbers. Those features are then fed into the traditional 
neural network, where each input is connected to its subsequent layer neurons by a 
learnable weight. The main drawback of a fully CNN is that it requires training many 
parameters, which contributes to its high computational expense and possible overfit-
ting. The dropout technique is used to overcome such difficulties, in which a few nodes 
and connections are removed (Goodfellow et al. 2013). The output layer is the final 
layer of CNNs, where softmax function is widely used to provide probability distribu-
tion (Russakovsky et al. 2015). Another classifier, the support vector machine (SVM), 
can also classify data (Tang 2013).
Parallel computing has made CNNs more efficient than humans in recognizing vis-
ual patterns, making them a desirable alternative for wide-area monitoring because of 
their advantages over humans. Mukherjee et al. (2020) proposed a CNN-based genera-
tive model, namely “GenInSAR”, for combined coherence estimation and phase filter-
ing which directly learns interferometric synthetic aperture radar (InSAR) data distri-
bution. InSAR is a developing and extremely successful remote sensing method for 
monitoring a variety of geophysical parameters, including surface deformation. The 
unsupervised training on simulated and satellite InSAR images of the proposed model 
(GenInSAR) outperformed the other comparable methods (CNN-InSAR(as-is), CNN-
InSAR(retrained), NLSAR, NLInSAR, Goldstein, Boxcar) in reducing the total resi-
due (by more than 16.5% on average), with fewer over-smoothing/artifacts surrounding 
branch cuttings. Compared to the related methods, the phase cosine error, coherence 
and phase root-mean-square-error of GenInSAR were improved by 0.05, 0.07 and 0.54, 
respectively. As a result, the InSAR machine learning can be improved by GenInSAR’s 
ability to produce new interferograms.
4.2.1  CNN‑LSTM
Long short-term memory (LSTM) can learn long-term relationships in data. However, 
spatial data like images are challenging to model with the standard LSTM. The convo-
lutional neural network combined with long short-term memory (CNN-LSTM) is based 
on an LSTM network that is primarily designed for sequence prediction tasks where 
the input is spatial data, such as images, videos, or temporal structure of words in a 
sentence, paragraph, or document. The model shown in Fig. 7 illustrates the combined 
regional CNN and LSTM to identify the sentiment of text (Wang et al. 2016a), which 
considers an individual sentence as a region and long-distance relationship of sentences 
in the prediction task.
The main architecture of the CNN-LSTM model consists of the input layer, convolu-
tion layer, pooling layer, sequential layer (LSTM hidden layer), and fully connected layer. 
The first three layers are the CNN layers. The CNN layer’s output data is transferred to the 
LSTM layer. Following temporal modelling, the data from the LSTM layers are sent to a 
fully connected layer. These layers are well-suited to produce higher-order features that are 
(4)
ak
l = g(Fk
l )

13535
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
easy to distinguish within distinct categories. The CNN model is used for feature extrac-
tion, while the LSTM model is employed for data interpretation over time.
4.2.2  Temporal convolutional network (TCN)
The novel work on the temporal convolutional networks (TCNs) was first proposed 
by Lea et al. (2016) for video-based action segmentation. This approach involves two 
phases: (i) CNN computes the low-level features that encapsulate spatial–temporal 
information, and (ii) RNN feeds the low-level features into a classifier to extract the 
high-level temporal information. Although TCN demands the integration of two differ-
ent models, it offers a unified technique to capture all two layers of information in a 
hierarchical manner. The original TCN model possesses a convolutional encoder and 
decoder architecture. The model captures a set of video features as the input and then 
extracts a D-dimensional feature vector for each video frame. If a video has T frames, 
the input X appends all the frame-wise features in a way that X ∈ℝT×D . Similar to other 
CNN architectures, the networks apply some filters followed by non-linear activation of 
the input to extract features. The convolution consists of l layers, where the collection 
of filters in each layer is defined as {W(i)}
Fl
i=1 for W(i) ∈ℝd×Fl−1 . Here, Fl is the number of 
convolution filters in the l layer with a temporal window d. If Xl−1 is an output from the 
previous layer, the l-th layer output, Xl , can be calculated as follows (Kim and Reiter 
2017):
where f denotes any non-linear activations functions, e.g., ReLu.
Convolutional neural networks and their variants are used in various applica-
tions, such as the detection, classification of objects in images and video data, finding 
(5)
Xl = f(W ∗Xl−1)
Fig. 7   Regional CNN-LSTM model for sentiment analysis (Jin Wang et al. 2016a)

13536
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
sentiment and emotions in natural language data, and audio processing applications like 
voice recognition. A CNN-based architecture named LeafNet was developed by Barré 
et al. (2017) to identify plant species from the leaf images. The authors experimented 
with their model on three publicly available state-of-the-art datasets of leaf images: 
LeafSnap, Foliage, and Flavia. The previous studies on these datasets were based on 
the hand-crafted feature extraction technique. After data augmentation, approximately 
270,000 leaf images were used on a 17-layer CNN to train the LeafNet model with 
image sizes of 256 × 256 pixels. Improved accuracies (by 0.8–13.3%) of 86.3%, 95.8%, 
and 97.9% were found on the LeafSnap, Foliage, and Flavia datasets, respectively, com-
pared to previous studies. However, this method is comparatively slow (training takes 
about 32 h) and lacks context due to the small, cropped window sizes.
In another work, a region-based convolutional neural network (R-CNN) has been 
applied in the computer vision field for the object detection task. Li et al. (2019a, b, c, d) 
proposed the stereo R-CNN method that can perform three-dimensional (3D) object detec-
tion in autonomous vehicle navigation. The method identifies and integrates objects in both 
the left and right images simultaneously and uses a region-based object detection align-
ment to retrieve the correct 3D bounding box. The stereo R-CNN captures input images 
with a resolution of 600 × 2000 and takes advantage of ImageNet’s pre-trained ResNet-101. 
The model was evaluated on the KITTI object detection benchmark. The proposed method 
outperformed a previous study (Chen et  al. 2018a, b) for 3D object proposals by over 
25–30%. Due to the absence of precise depth information, the model can only produce 
shallow 3D detection results. Variations in appearance can also have a significant impact.
Chen et al. (2018a, b) introduced an unsupervised domain adaptation model for cross-
domain object detection based on the faster R-CNN model (Zhang et al. 2016a, b). They 
employed two domain classifiers: one for high-level features at the global image scale and 
another for features clipped by the region proposal network at the instance (object) scale. 
The model was validated for different domain shift datasets. Via experiments, the authors 
found that the domain adaptive faster R-CNN model outperforms the faster R-CNN model 
by over 8.8%. This improvement was found consistent across the categories, thus indicat-
ing that the suggested method can minimize domain mismatch between object categories. 
However, the model was not trained to recognize traffic in darkness and is only adaptable 
to specific scenarios.
A dynamic CNN-based system was proposed by Chu et al. (2017) for tracking objects in 
videos. Using shared CNN features and Region of Interest Pooling, the model takes advan-
tage of single object trackers. The experimental results showed that the proposed online 
multi-object tracking algorithm outperforms Markov decision processes by 4%. Although 
the model performed well in tracking objects, it is unsuitable for applications with limited 
resources. Also, the model may consume a lot of memory and time as it constructs a net-
work for individual objects and performs online learning. Since CNN works well for both 
image classification and natural language processing tasks, CNN-based text classification 
models are gaining popularity. For instance, multi-layer CNN produces optimal features 
during the training process to reflect the semantics of the sentence being evaluated. These 
semantic constructs can be applied to a variety of applications, including text classification, 
text summarization, and information retrieval.
A CNN-based method was suggested by Hughes et al. (2017) for classifying clinical 
texts into one of 26 categories, such as “Brain” or “Cancer.” The model classifies texts 
by converting each document into a sentence-level representation. The authors used 
two stacked convolutional layers followed by a pooling layer. The experimental analy-
sis revealed that the model improves the word embedding-based methods by accuracy of 

13537
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
around 15%. However, the model was trained with a relatively small dataset (4000 sen-
tences). To improve the model performance, domain adaptation techniques can be used to 
transfer knowledge from another domain to the medical field (Sun et al. 2016).
CNN-based models have also been successfully applied in the sentiment analysis of 
Twitter data. To predict user behavior via sentiment analysis, Liao et al. (2017) examined 
different deep learning techniques. They employed CNN and word embedding techniques 
to get better results than traditional learning algorithms, such as SVM and Naive Bayes 
classifiers. Their approach interpreted the sentence matrix to be the same as an image 
matrix. A linear kernel was convoluted to that sentence matrix, and a max-pooling func-
tion was applied to each feature to find the fixed-length representation of the sentence. 
The model was assessed on several benchmark datasets, including MR and STS Gold. The 
maximum development accuracy was found to be up to 74.5%. To improve the model accu-
racy, a multilayer CNN may be used instead of a simple CNN (single channel) for sentence 
classification.
CNN-based approaches are also becoming more prominent in cosmology because of 
their noticeable performance. DeepSphere is a graph-based CNN that works on cosmologi-
cal data analysis (Perraudin et al. 2019) to predict a class from a map and classify pixels. 
The data often come as spherical maps represented as a graph in the network so that the 
model can perform the convolution and pooling operations. In the latter work, DeepSphere 
outperformed all the baselines by 10% in terms of classification accuracy. However, the 
model was applied to only the classification problem performed on scalar fields. To further 
demonstrate the performance of DeepSphere, it would be useful to make comparisons to 
various spherical CNN implementations with different sampling techniques.
4.3  Recurrent neural network (RNN)
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have recently demonstrated promising performance 
on various natural language processing tasks and have produced superior results on mul-
tiple tasks, such as sentiment classification (Wang et al. 2016c), image captioning (Yao 
et al. 2017), and language translation (Li et al. 2017a; b). There are numerous situations in 
which data sequences describe the case itself. For example, in a language modelling task, 
a sequence of words defines their meaning. If the sequences are disturbed, the informa-
tion makes no sense. In a traditional neural network, the assumption is that there has no 
dependency between the input and output. Considering this case, a network connecting to 
prior information is needed to fully comprehend the data. As a response, RNNs are useful, 
which are termed from the fact that they execute the same computation for each sequence 
element. The output in every state is dependent on the previous calculation. RNNs keep 
a "memory" that captures the information about what has been computed so far (Tomaš 
Mikolov et al. 2010, 2011). An RNN can be unfolded into an entire network, as illustrated 
in Fig. 8.
The computation flows running in an RNN for the text processing task are as follows:
•	 xt denotes the present input at time step t, where input is given as a one-hot encoded 
vector. For example, x1 = [ 1 0
0 0
0 ]
t is the initial word in a sentence.
•	 st signifies the hidden state at time step t, captures the “memory of the network, and is 
computed using the previous hidden state and the present step’s input:

13538
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
where f is an element-wise non-linear function, such as tanh or ReLU . In the case of calcu-
lating the first hidden state, st−1 is typically set to all zeros. W and U are the weight matrix 
of the hidden state and input, respectively.
•	 ot represents the output at time step t. For instance, to predict the next word in a sen-
tence, the probability can be calculated by applying the softmax function.
An RNN can, in theory, summarize all historical information up to time step st . Unfor-
tunately, the accuracy of RNNs is significantly inhibited by the vanishing gradient problem 
(Bengio et al. 1994). To address this problem, gated recurrent units and long short-term 
memory have become more powerful models and gained acceptance in recent years as the 
best strategy to implement recurrent neural networks.
(6)
st = f(Uxt + Wst−1)
(7)
ot = softmax(Vst)
Fig. 8   Unfolded recurrent neural network (Lecun et al. 2015)
Fig. 9   A schematic for a long short-term memory cell (Jenkins et al. 2018)

13539
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
4.3.1  Long short‑term memory (LSTM)
A long short-term memory (LSTM) network is comprised of different memory blocks 
referred to as cells. A cell is constructed by gates that control the flow of information: 
forget, input, and output gates (Fig. 9). A forget gate removes information from a cell con-
figuration, and the input gate updates the newly entered data to the cell. The input gate 
determines the rate at which new data enter the cell, whereas the output gate limits the data 
in the cell and computes the output activation of the LSTM unit.
The gating mechanism in a LSTM can be defined by the following equations:
where it is input gate; ft denotes forget gate; ot is output gate at a time step t; ̃Ct is a new 
memory cell vector; and W and U are parameter matrices.
4.3.2  Bidirectional long‑short time memory (BiLSTM)
Regular recurrent neural networks with LSTM cells can be extended to bidirectional recur-
rent neural networks in which the data is passed through two LSTMs (Graves et al. 2013; 
Graves and Schmidhuber 2005). One forward LSTM offers the input sequence in the cor-
rect order (forward layer), and another backward LSTM provides the input sequence in 
reverse order (backward layer). This technique improves the model’s accuracy by captur-
ing the long-term dependencies of the input sequence in both directions. In the BiLSTM, 
the forward layer computation is identical to those in the regular LSTM that computes 
the sequences ( ⃗ht, ⃗ct ) from t = 1toT . On the other hand, the backward layer computes the 
sequences ⃖
ht,⃖ct from t = Tto1 as described below:
(8)
it = 휎(Wixt + Uiht−1 + bi)
(9)
ft = 휎(Wf xt + Uf ht−1 + bf )
(10)
ot = 휎(Woxt + Uoht−1 + bo)
(11)
̃Ct = tanh(Wgxt + Ught−1 + bg)
(12)
Ct = ft ⊗Ct−1 + it ⊗Ct
(13)
ht = ot ⊗tanh(ct)
(14)
⃖it = 𝜎(Wixt + Uiht+1 + bi)
(15)
⃖ft = 𝜎(Wf xt + Uf ht+1 + bf )
(16)
⃖ot = 𝜎(Woxt + Uoht+1 + bo)
(17)
⃖
Ct = tanh(Wgxt + Ught+1 + bg)

13540
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
In a study conducted by Siami-Namini, Tavakoli, and Namin (2019), LSTM and BiL-
STM were compared in terms of time series data modelling. The prediction accuracy of the 
BiLSTM-based model was 37.78% higher than that of standard LSTM-based models after 
training with both directions of input data. However, BiLSTM-based models achieved slower 
performance than the LSTM-based models. Another study (Brahma 2018) introduced a new 
model suffix bidirectional LSTM (SuBiLSTM) that improved BiLSTM for sentiment classifi-
cation and question classification tasks (see Figs. 7, 8, 9).
4.3.3  Gated recurrent unit (GRU)
The architectures of a gated recurrent unit (GRU) and long short-term memory (LSTM) 
are closely related, since both are crafted similarly and, in some situations, generate equally 
outstanding results (Murali and Swapna 2019). The GRU cell is comprised of two gates: an 
update gate z and a reset gate r. It addresses the vanishing gradient problem of a regular RNN 
by using the update gate to determine how much historical memory (from earlier time steps) 
should be maintained and proceed to the future and the reset gate to pair the new input with 
the prior memory, as shown in Fig. 10.
The gating mechanism in GRU is expressed by the following equations:
(18)
⃖
Ct = ⃖ft ⊗⃖
Ct+1 + ⃖it ⊗⃖
Ct
(19)
⃖ht = ⃖ot ⊗tanh(⃖ct)
(20)
z = 휎(Wzht−1 + Uzxt)
(21)
r = 휎(Wrht−1 + Urxt)
(22)
c = 𝑡𝑎𝑛h(Wc(ht−1 ⊗r) + Ucxt)
Fig. 10   Gated recurrent unit cell (Zhao et al. 2019)

13541
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
where xt is the input vector; ht is output vector; W and U are parameter matrices; 휎 is the 
sigmoid function; and ⊗ denotes the Hadamard product (entry-wise product).
Due to their versatility in various applications, RNNs have been successfully used in 
multiple tasks, including language modelling, speech-to-text processing, caption generator, 
machine translation, and other fields. RNN has also been applied in the sentiment analysis 
task to produce effective outcomes. For instance, Basiri et al. (2021) proposed a model to 
determine the sentiment from long reviews and short tweet text. In the model, the attention 
mechanism in RNNs is used to pay more attention to certain factors by assigning different 
weights when processing the data. The linguistic structures become more descriptive by 
applying the attention mechanism. Two bidirectional LSTM and GRU are also employed 
to generate the input text’s previous and next contexts feature representation. The proposed 
model improved the accuracy from 1.85% to 3.63% for five long review datasets and from 
0.25% to 0.54% for three short tweet datasets. While the study emphasized sentiment clas-
sification at the document level, there is potential to investigate sentiment classification at 
the sentence and aspect levels.
Another RNN model based on dialogue was built with an attention mechanism for emo-
tion detection in textual conversations with six emotion labels (Majumder et al. 2019). The 
model has several variants, including DialogueRNN + Att and BiDialgouRNN, and con-
siders both context and speaker information. The network employs three GRUs to track 
individual speaker states, global context from the preceding utterances, and the emotional 
state through the conversations. The data are provided and fed into the GRU for emotion 
representation, depending on the context. Although the DialogueRNN model achieved a 
better f1-score of 6.62% on several experiments, which is above the baselines (Majumder 
et al. 2019), it is time-consuming for training and not parameter-efficient for global or local 
contexts.
In RNN-based neural machine translation (NMT), sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) 
architectures are used to deal with translation between languages. These seq2seq archi-
tectures apply two RNNs, namely an encoder and decoder. A study (Camgoz et al. 2018) 
utilized the standard seq2seq model to recognize sign language gestures from a video of 
someone performing continuous signs. In the study, the CNN was trained on the sentence 
level annotation to extract features from the video before translating it to text. These fea-
tures were fed to the seq2seq model. The model scored 18.13 on the BLEU-4 matric (Pap-
ineni et al. 2001) and 43.80 on the ROUGE matric (Lin 2004). The model assumed that 
the CNN could learn good feature representation, but this hypothesis’s validity was not 
evaluated.
To model long texts for generating semantic relations between sentences, researchers 
face challenges in sentiment analysis. Rao et al. (2018a, b) handled the problem by propos-
ing the State Refinement-LSTM (SR-LSTM) and SSR-LSTM models based on deep RNN. 
The models have two hidden layers: the first one uses LSTM to represent the semantic rela-
tionship of sentences, and the second one encodes those sentence relationships at the docu-
ment level. The SR-LSTM model outperformed other models by obtaining an accuracy of 
44% and 63.9% on the IMDB and yelp2015 datasets, respectively, while the SSR-LSTM 
model achieved an accuracy of 44.3% and 63.8% on the same datasets. However, the mod-
els considered only the sequential order of the documents. In future works, it may possible 
to represent the documents using tree-structured LSTM.
RNNs have also been successfully applied in intelligent health care systems. For example, 
Uddin et al. (2020) presented a multi-sensors data fusion network that relies on a recurrent 
(23)
ht = (z ⊗c) ⊗((1 −z) ⊗ht−1)

13542
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
neural network to recognize human activities and behavior. They extracted features from mul-
tiple body sensors and enhanced the features using Kernel Principal Component Analysis 
(KPCA) techniques. Then, human activities were recognized by training a deep RNN. The 
proposed method was assessed on three publicly available datasets. The average performance 
was found to be 99% using precision, recall, and F1-score matrices. It is possible to extend the 
work by developing a real-time human behavior tracking system with considering more com-
plex human activities.
The RNN-LSTM approach for time series modelling has recently attracted much interest. 
The applicability of RNN-LSTM was analyzed by Sahoo et al. (2019) for predicting daily 
flows during the low-flow periods. The model effectively used the time series data by taking 
advantage of the LSTM memory cell to learn features from both the current and past values 
of an observable object. The model’s performance (root-mean-square error RMSE = 0.487) 
on hydrological data outperformed the traditional RNN model (RMSE = 0.516) and naive 
method (RMSE = 0.793). Nevertheless, multiple hidden LSTM layers can be used to enhance 
the performance of the model. Experts are also attempting to use deep learning approaches 
in typhoon prediction as deep learning techniques become more sophisticated. Alemany 
et al. (2019) proposed a fully connected RNN to predict hurricane trajectories from historical 
cyclone data that could learn from all types of hurricanes. The model produced better predic-
tion accuracy than the previous models. For example, the mean absolute error (0.0842) of the 
RNN model was better than that of the previous sparse RNN average model (0.4612) to track 
Hurricane Sandy in 2012. The model may take advantage of converting the grid locations to 
latitude–longitude coordinates to reduce the conversion error.
4.3.4  Deep echo state network
The deep echo state network (DeepESN) is a recently proposed technique to enhance the effi-
ciency of a general echo state network (ESN) in several domains. ESN is a reservoir comput-
ing model in which the reservoir computing shows efficiency to train RNNs by preserving 
memory using its recurrent nature. A dynamic reservoir is incorporated in ESN, presenting a 
sparsely linked recurrent network of neurons that differs from a traditional multilayered neu-
ral network. The reservoir is the network’s only hidden layer, and its input connections are 
assigned at random and cannot be trained. On the other hand, the weights between the reser-
voir and output are the only ones that can be trained. The system learns the weights by linear 
regression rather than backpropagation. DeepESN is simply the ESN model’s application of 
the deep learning architecture.
The DeepESN output is produced using a linear structure of the recurrent units across 
all recurrent layers. After initialization, the DeepESN reservoir component is left untrained. 
Therefore, the usual ESN technique is subject to stability limitations. Such limits are stated 
in DeepESN by the criteria for the ESN of the deep reservoir computing network. In the deep 
echo state network, input is processed by the first layer, and the previous layers’ outputs pro-
cess the successive layers’ inputs. Therefore, the state transition function of a DeepESN can be 
presented by the following equation (Lukoševičius and Jaeger 2009):
where l represents the number of layers; W(l)
in  refers to the input matrix for l ; 휃(l) denotes 
bias weight vector; and ̂W(l) expresses the recurrent weight matrix for layer l . Here, i(l)(t) 
signifies the input for the l th layer of the network at time t . The output of the model can be 
expressed by the following equation:
(24)
x(l)(t) = (1 −a(l))x(l)(t −1) + a(l)tanh(W(l)
in i(l)(t) + 휃(l) + ̂W(l)x(l)(t −1))

13543
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
where Wout is the weight matrix between the reservoir and output y(t).
Based on the DeepESN, a novel technique was developed by Gallicchio et al. (2018a) 
for diagnosing Parkinson’s disease. This is a significant initial work in the DeepESN 
domain that shows the superiority of DeepESN over the shallow echo state network model. 
The proposed technique identified Parkinson’s disease by using the time series data gath-
ered from a tablet device while subjects performed sketching spiral tests with a pen. The 
acquired data contain x and y components of the pen, pen pressure, and grip angle. These 
signals were used to feed the model with no feature extraction and data pre-processing. The 
proposed model was evaluated on a public spiral test dataset and showed to perform better 
than the shallow ESN and other state-of-the-art methods.
Gallicchio et  al. (2018b) proposed a DeepESN technique based on additive decom-
position for predicting the time series data where the additive decomposition technique 
was used as a pre-processing step to the model. Data are split into three parts by additive 
decomposition (trend, seasonality, and residual) and then fed to the DeepESN. The perfor-
mance of the additive decomposition-DeepESN was compared with LSTM, GRU, ESN, 
and DeepESN algorithms on six different datasets. The proposed model demonstrated 
significant performance for large, multidimensional data. Although ESN was found to be 
computationally efficient, it delivered a poor performance in prediction. LSTM and GRU 
required five times more computational time than DeepESN and additive decomposition-
DeepESN. The additive decomposition-DeepESN model showed a low standard deviation, 
proving its stability, whereas other reservoir algorithms were unstable, i.e., with a higher 
standard deviation. Thus, the additive decomposition technique has the ability to improve 
the stability and performance of the DeepESN.
4.3.5  Elman recurrent neural network
The difference between the Elman recurrent neural network (ERNN) (Elman 1990) and 
other recurrent networks is that the hidden layer’s output is used as input for the context 
layer in the former. The architecture of ERNN consists of four layers: input layer, recurrent 
layer, hidden, and output layer. Each layer has one or multiple neurons that use a non-linear 
function of their weighted sum of inputs to transfer information from one layer to the next. 
Each hidden neuron is linked to a neuron of the single recurrent layer with the constant 
weight of one. As a result, the recurrent layer contains a copy of the hidden layer’s state 
one instant ago. The benefit of using ERNN is that it emphasizes the relationship between 
future and previous values even when it is difficult to learn from them. The ERNN can be 
described by the following equations (Achanta and Gangashetty 2017):
where Wi signifies hidden weight’s input; W denotes the recurrent weight matrix of the hid-
den layer; bh represents the hidden bias; U refers to the hidden output matrix; bo is the Bias 
Vector of the output layer; and f and g are the non-linear functions of hidden and output 
layers, respectively. Input is represented by xt , the state of ht and yt refer to the outputs at 
time t.
(25)
y(t) = Wout[x(1)(t)x(2)(t) … x(Nl)]
T + 휃out
(26)
ht = f(Wixt + Wht−1 + bh
)
(27)
yt = g(Uht + bo)

13544
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
An ERNN model with a stochastic time effective function (ST-ERNN) was developed 
by Jie Wang et al. (2016b) to forecast stock indices. The architecture is built by combin-
ing ERNN, multilayer perceptron, and stochastic-time-effective function, where a sto-
chastic process is used to describe the level of historical data impact in the market. The 
time-strength function includes a drift function and Brownian motion to model the appear-
ance of random changes while keeping the primary trend. The proposed neural network 
performs better than other existing neural networks in financial time series forecasting. 
Considering the rapid changes in the stock market data that make the field non-linear and 
nonstationary, predicting this kind of data is very challenging. Nevertheless, ST-ERNN 
showed a significant performance that can be crucial for future experiments in this domain. 
Krichene et al. (2017) applied ERNN for forecasting Mackey Glass time-series elements. 
The performance of ERNN was evaluated via comparison with two other existing models 
(Al-Jumeily et al. 2014; Park 2010) using the same dataset, where ERNN showed better 
performance. It is worth noting that optimal performance was achieved when the weights 
of the context units were randomly initialized.
4.4  Recursive neural network
A recursive neural network (RvNN) is a nonlinear model that can function on structured 
inputs and is applicable to parse trees in natural language processing (NLP), image anal-
ysis, protein topologies, among other applications in structured domains. For instance, 
RvNN performs extremely well in the NLP tasks. Despite their deep structure, the archi-
tecture of RvNN lacks the capacity for hierarchical representation (Irsoy and Cardie 2014) 
and contains complex informative processing models. Because they acquire high-level rep-
resentations from explicit inputs, recursive networks are effective in many deep learning 
tasks where the input is a structure. RvNNs are normally defined on a directed positional 
acyclic graph (Micheli et al. 2007). The form of RvNN is shown in Fig. 11, referring to the 
parse tree on the left side (Ma et al. 2018). If the parent node’s feature vector is p, and c1 
and c2 are its children, then
(28)
p = f(w.[c1;c2] + b)
Fig. 11   The tree and its associated RvNN architecture (Ma et al. 2018). In the figure, S represents a sen-
tence, NP is a noun phrase, VP is a verb phrase, D denotes determiner, N signifies noun, and V is a verb

13545
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
where f(.) is the activation function. The computation is recursively done for all nodes, and 
the hidden vectors of nodes’ can then be used for different classification tasks.
Tree-structured recursive neural networks (RvNNs) were used to perform rumor detec-
tion on Twitter by Jing Ma, Gao, and Wong (2018). This study constructed two recursive 
networks on top-down and bottom-up tree-structured neural networks. Rather than a sen-
tence’s parse tree, the model’s input is a propagation tree rooted from a source post, and 
each node is a sensitive post rather than individual words. Recursive feature learning can 
capture the content semanticization of posts along with the tree structure and the receptive 
relationship between them. The basic concept of the bottom-up model is to create a feature 
vector by traversing each node recursively from the leaves to the root on the top. On the 
other hand, the concept of the top-down approach is to create an enhanced feature vector 
for each post, considering its propagation direction, in which rumor indicators are com-
bined along the path of propagation. However, for the non-rumor class, the proposed mod-
els did not perform well. Yet, they could add other types of data into the structured neural 
models, such as user properties, to boost representation learning even further.
Biancofiore et al. (2017) analyzed atmospheric particulate matter (PM) and forecasted 
daily averaged concentrations of PM10 and PM2.5 up to 1–3 days. Particulate matter is 
a significant pollutant that affects human health, thus studies on reducing PM are critical. 
The latter researchers implemented a multiple linear regression model, feed-forward neu-
ral network, and neural networks with the recursive structure and found that the recursive 
neural network model outperforms the other methods. The total number of input variables 
and neurons in the second layer in the model determines how many neurons are in the first 
layer. The network’s output, the predicted particulate matter concentration, is represented 
by a single neuron in the final layer. In the latter work, the RvNN model correctly predicted 
95% of the days, but this decreased to 57% when considering only the days where the lim-
its were exceeded. In addition, the false-positive rate was 30% in this study.
Lim and Kang (2018) extracted the relation between chemical compounds and genes. 
They experimented with three methods, a tree-LSTM model with a position feature and 
a subtree containment feature, and implemented an ensemble process. The authors also 
implemented a stack augmented parser interpreter neural network (SPNN). The study 
revealed that the SPNN with ensemble technique outperformed the tree-LSTM with 
ensemble technique, which means that the extra tracking layer is beneficial. However, 
the proposed model is unable to comprehend the structure of a sentence. More training 
instances are needed to resolve this error. Also, coordination was not detected, whereby a 
comma, parenthesis, or special term like “and” or “or” is used to express coordination rela-
tions. This form of error may be avoided with the use of a separate module that looks for 
terms of equal emphasis.
4.5  Neural tensor network
In several natural language processing tasks, neural tensor networks (NTNs) have been 
successful. However, they need to estimate a considerable number of parameters, often 
resulting in overfitting (Yang et al. 2015) and excessive training times. An NTN model 
constructed by Socher, Chen, et al. (2013) implements a 3D tensor for combining two input 
vectors as bellow:
(29)
f(xT
1W[1∶k]x2 + V
[
x1
x2
]
+ b)

13546
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
where W[1∶k] ∈ℝnxnxk is the tensor ( W is a slice matrix); V ∈ℝk×2n is the linear mapping to 
combine input vectors x1 and x2; b refers to a bias term; f is the non-linear activation func-
tion; and xT
1W[1∶k]x2 is an array of k bilinear products.
In contrast to the regular neural network model, NTN can connect two input vectors 
with a tensor directly. Although the NTN model is efficient, it takes considerable time 
to compute. Several studies were done to reduce the time complexity using parameter 
reduction techniques. For instance, Ishihara et  al. (2018) introduced two-parameter 
reduction techniques based on the matrix decomposition method, while Y. Zhao, Liu, 
and Sun (2015) and P. Liu, Qiu, and Huang (2015) proposed simple matrix decom-
position techniques for reducing parameters. A neural tensor model named the con-
volutional NTN converts all word tokens into vectors with the help of a lookup layer, 
encode questions and answers with coevolutionary, pooling layers to fixed-length vec-
tors, and finally modelling their interactions with a tensor layer. Therefore, in a seman-
tic vector space, this model will group related questions and answers to avoid the prob-
lem of lexical distances.
Qiu and Huang (2015) proposed a convolutional NTN for community-based ques-
tion answering, integrating sentence modelling and semantic matching into one model. 
They implemented contrastive max-margin criterion to train the model. This study 
evaluated two different datasets for English and Chinese languages and found that the 
proposed model can handle more complex interactions with tensor layers than exist-
ing models. However, texts were converted into fixed-length vectors with the proposed 
convolutional layer, saving the essential information lost in bag-of-words. The experi-
ments on the Chinese dataset demonstrated worse performance than the English data-
set, which may be due to some mistakes in the segmentation of the Chinese expression.
A deep attention NTN for visual question answering was introduced by Bai et al. 
(2018). In this approach, tensor-based representations are used to find the joint rela-
tionship between images, questions, and responses. The authors used bilinear features 
to model images and questions that were further encoded by third dimension, i.e. the 
response as a triplet. The correlation between various triplets was broken down by dif-
ferent types of answers and questions. For the most discriminatory inference reasoning 
method, a slice-wise attention module was developed. The model was optimized by 
learning a label regression with Kullback–Leibler divergence losses. This designing 
technique enabled fast convergence and scalable training across a wide range of answer 
sets. The proposed model structure was integrated into the known visual question 
answering models MLB (Kim et al. 2017) and MUTAN (Ben-Younes et al. 2017). The 
proposed technique showed more accuracy than independent MLB and MUTAN mod-
els. This study compared GloVe word embedding with the word embedding learned 
from the proposed model and demonstrated that the model could be applied to more 
visual question answering models for further verification.
Hu et  al. (2017) proposed enhanced face recognition performance by combining 
face recognition features and facial attribute features in a variety of tasks. They created 
a robust tensor-based model that develops fusion as a problem of tensor optimization. 
Due to the great number of parameters, the model was not effective in explicitly opti-
mizing this tensor, and therefore a rich fusion architecture was proposed on the basis 
of the tensor. The results revealed that this tensor-based fusion’s Tucker-Low-Rank 
decomposition has the same Gated Two Stream neural network, making neural network 
learning simple but effective. The authors experimented on three well-known data-
bases (MultiPIE, CASIA NIR-VIS2.0, and LFW) and found that the fusion approach 

13547
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
significantly increased the face recognition performance. This technique can be 
expanded to large-scale data utilizing effective Mini Batch SGD-based learning since 
they set the equivalence between tensor-factorization and gated neural network archi-
tecture. Another advantage is that this model can be expanded to deeper architectures.
4.6  Continuous‑bag‑of‑word with denoising autoencoder‑logistic regression
To analyze sentiments, a Multimodal Learning technique was presented by Baecchi et al. 
(2016) by implementing neural network-based models for microblogging contents that 
might consist of texts and images. The proposed architecture is based on the continuous-
bag-of-word (CBOW) model (Mikolov et al. 2013) and was further extended to include 
a denoising autoencoder (DA) to include visual data. Thus, CBOW-logistic regres-
sion (LR) is the extended version of CBOW. The difference between CBOW and the 
extended model is that the new architecture can perform classification and representa-
tion concurrently. The idea behind this approach is that the multi-tasking technique can 
develop the performance of a neural network, while the proposed model can incorporate 
semantic and sentiment polarity. The model was further extended to CBOW-DA-LR to 
include visual data, such as images in tweets. The descriptor acquired by the denoising 
autoencoder, along with the regular word presentation, provides a new descriptor for a 
word window in the tweet and learns a logistic regressor at the same time. The proposed 
CBOW-DA-LR technique was compared to SentiBank, a commonly-used approach in 
this domain, and showed higher accuracy (79% accuracy on text + image data vs. 72% of 
SentiBank). Although this specific technique shows significant improvements, it should 
be further evaluated to ensure its validity.
4.7  Deep belief network
A deep belief network (DBN) is used to stack several unsupervised networks utiliz-
ing the hidden layer of each network for the next layer’s input. A stack of restricted 
Boltzmann machines (RBMs) is typically used in the DBN. The benefit of the restricted 
Boltzmann machine is to fit the sample features (Hinton 2009). Therefore, a hidden lay-
er’s output in an RBM can be used as another RBM’s visible layer input. This method 
may be considered as the further extraction of the features from the extracted features of 
the samples.
Suppose that W is the generative weights of the hidden layers learned by an RBM denote 
p(v|h, W) and prior distribution over hidden vectors p(h|W) . If v is the visible vector, then 
the probability of v can be expressed by the equation:
where p(v|h, W) is kept after learning W; and p(h|W) is replaced by a more reliable model 
of the grouped following distribution on hidden vectors.
A computer-aided diagnosis system was built by Abdel-Zaher and Eldeib (2016) for 
detecting breast cancer, utilizing a weight-initialized backpropagation neural network from 
a trained DBN having identical architecture. The authors implemented DBN in an unsuper-
vised state for acquiring the input features from the main Wisconsin breast cancer dataset. 
(30)
p(v) =
∑
h
p(h|W)p(v|h, W)

13548
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
The obtained network weight matrix of DBN was then shifted into the backpropagation 
neural network to enroll the supervised state. In the supervised form, the backpropaga-
tion neural network was evaluated on Levenberg Marquardt and Conjugate Gradient algo-
rithms. The proposed methodology showed 99.68% accuracy, which outperforms prior 
studies. Therefore, this work proposes an efficient system to construct an accurate breast 
cancer classification model. However, a deep belief network needs significant computa-
tional effort on hardware, and thus building a real-life computer-aided diagnosis system 
based on DBN is very challenging.
Zhao et al. (2017) proposed a feature learning technique named discriminant DBN for 
synthetic aperture radar (SAR) image classification. In the study, discriminant features 
were obtained in an unsupervised way by integrating the ensemble-learning technique with 
a DBN. Some SAR image patch subsets were organized and labelled for training weak 
classifiers, then the particular patch was defined by projection vectors. The SAR image 
patch was projected into each weak decision space covered by weak classifiers. The mod-
el’s performance was found to be better than other proposed approaches in this domain. 
However, since fixed neighbors govern the model, the weak classifier’s training strategy’s 
neighbor selection process may cause significant variance in pseudo-labelling. Some adap-
tive strategies can be utilized to choose specific samples for training the weak classifiers.
Another deep belief network, namely convolutional deep belief network (CDBN) is a 
hierarchical generative model for a real size image. RBM and DBN find it challenging to 
scale to complete pictures since they do not take into account the 2D form of the image, 
and therefore, the weights for detecting a specific feature must be acquired separately for 
each position. CDBN addresses this issue by scaling to the size of real images. The key to 
this solution is probabilistic max-pooling, a new strategy for shrinking higher layer rep-
resentations in a probabilistically sound manner. This model stacks convolutional RBMs 
(CRBMs) to construct a multilayer structure similar to DBNs. The CRBM is analogous 
to RBM, except the weight among the hidden and visible layers is distributed over each 
position in the image. By integrating the energy functions of all individual layer pairs, the 
system generates an energy function. After training the given layer, the weights and activa-
tions of the layer are frozen and passed on to the next layer as input.
Assume a CDBN with detection layer ( H ), visible layer ( V ), pooling layer ( P ), and 
another higher detection layer ( H
′ ); H
′ and K
′ has groups, shared weights Γ = {Γ1,1 … Γk,k
 } 
connects pooling unit Pk and detection unit Hl . The energy function can be described as 
(Lee et al. 2009):
Based on CNN structure, Wu et al. (2018) presented a novel technique for pathological 
voice detection, in which the weights of the CNN are pre-trained by a CDBN. The model 
uses statistical approaches to detect the structure of the input data. The performance of 
the proposed technique was compared with the existing techniques using the Saarbrucken 
voice database. Generative models are generally used to develop the deep learning models 
on a small dataset and avoid overfitting. The study reported an accuracy of 68% and 71% 
on the validation set, respectively. This is a slight improvement compared to other exist-
ing methods. The results demonstrated that CNN can be tuned more robustly by applying 
CDBN to initiate the weights and can avoid the overfitting issue. However, the accuracy for 
the testing set decreased, which proves that a more robust system might affect the accuracy.
(31)
E(v, h, p, h) = −
∑
k
v◦(Wk ∗hk) −
∑
k
bk
∑
ij
hk
ij −
∑
k,l
pk◦(Γkl ∗h
l) −
∑
l
b
l
∑
ij
h
l
ij

13549
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
A Gaussian Bernoulli-based CDBN (GCDBN) model is made up of many coevolution-
ary layers that are built on Gaussian Bernoulli restricted Boltzmann machines (GBRBM). 
Therefore, the architecture takes the benefit of GBRBM and convolution neural networks. 
After each convolutional layer, the feature maps are down-sampled using a stochastic 
pooling layer. Using a convolutional neural network and GRBM, the proposed system 
can extract relevant features from a real-sized image using generative convolution filters, 
reducing the amount of connecting weights, and improving the learning of spatial informa-
tion from nearby picture patches. Li et al. (2019a, b, c, d) proposed the GCDBN model 
for image feature extraction, which can reduce the computational cost significantly by 
replacing fully connected weights with the convolutional filter. However, as a limitation of 
this study, only one GCDBN was built with five layers. The recognition accuracy can be 
increased by adding more convolutional and pooling layers in the proposed architecture.
DBNs are also widely used in the analysis of hyperspectral imaging (HSI). However, 
they fail to examine training samples’ prior knowledge, limiting the discriminant capacity 
of retrieved features for classification. MMDBN, a manifold-based multi-DBN was thus 
proposed by Li et al. (2022) in order to acquire deep manifold characteristics of hyper-
spectral imaging. The MMDBN created a hierarchical initiation approach that initializes 
the network based on the data’s hidden local geometric structure. The MMDBN algorithm 
efficiently extracted the deep characteristics from each HSI class. Experimental findings 
on the Salinas, Botswana and Indian Pines datasets reach 90.48%, 97.35%, and 78.25%, 
respectively, demonstrating that MMDBN outperforms some state-of-the-art algorithms in 
classification performance. MMDBN’s classification performance can be further improved 
by designing the combined spectral-spatial deep manifold networks.
4.8  Hybrid neural network
The process of artificial neural network (ANN) learning entails predicting values for a set 
of parameters and an architecture (Guti 2011). After choosing an architecture, supervised, 
unsupervised, or reinforcement learning is often accomplished by repetitively modifying 
the connection weights using a gradient descent-based optimization method. The signifi-
cant challenges with this type of technique are the need for a prior-determined architecture 
for the neural net, its sensitivity to early training conditions, and its local nature. Several 
activations or transfer methods have been used for the hidden layer nodes in hybrid mod-
els. Many studies have suggested hybridizing various basis functions via a single hybrid 
hidden layer or different linked pure layers. A hybrid neural network (HNN) was initially 
introduced to model a fed-batch bioreactor [36]. The hybrid model is comprised of a partial 
first principal model that provides previous information about the process with a neural 
network, which acts as an estimate of unmeasured process arguments.
A genetic algorithm is a type of evolutionary algorithm that uses evolutionary biology 
concepts like inheritance and mutation. A number of operators (selection operator, substi-
tution operator, recombination operator, and mutation operator) are used in genetic algo-
rithms to bring together the current generation’s eligible members to produce new eligi-
ble members. Arabasadi et al. (2017) developed a hybrid technique that combines genetic 
algorithms with neural networks for diagnosing coronary artery disease, using Gini-index, 
principal component analysis, information-gain, and weight-by-SVM for feature selection. 
The initial weights of a neural network were determined with a genetic algorithm, then 
the neural network was trained using training data. The proposed technique implements a 

13550
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
feed-forward topology with one hidden layer in the neural network. The experiment con-
tained 22 inputs and five neurons in a hidden layer to produce an output that indicates 
whether the patient has CAD or not. The suggested approach improved the performance of 
a neural network by around 10% by upgrading its initial weights with a genetic algorithm 
that offers better weights for the neural network. However, several limitations were found 
in this study. Instead of genetic algorithms, other established evolutionary algorithms 
like evolution strategy and Particle-Swarm-Optimization (PSO) could be implemented to 
ensure the validity of the model. Some parameters, such as momentum factor and learning 
rate, could also be optimized.
A novel metaheuristic method was suggested for improving the free parameters of the 
PV generation forecasting engine. Using this metaheuristic optimization approach, the 
shark-smell-optimization (SSO) technique has been enhanced. The metaheuristic algorithm 
incorporates efficient operators to improve its global and local search capabilities. A new 
forecasting methodology was applied to a hybrid forecasting engine that combines a neu-
ral network with a metaheuristic algorithm (Abedinia, Amjady, and Ghadimi 2018). This 
method includes a two-stage feature selection filter that filters out inefficient inputs using 
information-theoretic criteria, such as mutual information and interaction gain. For PV 
generation prediction, a three-stage neural network-based forecasting engine was designed 
and trained via a combination of a metaheuristic algorithm and the Levenberg–Marquardt 
learning method. With the help of this hybrid technique, the neural network-based forecast-
ing engine eliminated underfitting and overfitting problems.
An HNN with Wavelet Transform and Bayesian Optimization was used in a study con-
ducted by (Liu et al. 2022) to predict the copper price for the short-term and long-term. 
Wavelet Transform was applied to the data to reduce noise and remove extraneous informa-
tion whereas the algorithm of Bayesian Optimization was utilized on the searching task’s 
hyperparameter. For training and forecasting copper price, GRU and LSTM were used. 
The results showed that the proposed approaches, GRU or LSTM, can accurately forecast 
the copper price in the short and long term with the mean squared errors of less than 3% 
in both cases. With this HNN, the unnecessary data can be filtered out while the optimal 
hyperparameter set is searched. It is simple and straightforward to use in predicting the 
price of other commodities such as the stock market.
4.8.1  Probabilistic neural network (PNN) and two‑layered restricted Boltzmann (RBM)
A hybrid deep learning model was presented by Ghosh, Ravi, and Ravi (2016) for senti-
ment classification that combines a two-layered restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) and 
probabilistic neural network (PNN). Sentiment classification is a sub-domain of sentiment 
analysis that identifies positive and negative sentiments from a review. In the proposed 
architecture, RBM was used for dimensionality reduction, and PNN classified the senti-
ment. The hybrid model was assessed in five datasets and performed better than other exist-
ing models in this domain. The technique achieved a sensitivity of 92.7%,93.3%, 93.1%, 
94.9%, and 93.2% for a book dataset, movie dataset, electronics, and kitchen appliance 
dataset, respectively. The study revealed that the model does not rely on external resources, 
such as sentiment dictionaries, reducing the system’s complexity. It also does not perform 
POS tagging, which, although is typically needed in this domain, reduces the system’s 
time complexity. In future works, the model should be evaluated with more experiments to 
ensure its validity.

13551
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
4.8.2  Dynamic artificial neural network
In the field of deep learning, dynamic neural networks (DNNs) are an emerging technique 
that can outperform traditional static models in terms of accuracy, adaptiveness, and compu-
tational complexity (Han et al. 2021). Static models have limited parameters and computa-
tional graphs at the inference stage, whereas DNN architecture and parameters are flexible 
to different inputs. The outputs of static models are computed based on their link with feed-
forward inputs, as there is no feedback. However, the outputs of dynamic neural networks are 
determined by the present and previous values of inputs, outputs, and the network architec-
ture (Abbas Ali Abounoori Esmaeil Naderi Nadiya Gandali Alikhani Hanieh Mohammadali 
2016). DNNs can be divided into three types (Tavarone et al 2018): (i) instance-wise dynamic 
models that process each instance individually using data-dependent structures or parameters, 
(ii) spatial-wise dynamic models that perform adaptive computing on image data at various 
spatial locations, and (iii) temporal-wise dynamic models that accomplish adaptive inference 
for sequential data, such as movies and texts along the temporal dimension. Instance-wise and 
spatial-wise methods are used specifically in image recognition, whereas temporal-wise mod-
els show emerging improvements in text and audio data. These three types can be combined 
simultaneously for video-related research domains (Li et al. 2017a, b; Niklaus et al. 2017).
Godarzi et al. (2014) improved an artificial neural network (ANN), specifically named a 
nonlinear autoregressive model with eXogenous input (NARX), to predict oil prices by devel-
oping a dynamic neural network. For the validation and improvements of results, the method-
ology followed three stages: ANN static, time series, and NARX. For identifying the signifi-
cant factors that affect the oil price, a time series model was developed in the first stage. Then, 
a static ANN model was built to verify the acquired data from the first stage to ensure the opti-
mal performance of the NARX model. In the last phase, the NARX model was implemented 
for the prediction. The methodology was found to be a novel approach for oil price prediction 
and can be used for other domains like predicting coal or natural gas price.
4.9  Generative adversarial networks
Goodfellow et al. (2014) was the pioneer of adversarial training for image generation, whereby 
training is formulated as a minimax adversarial game and a discriminator is used to distin-
guish fake data from real samples. The generator works by generating fake samples based 
on a probabilistic model with the given data. Then, a classification model is applied to verify 
whether the generated samples belong to the expected class. The generator aims to fool the 
discriminator, whereas the discriminator works to detect the false samples generated by the 
generator. Generative models have been used in a wide range of research domains and have 
undergone numerous advances since their introduction (Bau et al. 2019; Odena et al. 2017; 
Brock et al. 2019; Ledig et al. 2017; Miyato et al. 2018; Karras et al. 2018). In every adversar-
ial approach, there are two models working simultaneously: (i) the generative model acquires 
the data distribution, and (ii) the discriminative model measures the probability of sample 
point whether it is coming from the training samples. Generative adversarial networks (GAN) 
learning concerns finding the optimal parameters 휃∗
G for a generator function G(Z;휃G
) by a 
minimax game. This relation can be represented by the following expressions (32–35), as sug-
gested by Goodfellow et al. (2014):
(32)
휃∗
G = 휃G
argmin
휃D
maxf(휃G, 휃D
)

13552
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
where f is determined by:
For ensuring maximum loss in the above equation, the optimal discriminator D∗(x) is 
a known smooth function for the generator probability pG(x) , as described in (Goodfel-
low et al. 2014). The smooth function can be formulated as:
GAN has been in a wide range of applications since its emergence. Generative 
approaches are being applied to validate machine learning models’ robustness and to 
generate new data for rare examples and for image-to-image translation (Park et  al. 
2019; Taigman et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2018), image super-resolution (Ledig et al. 2017; 
Sønderby et al. 2017), synthesis training (Brock et al. 2019; Tang et al. 2019), text-to-
image synthesis (Hong et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2017a, b, c), and many more. However, 
the training of generative models is very sensitive to the selected hyperparameters. New 
network architectures have been introduced on a regular basis to this research paradigm 
in order to maintain training stability.
4.9.1  Unrolled generative adversarial networks
To solve the problems of mode collapse, instability of GANs network training with 
complex recurrent generators, and increasing diversity, Pfau (2017) introduced a method 
for reducing complexity in GANs training. The proposed algorithm defines the genera-
tor’s objective in order to achieve an unrolled optimization of the discriminator. The 
authors argued to use a local optimum of the discriminator parameters 휃∗
D(as presented 
in Eq. 34) to be demonstrated as a fixed point, which comes from an iterative optimiza-
tion procedure. Pfau (2017) developed the complex recurrent generators increasing the 
diversity and scope of the data distribution. To explain the unrolled GAN, the authors 
used the discriminator parameter 휃∗
D to express the fixed mark of an iterative optimiza-
tion process. The expression continues in the following order (15–17):
where 휂k represents the learning rate scheduler. Equation  (37) is the full batch steepest 
gradient ascent equation, and Eqs. (36) and (38) supplement the expression to explain the 
(33)
= 휃G
argminf(휃G, 휃∗
D(휃G))
(34)
휃∗
D
(휃G
) = 휃G
argmaxf(휃G, 휃D
)
(35)
f(휃G, 휃D
) = 피x∼pdata
[log (D( x;휃D
))] + 피Z∼N(0,1)
[log(1 −D(G(Z;휃G
);휃D))]
(36)
D∗(x) =
pdata(x)
pdata(x) + pG(x)
(37)
휃0
D = 휃D
(38)
= 휃k
D + 휂k df(휃G, 휃k
D)
d휃K
D
(39)
휃∗
D
(휃G
) = lim
k→∞휃k
D

13553
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
iterative optimization process. This approach is different from that presented in (Good-
fellow et al. 2014), which indicates that the generator requires that the discriminator be 
updated via several steps to run every update step for the generator. Some drawbacks of 
this algorithm include high computational cost and cost for each training period as well as 
increased complexity with respect to the number of steps.
4.9.2  Style‑based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks
Motivated by the style-transfer model presented in (Huang and Belongie 2017), an alterna-
tive generator architecture was proposed in (Karras et al. 2019) for GANs. The presented 
generator improved the state-of-the-art work with regard to traditional distribution matri-
ces, which continued towards finding better interpolation properties and latent factors vari-
ation. The authors stated that compared to the traditional generators (Karras et al. 2018) 
that are used to feed the latent code within the input layer, their architecture (Karras et al. 
2019) allows input to be mapped through an intermediate space. This latent space then 
allows control of the generator through the adaptive instance normalization or AdaIN 
(Dumoulin et al. 2018, 2017; Ghiasi et al. 2017; Huang and Belongie 2017) within every 
convolutional layer. The proposed automated linear separability and perceptual path met-
rics quantified the aspects needed for the generator.
The affine transformations learned from the 8-layer MLP was specialized by a parame-
ter w to styles y, where y = (ys, yb), which led to AdaIN (Dumoulin et al. 2018, 2017; Ghiasi 
et al. 2017; Huang and Belongie 2017). Followed by the synthesis network g of each con-
volution layer, AdaIN function performs the computation as follows:
where each feature map xi is normalized individually, the feature matrix is scaled, and bias 
is added by applying the respective scalar components from the style y . Karras et al. (2019) 
redesigned the generator architecture, which exposed new approaches for image synthesis 
tasks. It is clear from the obtained results that style-based generators outperform the tradi-
tional GAN generators.
4.9.3  Multi‑Level generative models for partial label learning (MGPLL) 
with non‑random label noise
The presented MGPLL method (Yan and Guo 2020) learns a problem through a feature 
level and label level generator. It follows a bidirectional mapping of data points and label 
vectors. A noise label generation is also used while developing the network to form non-
random noise and to execute label denoising. The model architecture has a multi-class pre-
dictor to locate the training samples to denoise label vectors. Afterwards, a conditional 
feature generator is applied to perform the inverse mapping. Yan and Guo (2020) adopted 
adversarial loss from Wasserstein Generative Adversarial Network (WGAN) to formulate 
their learning. They claimed their model to be the pioneering work that exploited multi-
level generative architecture models. Moreover, the network was modelled with non-ran-
dom noise labels in order to learn the partial label (Zeng et al. 2013). The noise label gen-
erator was responsible for exploiting non-random characteristics of noise labels, whereas 
(40)
AdaIN (xi, y) = ys,i
xi −휇
(
xi
)
휎(xi
)
+ yb,i

13554
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
the data feature generator was accountable for executing the conditioning upon the data 
samples based on the particular ground data. Later, the prediction model performed inverse 
mapping between these labels and features. The GAN architecture was designed particu-
larly for label learning partially. The conditional label level generator pointed to the advent 
of the label-dependent non-random noise, whereas the feature level generator was used to 
produce data from the denoised label vectors. As a partial label learning generative archi-
tecture, the authors tested the model against both synthetic PL and real-world (FG-NET, 
Lost, MSRCv2, Birdsong, Yahoo! News) datasets, where they achieved satisfactory state-
of-the-art performance.
4.9.4  Dual adversarial co‑learning for multi‑domain text classification
Multi-domain sentiment classification was performed by Wu and Guo (2020) through the 
novel dual adversarial co-learning method. The authors explored a number of real-world 
sentiment analysis tasks and demonstrated how multi-domain text classification (MDTC) 
addresses the problem of a model constructed for one domain failing when tested on 
another domain. The methodology focuses on domain-invariant and domain-specific fea-
tures by shared-private networks, and two classifiers were trained to extract features. Both 
the classifiers and feature extractors were designed to work in an adversarial manner, which 
resulted in the basis of prediction discrepancy on unlabeled data. A multinomial multi-
domain adversarial discriminator was developed to enhance the effectiveness of feature 
extraction of the domain invariant features. This technique separates the domain-specific 
features from the domain invariant features. The presented methodology is novel in such a 
way that the network tries to align data across domains within the extracted feature space 
and labelled and unlabeled data within each domain. This technique also contributes to 
avoiding overfitting the limited labelled data.
According to Wu and Guo (2020), if each of the M domains has a limited number of 
labelled instances, then Lm = {(xi, yi)}lm
i=1 and unlabeled instances Um = {(xi)}um
i=1 . In the 
study, the challenge was to make use of all available resources of the M domains. The 
authors reported that this helped to improve the multi-domain classification performance. 
They furthermore introduced separation regularizer (Bousmalis et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2016) 
to ensure that domain-specific extractors remained distinct from the extractors, which are 
domain-invariant. The introduced methodology was designed to pull features from domain 
invariant and domain-specific literature. The shared private network was used to pass 
the extracted features from the texts, followed by two classifiers that work together in an 
adversarial fashion. A multinomial multi-domain discriminator was applied to increase 
the effectiveness of domain-invariant feature extraction. The authors tested this model on 
two MDTC benchmark datasets and for unsupervised domain adaptability. The generative 
model positions data with respect to extracted feature space and distinguishes labelled and 
unlabeled data between each domain. However, the model should be more robust to avoid 
overfitting for limited data samples.
4.9.5  Capsule neural network
A capsule neural network (CapsNet) was first introduced by Sabour et al. (2017) to address 
a few drawbacks of the convolutional neural network (CNN). For instance, the sub-sam-
pling layers involved in CNN provide less translation invariance. Also, CNN loses the 

13555
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
information about location and position estimation and is more prone to overfitting train-
ing data for these reasons. It learns the features without understanding the spatial infor-
mation. Thus, most of the CNN models are not effective to avoid misclassification. Cap-
sNet addresses these issues by avoiding the sub-sampling layers, which helps the model to 
maintain the spatial and pose information. The idea of capsules was introduced by Hinton 
et al. (2011). CapsNets use these “capsule” neural units to encode the relationship between 
features and location with capsules as well as transformation matrices. Since this approach 
acquires translation equivariance, CapsNets are more powerful than CNN for samples with 
misled spatial and pose information.
The dynamic routing algorithm (Sabour et al. 2017) also helps CapsNets to overcome 
the inability of features to acquire spatial information and scarcity of rotational invariance. 
CapsNets also encode part-whole relationships like orientations, brightness, and scales 
among different entities that are objects’ features or feature parts. They use shallow CNN 
to acquire spatial information. However, CapsNets perform poorly on classification tasks 
for missing semantic information. For shallow convolutional architecture, a high number of 
convolutional kernels are used to provide the network with a broad receptive field, but this 
approach is also prone to overfitting. Since their inception, CapsNets has been employed 
in various researches, including cancer and tumor cell detection (Mobiny and Van Nguyen 
2018; Afshar et al. 2018), generative adversarial network (Jaiswal et al. 2019), monitor-
ing machine health (Zhu et al. 2019), object height classification (Popperli et al. 2019), 
rice image recognition (Li et al. 2019a, b, c, d), protein translational analysis (Wang et al. 
2019), hyperspectral images (Landgrebe 2002), and many more.
Hyperspectral images are used for agriculture (Gevaert et al. 2015), land coverage clas-
sification (Yan et al. 2015), vegetation and water resource studies (Govender et al. 2007), 
scene classification (Hu et al. 2015), and other environmental monitoring related activities. 
Deng et al. (2018) presented two-layered CapsNet, which was trained on less training sam-
ples than Hyperspectral Image (HSI) classification. The work was motivated by the sim-
plicity and comparability of shallower deep networks. The model was trained on two real-
life HSI data: PaviaU (PU) and Salins A. Upon the observation, CapsNet gave an overall 
accuracy of 94% and an average accuracy of 95.90% on the PU dataset, whereas CNN had 
93.45% and 95.63% accuracy, respectively. The study also made a comparison among Ran-
dom Forests, Support Vector Machines, and CNN with CapsNet in terms of network archi-
tecture. The authors stated that traditional deep learning-based models would not be suit-
able for HSI datasets (Zhong et al. 2018) and that CNN could achieve higher performance 
with more training samples, but for limited training data, CapsNet worked better. Figure 12 
shows the native logic for Hyperspectral Image (HSI) classification in its conceptual form.
CapsNet was also used in another HSI study (Jiang et al. 2020), in which a new model 
called Conv-Caps was designed by integrating CNN and a capsule network with Markov 
Random Fields (MRF) for possessing spectral as well as spatial information. With MRF, 
the study used graph cut expansion for more efficient classification performance. A CNN-
based feature extractor was also used in the network design. In the model, the layer was 
followed by a feature map in order to obtain a probability map. In the last stage, MRF 
was used to find subdivision labels. This method takes proper advantage of the spectral 
and spatial information that hyperspectral images provide. The model was evaluated with 
a Bayesian framework perspective and produced satisfactory results. To make capsule net-
works more robust, various research approaches have been introduced over time, a few of 
which are presented below.

13556
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
4.9.6  Multi‑lane capsule network
Multi-Lane Capsule Network (MLCN) was introduced by Do Rosario et  al. (2019) to 
address the limitation of traditional Capsule Networks. The algorithm was tested on the 
reputed FashionMNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. When compared to traditional CapsNet 
architectures, the authors achieved satisfactory outcomes with their novel lane proposals. 
The experimental baseline was similar to the original configuration employed in (Sabour 
et al. 2017). According to the findings of do Rosario et al. (2021), MLCN was found to be 
two times more efficient, on average, than the typical capsule network. The authors intro-
duced the problem of load balancing that occurs when distributing heterogeneous lanes 
within both homogeneous and heterogeneous accelerators. They addressed this issue with 
a greedy approach, which was argued to be 50% more efficient than the brute force naive 
approach. Furthermore, the load balancing issue was handled by the neural architecture 
search created by their MLCN models, which matched device memory.
Chang and Liu (2020) improved the MLCN algorithm by addressing the issue of cap-
sule networks creating undesirable priorities in the background, which usually results in 
poor performance if the background contains too much variance. The authors proposed a 
newly configured multi-lane capsule network architecture with a strict-squash (MLSCN) 
function for image classification with a complex background to solve this issue. The novel 
architecture replaced the traditional squash function and optimized the dropout function 
d. The strict-squash algorithm was proposed to prevent the vulnerability of dynamic rout-
ing while also limiting the uselessness of the capsule initialization features. For meaning-
ful feature extraction, the authors also proposed a coherent dynamic weighting assignment 
strategy in the multi-lane module. By combining these two methods, the authors recom-
mended MLSCN on the basis of MLCN. The research work focused on addressing the 
Fig. 12   HSI classification overview presented in (Deng et al. 2018)

13557
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
issue of misclassification of images with complex backgrounds. This issue can be repre-
sented with the input formalized as below (Chang and Liu 2020):
where gij is the input pixel value in location ( i, j ). After the convolutional network pro-
cesses, the feature map can be obtained using:
where  ̂gij is the output pixel value in the location ( i, j ); and Fi×j
out is the capsule layer input, 
which is responsible to finish the classification step. Following this step, the output layer 
can be defined as:
where pi is the probability for each category. Most of the regions of an input image have 
a background as the content or information; however, this information is useless as it is 
the background of the image. Yet, the capsule network provides redundant attention to the 
information. As a result, it was identified as the fundamental cause of poor performance in 
traditional capsule networks. This problem was solved using the aforementioned network 
combined with the original capsule network along with multi-lane architectures. Chang 
and Liu (2020) improved their work by making three major contributions: the strict-squash 
function, lanes filter, and drop-circuit.
If ui is activation vector of the capsule i of the previous layer, Vj|i is the inclination 
of the capsule i moving to be clustered in capsule j . The relation between these two 
parameters can be formalized by the following equation (Chang and Liu 2020):
The summation of coupling coefficients between i and the other previous capsules 
equals 1, which was achieved by a ‘routing SoftMax’ in which the initial logits bij are 
prior probabilities and the capsule i must be coupled with capsule j. Equations (44)-(47) 
are used to perform the necessary computations for the model architecture (Chang and 
Liu 2020).
The squash function is interpreted as a normalization step upon the weighted sum 
from the previous layers and is presented as:
(41)
Gi×j
in = ((g11, ..., g1j), (g21, ..., g2j), ..., (gi1, ..., gij))
(42)
Fi×j
out = ((̂g11, ..., ̂g1j), (̂g21, ..., ̂g2j), ..., (̂gi1, ..., ̂gij))
P = {p1, p2, ...pj}
(43)
Vj|i = wj|i × ui
(44)
cij =
exp

bij

∑
k bik
(45)
sj =
∑
i
(cj|i × vj|i)
(46)
uj = Squash
(
Sj
)
=
||||Sj||| |
2
1 + ||||Sj||| |
2
Sj
||||Sj||| |

13558
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Finally, to compute cj|i and update ui or vj|i , the following equation is used, where uj is 
the result of the first iteration:
Based on the best classification performance on four benchmark image classification 
datasets, Chang and Liu (2020) found that, in comparison with a single input type, mul-
tiple input types can help the multi-lane architecture to achieve better results. One short-
coming of their research was the drop-circuit, which could not recognize the combined 
adapted lanes. Consequently, the dropout algorithm would need further research as it 
establishes randomness in the experimental results.
4.9.7  Complex‑valued capsule network (Cv‑CapsNet)
To adjust complex datasets, He et  al. (2019) focuses on the extraction of multi-scale, 
complex-valued, and high-level features. Moreover, they introduced an algorithm with a 
restricted encoding unit of the complex-valued capsule and dense network, with a generali-
zation of the dynamic routing in the complex-valued realm. The generalized dynamic rout-
ing algorithm was used to fuse the real- and imaginary values of complex-valued primary 
capsules. The parameters trained for complex-valued routing were lowered when compared 
to real-valued routing of the same dimensional capsules. He et al. (2019) also introduced 
Cv-CapsNet +  + as an extended framework utilizing a 3-level Cv-CapsNet model. It was 
designed for multi-scale high-level complex-value feature extraction and merging the low-
level capsules information that represents the features of instantiation. In addition, Trabelsi 
et al. (2018) presented a method to simulate complex and real-valued convolution, which 
was demonstrated for a complex-valued filter matrix W = (A + iB) and a complex-valued 
vector h = (x + iy) using the following computation:
Real-valued matrices were also presented to introduce the real and imaginary parts in 
Eq. (49)
Here, the real and the imaginary components of the output convolutions are two sepa-
rate parts. Moreover, the real and the imaginary part for all complex-valued convolutions 
are detached from each other but concatenated with respect to the real and complex parts 
for the following complex-part layer. He et al. (2019) argued that this modelling guaran-
tees the sustainability of the complex-valued convolutions and ensures the complex-valued 
encoding. Thus, the architecture was employed to fetch multi-scale features, including orig-
inal, semantic, and structure features. In the model, CReLU (complex-valued) (Trabelsi 
et al. 2018) was chosen as the activation function. The authors implemented the model 
on CIFAR10 Fashion and MNIST datasets. The model performed well by achieving fewer 
trainable parameters with a smaller number of iterations. The generalized dynamic routing 
algorithm helped to combine the real values with the imaginary values, greatly reducing 
the number of trainable parameters for the same dimensional complex routing model as 
compared to the real-valued routing models. However, they could not reduce the computa-
tional complexity for training the model.
(47)
bj|i = bj|i + vj|i × uj
(48)
W ∗h = (A + iB) ∗(x + iy)
(49)
[
ℜ(W ∗h)
ℑ(W ∗h)
]
=
[
A −B
B A
]
∗
[
x
y
]

13559
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
4.9.8  Multi‑scale CapsNet
A novel variation of capsule networks was introduced by Xiang et al. (2018), focusing on 
computational efficacy and representation capacity. In the leading stage of the presented 
multi-scale architecture, information was extracted following the multi-scale information 
extraction method. However, on the second stage hierarchy, the features were encoded into 
multi-dimensional capsules. An improved drop-out was also introduced in the research 
work to enhance the robustness of the capsule network. The authors considered the hier-
archical features of the dataset and exploited multi-dimensional capsules for encoding 
those features. The multi-scale capsule encoding consists of two stages, where the first 
stage obtains the semantic and structural information through multi-scale feature acqui-
sition. Another top branch of the two layers retrieved the semantic information from the 
data as well. The foremost hierarchy of the middle branch of the architecture performed 
the medium-level feature extraction process. The last branch took on the actual original 
features that were obtained without trainable parameters. In the second stage of the archi-
tecture, feature hierarchies were encoded into multi-dimensional capsules. The final branch 
layer was encoded to high-level features of 12D, medium level features of 8D and low-level 
features of 4D. The following weight matrices were used to compute the predicted vectors 
(Xiang et al. 2018):
Equation (50) is used as the objective function of the multi-category capsule network 
(Xiang et al. 2018):
The length of a capsule portrays the probability of the entity, where the length is argued 
to be compressed to [0,1]. Equation  (51) represents that the length can be compressed 
without changing its direction and helps in translating the length as the capsule detects the 
actual probability of a given data feature:
where vj represents the capsule output of the j-th unit; and sj is the total input. Dynamic 
routing was used as a form of the information selection method, which ensures that the 
outputs of the children capsules are sent to their respective parent capsules (Xiang et al. 
2018). On the other side, the routing coefficients are adjusted by the update() function 
shown below:
̂u1
j|i = Wiju1
i
̂u2
j|i = Viju2
i
̂u3
j|i = Uiju3
i
̂u = concat(̂u1, ̂u2, ̂u3)
(50)
LM =
J
j=1
Tj푚푎푥0, m+ −‖Vj‖2 + 휆1 −Tj
max(0, ‖Vj‖ −m−)2
(51)
vj =
‖sj‖2
1 + ‖sj‖2
sj
‖sj‖

13560
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
The authors achieved state-of-the-art performance of the model on FashionMNIST and 
CIFAR10 datasets. MS-CapsNet was also used in the Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) 
image detection task (Xiang et al. 2018). Gao et al. (2021) addressed the issue of noise 
detection and deformation sensing in traditional CNN architectures with their implemented 
multiscale capsule network for feature extraction in SAR image pixels. The multiscale 
module exploited spatial information from the image features. The authors also applied an 
adaptive fusion convolution module to address the issue of noise detection and tested the 
model’s architecture on three real-life SAR datasets.
4.9.9  Attention mechanism
The attention mechanism is described as a mapping mechanism to query and set a key-
value pair to the output. In the output, all of the elements in values, keys, query, and out-
put are vectors. The output values are produced as a weighted sum of the input values, 
and the weight values are assigned using a compatibility function. The query with respect 
to the associated key generates this compatibility function. Self-attention, also known as 
intra-attention, is such an attention-based mechanism that relates various positions of a unit 
sequence to compute the representation of that sequence input. The self-attention algorithm 
has been used for reading comprehension (Cheng et al. 2016), textual entailment (Paulus 
et al. 2018), summarization (Parikh et al. 2016), task-dependent sentence representation 
(Lin et al. 2017), and in many other fields.
Vaswani (2017) introduced the transformer-based attention mechanism for sequence 
transduction, replacing the recurrent units to employ in encoder-decoder network archi-
tectures for multi-headed self-attention units. The transformer was trained significantly 
for translation tasks and was found to be faster than the recurrent and convolutional-based 
architectures. The model was applied to 2014 WMT English-to-German and 2014 WMT 
English-to-French machine translation work. The encoder was used to map and input 
sequence for symbol representations and to generate an output sequence given the con-
tinuous representation. The transformer was employed to follow the overall architecture 
with the help of self-attention as well as the point-wise fully connected layers within the 
encoder-decoder network architecture.
Vaswani (2017) proposed a self-attention algorithm to perform two machine translation 
work and achieved satisfactory and parallelizable results. The model obtained a 28.4 score 
on BLEU for the 2014 WMT English-German machine translation task and a 41.8 score 
on the 2014 WMT English-French machine translation work. The model was generalized 
through the transformer-based attention mechanism on words, which proved to be advanta-
geous over previous researches (Gehring et al. 2017; Kaiser and Sutskever 2016). It was 
successfully implemented to the English constituency parsing task with both large and lim-
ited training samples. However, the authors did not evaluate this model for image, audio, 
and video data.
bi+1 = bi + ̂uj ⋅uj
ci+1 = softmax(bi+1)

13561
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
4.9.10  Deep Boltzmann machines
Deep Boltzmann Machine (DBM) (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2014), a deep neu-
ral network architecture, is trained in a semi-supervised approach. The architecture of 
DBM allows the network to acquire knowledge about complex feature-based relation-
ships. DBMs have a wide range of applications like facial expression recognition (He 
et al. 2013), text recognition (Srivastava and Salakhutdinov 2014), person identification 
from audio-visual data (Alam et al. 2017), 3D model recognition (Leng et al. 2015), and 
many more. DBM consists of units that are respective to input data. The hidden units in 
a DBM consist of symmetrical-coupled stochastic binary units. Different layers of the 
DBM architecture hold the binary hidden units. Coupling is enabled in consecutive two 
layers in a top-down and bottom-up approach. Such structure allows DBM to understand 
complicated internal representations of input data.
4.9.11  Deep‑FS: A feature selection algorithm for deep Boltzmann machines
A deep feature selection algorithm was presented by Taherkhani et al. (2018), which 
was argued to have the ability to remove unwanted features from extensively large data-
sets. Considering that a feature selection algorithm can help improve the performance of 
a machine learning model significantly, this algorithm was developed for DBM domain 
work. The algorithm was used by a Deep Boltzmann Machine and gathered the data 
distribution in a network. Such an algorithm is capable of embedding feature selection 
within a Restricted Boltzmann Machine, as presented in Fig. 13.
Considering an RBM of D binary units, if V is a vector containing states of the D 
units, there is the set V ∈ {0,1}D and a vector h, which contains states of the hidden 
units. If an RBM has F hidden neurons, the F dimensional hidden variables are h ∈ 
{0,1}F. Taherkhani et al. (2018) expressed the joint configuration of V and h as defined 
in the following Eq. (52):
(52)
E(퐕, h) = −
D
∑
i=1
F
∑
j=1
Wijvihj −
D
∑
i=1
bivi −
F
∑
j=1
ajhj
Fig. 13   Representation of a restricted Boltzmann machine comprised of two layers of hidden and visible 
neurons. In the network, there are D visible and F hidden neural units (Taherkhani et al. 2018)

13562
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
where Wij is the weight connecting the ith visible component vi and the jth hidden compo-
nent hj ; and bi and aj are the biases connecting to the ith visible units and the jth hidden 
units, respectively. An energy function was employed by Taherkhani et al. (2018) for the 
joint distribution of the visible and hidden variables, which assignment is demonstrated in 
Eq. (53):
where Z is a partition function, also known as the normalizing term. The function Z is 
defined below:
The overall sum was calculated for all pairs (V,h). If V is a D dimensional vector and h 
is an F dimensional binary vector, there are ­2D+F different pairs of (V,h) that are possible. 
Additionally, the visible units are considered to be binary. Moreover, the conditional prob-
abilities of P(h|V)  and P(V|h) were calculated in (Taherkhani et al. 2018) by the following 
equations:
Furthermore, these conditional probabilities can be extended as:
Based on the results of Taherkhani et al. (2018), the novel feature selection algorithm 
was designed to handle feature selection from large datasets. The algorithm was embedded 
into DBM classifiers, which helped to handle a reduced quantity of input features with less 
learning errors from large datasets. The algorithm performed well because of its ability to 
remove irrelevant features from large data. The results demonstrated that more than 45% 
of the features can be reduced from the FashionMNIST dataset, which helped to reduce 
the network error from 0.97 to 0.90%. In addition, the time of execution was reduced by 
more than 5.5% for classification tasks. The model was tested on GISETTE, PANCAN, 
and MADELON datasets and showed to be highly effective for all datasets. Specifi-
cally, it reduced the input features by 81% for GISETTE, 77% for PANCAN, and 57% for 
MADELON datasets.
(53)
P(퐕, h) = 1
Zexp(−E(퐕, h))
(54)
Z =
∑
V
∑
h
exp(−E(퐕, h))
(55)
P(h|V) =
F
∏
j=1
p(hj|V)
(56)
P(V|h) =
D
∏
i=1
p(vi|h)
(57)
p(hj = 1|퐕) = g(
D
∑
i=1
Wijvi + aj)
(58)
p(vi = 1|퐡) = g(
F
∑
j=1
Wijhj + bi)

13563
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
4.9.12  Restricted Boltzmann machine
Restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) is a variant of the Boltzmann Machine, contain-
ing a stochastic neural network (generally) for unsupervised learning (Guo et al. 2016). 
Unlike other Boltzmann machines, RBMs have a defining trait of providing a bipartite 
graph for its visible and hidden layers, enabling the implementation of a gradient-based 
contrastive divergence algorithm for training. Developed RBM models use noisy recti-
fied units (linear) to store data on intensities. To create learning modules, RBMs can 
be efficiently applied to compose deep networking models, such as Deep Energy Mod-
els (DBNs), Deep Boltzmann Machines (DBMs), and Deep Belief Networks (DBNs). 
Generally, RBMs are not a popular choice for computer vision-based applications; how-
ever, in recent times, a few RBM models have been structured to perform vision tasks. 
For example, Shape Boltzmann Machine, proposed by Eslami et al. (2014), can learn 
to apply the probability distribution method on object shapes to model binary shape 
images.
Another prominent use of RBMs, suggested by Kae et al. (2013), is in combination 
with CRF to model local and global structures for face segmentation with improved 
performance in face labelling. Furthermore, another novel method based on DBN archi-
tecture and mean-covariance RBM was employed for phone recognition. Various frame-
works and models for RBMs have been intensively studied and developed, each having 
its own sets of merits and demerits. Although most RBMs that are utilized for vision 
tasks exhibit remarkable capability in performing image and object classification/iden-
tifying tasks, such models must be a hybrid of one or more networks to be efficient. 
As of yet, standard RBMs alone are not adopted for memory associative or computer 
vision-based tasks and are usually in compliance with more than one other deep learn-
ing framework.
4.9.13  Sequence classification restricted Boltzmann machines with gated units
The intractability of learning and inference in RBM was investigated by Tran et  al. 
(2020) considering the exponential complexity of the gradient computation while 
maximizing the log-likelihoods. The algorithm optimized a conditional probability 
distribution in place of a joint probability distribution for sequence classification. The 
authors also introduced gated-Sequence Classification Restricted Boltzmann Machine 
(gSCRBM), in which an information processing gate is integrated alongside long short-
term memory (LSTM) networks. The network architecture was evaluated in an optical 
character recognition (OCR) task and for multi-resident activity recognition in smart 
homes. It was argued that gSCRBM requires much fewer parameters compared to other 
recurrent architectures with memory gates. The SCRBM was constructed by the roll-
ing RBMs along with the class label over the time of training. The network architecture 
interpreted the probability distribution with the following equation:
where 퐱1∶T , 퐡1∶T are the time series corresponding to the visible and hidden states; y1∶T is a 
sequence of class labels; and 퐡0 are the hidden unit biases.
(59)
p(y1∶T, x1∶T, h1∶T) =
T
∏
t=1
p(yt, xt, ht|ht−1)

13564
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
The model faced difficulty with an intractable inference, as explained in (Sutskever and 
Hinton 2007). The authors also suggested that this problem could be solved through the 
addition of recurrent units, as done for RTRBM (Sutskever et al. 2009). For RTRBM, the 
class labels were excluded, while in the case of SCRBMs, local distribution at time t was 
p(yt, 퐱t, 퐡t|퐡t−1) . This was replaced by the expression presented in Eq. (60):
where ̂퐡t−1 is the expected values vector for the hidden units at time t-1 and is calculated as:
The local energy function is given by:
The algorithm was designed to achieve better learning and dynamic interference in 
sequence classification. For long-term information retrieval, the algorithm followed the 
structure of rolling RBMs, and gated units (gSCRBM) were introduced. The gSCRBM 
performed better in terms of parameters because it was trained with fewer parameters 
than traditional LSTMs and GRUs. The model was evaluated to prove its superior perfor-
mance over advanced LSTM structures (Yu et al. 2019), Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM), 
and Stacked LSTM (StackedLSTM) (Graves and Schmidhuber 2005). It was found that 
SCRBM outperformed the other models in terms of generalization. Although GRUs and 
LSTMs generated better results in a few circumstances, the authors explained that those 
architectures demand more sophisticated structures, longer processing time, and more hid-
den units. SCRBM was found to be more compact with fewer parameters but with the same 
amount of neurons as another RNN network containing the same hyperparameters. How-
ever, the SCRBM was not able to capture long-term information, which led to a vanishing 
gradient or exploding gradient problem. This issue was later resolved by the gated unit 
(gSCRBM).
4.10  Stacked denoising autoencoders
4.11  Autoencoders
Autoencoder neural networks were designed for unsupervised learning by applying a back-
propagation algorithm of the target values for equalizing the inputs. The autoencoder learns 
the approximation between the output and identity function when the input is compared to 
the output. When the autoencoder discovers the features or data structure, the hidden units 
are subjected to a sparsity constraint. Autoencoder models require knowledge of the geom-
etry of the data to properly understand the input data. Constraining the node in the hidden 
layer allows autoencoders to learn the low-dimensional representation of the model.
(60)
p(yt, 퐱t, 퐡t
̂퐡t−1
=
exp(−E𝜃(yt, 퐱t, 퐡t;̂퐡t−1)
∑
yt,퐱t,퐡texp(−E𝜃(y
, 퐱
, 퐡
;̂퐡t−1)
(61)
̂퐡t−1 = 피[퐇t−1|퐱1∶t−1, y1∶t−1]
(62)
E𝜃
(
y
, 퐱
, 퐡
;̂퐡t−1)
= −
[(퐱t)⊤퐖xh + 퐮⊤
yt +
(
̂퐡t−1)⊤
퐖hh
]
퐡t −퐚⊤퐱t −byt −퐜⊤퐡t

13565
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
4.11.1  Autoencoders for Words
Liou et al. (2014) presented the Elman network for encoding each word of a different vec-
tor in semantic space, which is related to corresponding entropy coding (Elman 1990, 
1998) and is operated on an encoder for training. The authors utilized the Elman network 
as a super Turing machine for powerful computation work (Siegelmann 1995). Figure 14 
illustrates the Elman network employed by a simple recurrent network, which was designed 
for semantic word categorization. However, because it could not handle the encoding task, 
the Elman network was redesigned in order to encode the words into the semantic space 
Fig. 14   Representation of Elman network (Liou et al. 2014)
Fig. 15   Schematic representation of deep energy model (Samaniego et al. 2020)

13566
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
domain. The achieved codes were utilized in indexing, ranking, and categorizing literary 
tasks.
Liou et al. (2014) encoded each word for individual vectors while training. The ward 
was bound with corresponding entropy coding in semantic space. The training methodol-
ogy also included ranking, indexing and categorizing literacy steps from the training data. 
The model was trained on the basis of acquired datasets from two Chinese novels: Romance 
of the Three Kingdom and Dream of the Red Chamber. However, they still needed to inves-
tigate whether a low error rate could be achieved without the renewed coding units and the 
same network architecture.
4.11.2  Deep energy models
The deep energy model (DEM) is a deep learning training technique for deep networks and 
architects based on the restrictive Boltzmann machine learning methodology (I. Goodfel-
low et al. 2016; Guo et al. 2016). It includes a feed-forward neural network that transforms 
data inputs deterministically rather than modelling the output via a layer of stochastic hid-
den units (perceptron/neuron), as shown in Fig. 15. The feedforward network (g휃) acts on 
the universal approximation theorem in order to approximate a continuous function, map-
ping corresponding inputs and outputs (Nguyen-Thanh et al. 2020).
Unlike deep belief networks and deep Boltzmann machines that have multiple stochas-
tic hidden layers, DEM consists of a single stochastic hidden layer (h), which allows effi-
cient inference and simultaneous training of all the layers within the network (Ngiam et al. 
2011). Hopfield energy models were one of the earlier developed DEMs that, in their sim-
plistic nature, allow closed-form modelling (Bartunov et al. 2019). However, the Hopfield 
model has significant demerits and is unable to work with the quadratic dimensionality of 
memory patterns. The capacity for more patterns is also limited by the number of param-
eters in the network. Since real-world data consist of higher-order dependencies, the Hop-
field energy model cannot be used (Bartunov et al. 2019). Ngiam et al. (2011) utilized 
the DEM approach to process natural images, demonstrating significant improvements in 
data outputs when compared to greedy layer-wise training. In recent years, the develop-
ment of energy-based models meta-learning (EBMM) has been observed to show better 
performance as a memory model that is capable of recalling training, memorizing patterns, 
and performing compression (Bartunov et al. 2019; Kraska et al. 2018; Parkhi et al. 2015; 
Sun et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2016a, b). Meta-based learning primarily operates on the read 
(x;θ ) and write (X) functions by means of truncated gradient descent, as follows:
(63)
read (̃x; 𝜃) = x(K+1) = xk −𝛾(k)∇xE(x(k)), x(0) = ̃x
(64)
L(X, 휃) = 1
N
N
∑
i=1
E[||||xi −read(xi;휃)||| |
2
2]
(65)
W(x, θ) = E(x;θ) + α|||∇xE(x;θ)|||2
2 + β||θ −θ||2
2
(66)
write (X) 휃(T), 휃(t+1) = 휃(t) −휂(t) 1
N
N
∑
i=1
∇휃W(xi,휃(t)), 휃(0) = 휃

13567
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
where x is the input (the deterministic dynamics); X represents the Nth set of input pat-
terns compressed into parameters,θ , by the writing rule; N is the number of stored patterns; 
k = 1, 2,…K (number of sequences required to be updated to perform gradient descent 
for optimization for reading function); t = 1, 2,…T (number of sequences required to be 
updated to perform gradient descent for optimization for write function), respectively; 
γ(k)andη(t) are the learned stepped sizes for reading and writing functions respectively; E(x) 
represents the energy function; ∇x is the derivative operator; and W(x, θ) is the writing loss 
function, consisting of meta parameters α andβ , representing the energy function at a local 
minimum that must be two-fold and requires the hessian term to be positive. The later part 
of the writing loss function performs optimization, limiting deviation of prior parameter, θ , 
from the initial parameter,θ . Finally, implementing gradient descent tunes the writing func-
tion as Eq. (34); where L(X, θ) denotes the score matching objective, or the reconstruction 
error for the read function.
Compared to past DEMs, EBMMs can utilize slow gradient learning, having effec-
tive convolutional memories, particularly due to fast writing rules (Bartunov et al. 2019). 
EBMMs also adhere to and manage memory capacity efficiently, even for non-compress-
ible inputs, such as binary strings to natural images of high compression. It also has the 
ability to differentiate different patterns (energy levels). The method proposed by Bartunov 
et al. (2019) resolves the functioning pace of EBMMs with fast writing and limited param-
eter updates (a maximum of 5 steps), adding new inputs for the weights. Another advan-
tage of this method is the association of faster reading and fewer gradient descent steps. 
The employability of the proposed operations, which store N patterns in memory and do 
not require additional assumptions, further adds to the efficiency of the model (Bartunov 
et al. 2019). However, batch writing assumption is a challenge for EBMM and could be 
improved with more elaborate architecture.
It is also difficult to find the optimum balance between writing speed and the model’s 
capacity (a commonality for most deep learning energy models) (Ba et al. 2016; Bartunov 
et al. 2019). In addition, the characterized properties of the learning attractor models are 
not yet known, and EBMM cannot return different associations when under uncertainty, 
which occurs due to compression. Furthermore, with the general application of gradient-
based meta-learning, it is difficult to evaluate the expected outcome of EBMMs, mainly 
because of the high dimensionality pattern space of inputs that increases the resulting dis-
tortion of the model and decreases the output reliability after adaptation. Therefore, a dif-
ferent gradient descent functionality is necessary. Also, parametric gradient-based optimi-
zation requires significant updates (for memory/recalling applications) and, hence, is slow. 
Resolving these existing issues, together with the observation and exploration of more sto-
chastic variants for EBMMs would lead to significant improvements for DEM.
Statistical learning and construction of an inference-free hierarchical framework offer 
a viable solution for density estimation, consisting of higher dimensional challenges. By 
utilizing Bayesian (Eq. (67)) and Parzen score matching functions (Eq. (68)) (Saremi et al. 
2018; Vincent 2011) together with a multilayer perceptron of scalable energy learning 
operation (Eq. (69)), the deep energy estimator network (DEEN) can be modelled and fur-
ther optimized (Saremi et al. 2018), as follows:
where σ denotes any level of noise; ψ represents the score function; ξ is the noisy measure-
ment of underlying random variable x; and θ is the parameter vector.
(67)
̂x(ξ) = ξ + σ2ψ(ξ;θ)

13568
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
where P represents the Parzen density estimator; S signifies the smoothing kernel; k rep-
resents the nth x of a dataset, x = {x1, x2 … xn }; and n is the number of elements in the 
dataset, x.
In Eq. (69) (Saremi et al. 2018), E(x;θ) is linearly constructed from the preceding hid-
den layer ­hL, in which w is the weight of each data x and parameter θ , εα denotes the expert 
(corresponding products of expert, PoE) parametrized by the neural network, and α signi-
fies the number of iterations.
Deep energy estimator networks (DEENs) have been demonstrated to be effective 
with high dimensionality data values (Saremi et  al. 2018). However, it is important 
to note that although DEEN can auto-regularize due to its Parzen function, it is not 
an autoencoder. In fact, DEEN can operate with a decoder by not directly estimating 
the score functions (Alain et al. 2014) and, thus, skipping stability issues of denoising 
autoencoders. Being dataset-dependent, DEEN does not impose any bounds towards σ 
and can be effectively regularized. Apart from working with higher dimensionality data, 
deep energy estimators are employed for semi-supervised, unsupervised learning, and 
generative modelling (Saremi et al. 2018). DEENs provide consistent estimations and, 
therefore, acquire increasing interest; however, more testing is required to examine the 
network’s performance for dynamic data as well as the scalability potential.
Another prominent application of DEM is the nonlinear finite deformation hyper-
elasticity problem, operating on an energy and loss function. For instance, using Eule-
rian motion description and transport deformation gradient formulation, the nonlinear 
response of elastic materials (in 3D) with a large deformation continuum can be mod-
elled by employing DEM via DNNs. In a previous work, a neural network is structured 
using Eq. (70), then optimized to minimize its potential energy using a loss function 
(Nguyen-Thanh et al. 2020):
where ̂z is the final output of the final layer l; w and b are weights and biases, respectively; 
and σ is the activation function acting on the kth neuron of the lth layer.
DEM can also be utilized for nonlinear deformation, being faster with fewer cod-
ing and having the traction-free boundary conditions to be auto-filled. Training enables 
faster solution retrieval, and the model can be easily coded in common machine learn-
ing operating platforms, such as TensorFlow and Pytorch (Nguyen-Thanh et al. 2020). 
However, the use of DEM has certain drawbacks due to the imposition of the boundary 
condition of parameters and the associated integrations used for modelling and, there-
fore, requires further study to improve the integration techniques. Moreover, the mod-
elling tends towards non-convexity of loss function during the nonlinear evolution of 
network neurons, and so, an enhanced theoretical understanding is required to better 
establish the deep neural network architecture. DNNs for finite deformation hyper-elas-
ticity are trained using backpropagation, computing the gradient loss and minimizing 
(68)
P(ξ) = 1
n
∑
k
S(ξ|x(k))
(69)
E(x;θ) =
∑
α
w(L+1)
α
h(L)
α
(x;{w(1), w(2), … , w(L)}) =
∑
α
εα(x;θ)
(70)
̂zl
k = σ
(nl−1
∑
j=1
wl
kĵzl−1
k
+ bl
k
)
, 0 < 1 < L (the ﬁnal layer)

13569
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
the function, using a standard optimizer. Considering the tendency of a gap to exist 
between backpropagation and energy-based models, Nguyen-Thanh et al. (2020) admin-
istered forward propagation to approximate the solution with defined boundary condi-
tions, which directs the prediction. Scellier and Bengio (2017) proposed equilibrium 
propagation to bridge gaps between backpropagation and the energy-based model. The 
main objective of equilibrium propagation is to ensure a learning framework for the 
DEMs with a 0.00% training error. Provided the statistics of an excellent training error 
score, it would be interesting to observe the performance of such a system for different 
deep learning techniques and DEMs with complex non-linear data of high parameters 
and dimensions.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is another intensively studied deep learning method 
that has unique connections with DEMs in terms of state and action spaces. RL sur-
pluses the shortcomings associated with DEMs, which are mostly sampling issues and 
unpopularity with regression models (Zhang et  al. 2020). For example, performing 
molecular modelling using a DEM-based system would be difficult due to the absence 
of frameworks that do not involve a classification route for the dataset. Consequently, 
when it comes to modelling problems that do not involve density estimations or the 
necessity for energy functions, a new neural network is required. Recently, Zhang et al. 
(2020) proposed a novel approach, where RL is reformulated into distribution learning 
to resolve sampling issues, using a minimax generative adversarial network to develop a 
targeted adversarial learning optimized sampling (TALOS) methodology. Another tech-
nique using entropy policy, called variational adversarial density estimation (VADE), 
was also effective (for molecular modelling), demonstrating how cross-fertilization 
between EBMs/DEMs and RL can overcome the challenges of EBMs. Haarnoja et al. 
(2017) explored maximum RL via DEM using the Markov decision process (Eq. (71)) 
and modified the objective to maximize the entropy (Eq. (72)). Using soft Q learning 
and the Bellman equation, the model operated on learning maximum entropy policies 
(Eq. (73)).
where S and a are state and action space, respectively; r denotes reward; p휋 signifies the 
marginals of state and state action for the policy, π(⋅|st) ; and α acts as a hyperparameter.
where V∗
soft represents a partition log function; and Q∗
soft denotes a Q-function (proven and 
detailed by Ziebart and Fox (2010) and Haarnoja et al. (2017), respectively).
Reinforcement learning energy modelling policies, which are suitable for high-
dimensional values, have been observed to be robust and applicable to code robotic 
tasks and, hence, have become quite popular amid humanoid robots. Although the 
model requires pre-training of the general-purpose stochastic policies, when compared 
with other deep energy modelling techniques, reinforcement learning via DEM seems 
most promising, particularly by being able to solve inputs and sampling issues for 
energy-based modellings.
(71)
πstd=argmaxπ
∑
t
E(st+at )∼pπ[r(st, at)]
(72)
πMaxEnt=argmaxπ
∑
t
E(st+at )∼pπ[r(st, at)] + αH(π(⋅|st))]
(73)
πMaxEnt(at|st) = exp1
α(Q∗
soft
(St, at
) −V∗
soft(st)))

13570
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
4.11.3  Deep coding network
Deep predictive coding network is a bio-inspired framework built on the theoretical 
understanding of how the brain infers sensory stimuli. The mechanism by which the 
brain speculates decisions based on certain data (e.g. visual information) has been for-
mulated as the baseline for predictive coding, followed by the adaptation of filter objec-
tives and training of modules via gradient descent. However, due to the still very mis-
understood functioning of neurons in the brain, it is likely that the connected neurons 
in the brain consist of a more complex architecture, significantly limiting existing deep 
learning models. Incorporating a feedforward and feedback (prediction making) system 
along with each layer of a neural network is a generative understanding of deep cod-
ing networks, particularly the deep predictive coding system. Such networks are heav-
ily studied and used for computer vision, where classification for images and videos is 
performed.
A base equation for a deep predictive coding network is given by (Dora et al. 2018):
where lp is the calculated error in compliance with p-norm; yl
m,n is a vector in a channel of 
the lth layer, consisting of mth rows and nth columns; w(l)
m,n,i,j represents the filter through 
which neurons at m, n position of l layer is projected; Y1andX1 are the height and width of 
the layer arranged in a 3D box shape; and ̂y and y denote the predicted and actual activity 
of neurons, respectively.
With limited research and understanding of brain processing, particularly of events asso-
ciated with memory, learning, and attention, developing mature and complex deep predict-
ing coding network architectures remains challenging. Therefore, visual image mapping 
requires further analysis. Nevertheless, many novel deep learning frameworks and applica-
tions employ the use of predictive coding across various fields for plethora machine learn-
ing applications. For instance, Dora et al. (2018) developed a generative model based on 
deep predictive coding and trained using unsupervised learning for processing real-world 
images and to effectively capture the statistical regularities of the data. Such ability makes 
the model suitable for various image classification and computer vision tasks. The applica-
tion of a similar model in security is another prominent example.
The importance of machines to detect video anomalies is gaining popularity to enhance 
security and surveillance. However, video anomalies are highly ambiguous and complex, 
with high error margins and poor scores in existing reconstruction and prediction modules 
(Hasan et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017; Ye et al. 2019). A recent application of deep learning 
by Ye et al. (2019) demonstrated an improved video anomaly detection. Using a predic-
tive coding network with an error refinement module, the methodology was able to refine 
coarse predictions, reconstruct errors, and create a framework that assembles reconstruc-
tion and prediction modules. The modified predictive coding model uses a multilayer net-
work that extracts prediction error features (Eqs. (75) and (76)). The new predictions are 
then generated to rectify prediction errors using the convolution of the ConvLSTM unit, 
enabling sequential dynamics modelling (Eq.  (77)). Afterwards, the system performs 
refinement. To reach a refined estimation, score gaps between the frames (normal and 
abnormal) are reconstructed. Equation (79) represents the error refinement module based 
on Eq. (78). The objective functions were minimized and optimized. Metrics, including 
(74)
E =
N
∑
l=0
(
Y1,X1
∑
m,n
lp
(
yl
m,n −̂yl
m,n
)
+
Y1,X1
∑
m,n
lp
(
yl
m,n
)
+
∑
m,n,i,j
lp(w(l)
m,n,i,j))

13571
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
intensity (to measure pixel-wise difference), gradient (to prevent blurry predictions), and 
motion constraints, were utilized as a part of the adversarial training strategy.
where Ej−1 is the previous prediction error; Ij−1 represents the ground truth; and ̂I(j−1) 
denotes the previous prediction.
In Eq. (44), Rj−1 extracts deep features, and Ej−1 is the previous prediction error.
where ̂Ij is the updated prediction generated from the previous prediction error; and 
ConvLSTM is a special LSTM operation (spatial convolutions placed for connected 
transformations).
where ΔS is the regularity score gap for error refinement (between normal and abnormal 
frame); St is the regularity score; t, time frame; N is the sequence number set for the nor-
mal frame; A is the sequence number set for the abnormal frame; and Tn and Ta denote the 
total number of normal and abnormal frames, respectively.
where ̂Et and Et are the updated prediction error and preceding prediction error of time step 
t, respectively.
Another novel method was proposed by Tandiya et al. (2018) based on deep parse coding 
to detect radio frequency (RF) anomalies that are present in wireless connections. The neural 
network was trained to recognize the anomaly when there is a potent deviation between the 
predicted and actual outcomes. The method performs real-time RF monitorization, which is 
both non-intrusive and automated. Tandiya et al. (2018) demonstrated that the use of deep pre-
dictive coding is faster and more efficient than other ML-based approaches. Sequenced images 
of the network’s normal operation were obtained using Prednet, a video frame detector, which 
teaches the network to make predictions and detect anomalies. Auto-tuning the hyperparam-
eters could be one significant improvement for the predictive coding networks, using:
where α = cycle frequency as one axis.
The anomaly detection efficiency of this neural network was close to 100%. The seis-
mocardiography-based detector showed to act relatively faster than the first detector, which 
is responsible for the detection anomaly in consecutive spectrogram images. The seis-
mocardiography-based detector spots image anomalies almost instantaneously, and such a 
methodology of anomaly detection can be employed for networks with variable constraints 
and devices. However, the robustness of detection can be further improved by working 
(75)
PEP ∶Ej−1 = Ij−1 −̂I(j−1)
(76)
Rj−1 = PEP(Ej−1)
(77)
̂Ij = Conv(ConvLSTM(Rj−1
))
(78)
ΔS =
∑
t∈NSt
Tn
−
∑
t∈ASt
Ta
(79)
̂Et = ERM(Et
)
(80)
S훼
xx(n, f) = 1
N
N
∑
r=1
1
N
 XN (n, f + 훼∕2)X∗
N (n, f −훼∕2)

13572
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
with complex anomalies, evaluating longer run times, and employing machine learning 
techniques to process raw data in different forms. Showing promising error rates and effi-
cient predictive capacity, each framework has its own merits and demerits. Given that pre-
dictive coding is an area that requires further understanding, the functions and frameworks 
applied by machine learning engineers to solve problems in various disciplines, with vari-
ous biases, can be significantly improved and optimized further.
The main objective of sparse coding, a special case of deep predictive coding, is to deter-
mine a set of input vectors as a linear combination of basis vectors, which is then taught to 
efficiently represent data, as seen in Eq. (49) (for example, image data for classification). In 
a study by Zhang et al. (2017a, b, c), deep sparse coding (a deep modelling technique) pro-
duced effective results in extracting high distinct features from raw image pixels, for which 
the process is based on unsupervised learning. The deep sparse coding network is constructed 
upon basic input, a sparse-coding and pooling layer, and a normalization and map reduc-
tion layer. Such an algorithm uses heuristics to minimize non-convex functions. Although 
the system is dependent on a CNN architecture and could have improved speed, the overall 
framework is easier to code and functions better than any independent CNNs. However, deep 
sparse coding suffers from not being mathematically rigorous and converging towards a local 
minimum. Arora et al. (2015) demonstrated how sparse coding can also converge to a global 
minimum, providing a novel-based initialization method that returns a better starting point.
where ­Xij is the receptive field at spatial location i, j; W represents the weight of the input; 
C is the number of colored channels (of the input layer), as well as the number of feature 
maps for the feature map layer (Zhang et al. 2017a, b, c); K controls the sparsity of cij ; and 
L0 is a constraint under batch tree orthogonal matching pursuit.
where wm is the kernel; and Cm is the sparse feature map.
Convolutional sparse coding network (CSN), based on Eq. (50), incorporates the frame-
work of a convolutional system (Zhang et al. 2017c). Similar to a deep sparse coding net-
work that primarily performs patch-level approximation, CSN conducts image-level recon-
struction (approximation as well), but with more hindrance due to the convolution’s nature. 
Therefore, deep sparse coding was observed to propagate sharp information forward. The 
hierarchical sparse coding (HSC) framework is a similar working sparse coding network 
that completes the patch operation using concatenation methodology. For HSCs, map 
reduction layers are essential to delve deeper. Utilizing multi-level optimization and non-
negative sparse coding, Sun et al. (2017) developed a multilayer sparse coding network. 
The latter system is a deep learning framework consisting of bottleneck modules with an 
expansion and reduction layer of sparse coding, consisting of wide and slim dictionaries 
that are able to generate high- and low-dimensional distinct features and clustered repre-
sentations, respectively. A supervised learning technique was also employed to train the 
dictionaries, optimizing regulatory parameters. Although the network requires fewer layers 
and parameters, the deep learning architecture should be further studied to improve pro-
cessing efficiency. The general descriptions of each deep learning modelling technique, as 
(81)
Cij = arg min 1
2||xi,j −Wcij||2, s.t||||cij||| |
L0 ≤K
(82)
C = arg min 1
2
‖‖‖‖‖
I −
∑M
m=1 wm ∗Cm
‖‖‖‖‖
2
F + 훽
M
∑M
m=1 ||C1||
m=1

13573
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   Overview of the studies conducted on deep learning modelling
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Vector space 
model 
(VSM)
VSM is an arithmetic model in which texts are 
represented as vectors. The vector elements 
characterize the weights or significance of 
each word within a document. It can identify 
similarities among distinct documents, and thus 
assists to detect plagiarism. However, due to 
their low similarity values, long documents/
papers are poorly represented. The VSM has 
been effectively implemented in information 
filtering and retrieval, among other applications
Ali et al. (2019)
Propose a text clas-
sification system for 
retrieving transporta-
tion sentiment from 
social networking and 
news sites
Achieved an accuracy of 93% for 
sentiment classification, which 
outperformed topic2vec docu-
ment representation methods 
with transportation datasets
Sentiment 
analysis, 
topic model-
ling
Sophisticated data pre-
processing is needed to 
improve classification 
accuracy
Adhikari et al. 
(2019)
Development of 
document classification 
model based on BERT 
for identifying different 
labels for the document 
classification task
Reduced the number of parameters 
by 30 times
Document 
classification
The average document 
length is less than 
bidirectional encoder 
representations from the 
transformer (BERT); the 
maximum length is 512
Si et al. (2019)
Assessment of how 
well classic word 
embedding approaches 
(word2vec, GloVe) and 
contextualized methods 
(BERT) perform on a 
clinical concept extrac-
tion task
Achieving better performance 
(F1-measures of 93.18) on vari-
ous benchmark tests
Clinical 
concept 
extraction
Not investigates the 
performance benefits of 
fine-tuning BioBERT 
with clinical text
Mohd et al. 
(2020)
Introduced a text summa-
rizer that obtains the 
features of a long text 
document to extract the 
essential and valuable 
information while 
maintaining critical 
information
The macro-average of precision 
from the experimental results 
was found 34%
Text summari-
zation
Tested the technique with 
only one dataset

13574
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Yang et al. 
(2019)
Develop a hypergraph 
embedding method 
LBSN2Vec for 
location-based social 
network data that 
enhanced friendship 
and location prediction 
task effectiveness
Outperforms the baseline graph 
embeddings an average growth 
of 32.95% and 25.32%, respec-
tively
Location-
based social 
network
Examined only the random 
walk in the hypergraph 
for location prediction 
tasks
Convolutional 
neural net-
work (CNN)
A CNN model is comprised of three primary lay-
ers: convolution, pooling, and fully connected 
layers. The first two layers generate features 
from the input, while the third layer, the fully 
connected layer, connects the extracted features 
to the final output. The convolution layers 
extract high-level features from the provided 
data. CNNs are especially beneficial for reduc-
ing the number of parameters in an artificial 
neural network. However, sometimes they take 
a longer time to train data. These models are 
typically used in object detection, text classifi-
cation and sentiment analysis
Barré et al. 
(2017)
Construct LeafNet that 
can be used to identify 
plant species from the 
leaf images
Found an accuracy of 86.3%, 
95.8%, and 97.9% on the LeafS-
nap, Foliage, and Flavia dataset, 
respectively
Plant clas-
sification
- Comparatively slow 
(training took about 32 h)
- Lacks context due to the 
small, cropped window 
sizes
Li et al. (2019a, 
b, c, d)
Propose a method Stereo 
R-CNN that can per-
form 3D object detec-
tion in autonomous 
driving
Outperformed one of the previous 
studies by over 25%—30%
Object detec-
tion
- Due to the absence of 
precise depth informa-
tion, the model can only 
produce shallow 3D 
detection results
- Variations in appearance 
can also have a signifi-
cant impact
Chen et al. 
(2018a, b)
Apply an unsupervised 
domain adaptation 
method for object 
detection in a variety 
of image domains
Outperformed the faster R-CNN 
model up to + 8.8%
Object detec-
tion
The model is adaptable to 
specific scenarios only

13575
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Chu et al. (2017)
Propose a dynamic 
CNN-based framework 
for tracking objects in 
videos
The proposed online multi-object 
tracking algorithm performed 
better than Markov decision 
processes by 4%
Object tracking
- Unsuitable for applica-
tions with limited 
resources
- Consume a lot of memory 
and time
Hughes et al. 
(2017)
Classify clinical text into 
one of 26 categories, 
such as "Brain" or 
"Cancer"
Showed better prediction accuracy 
compared to the word embed-
ding based methods by about 
15%
Text classifica-
tion
Domain Adaptation Tech-
niques can be used to 
transfer knowledge from 
another domain to the 
medical field
Liao et al. 
(2017)
Predict user behavior 
from Twitter data
Development accuracy was maxi-
mum up to 74.5%
Sentiment 
analysis
A multilayer CNN may be 
used to boost the model
Perraudin et al. 
(2019)
Develop DeepSphere, a 
graph-based convolu-
tional neural network 
that can predict a 
class from a map and 
classify pixels from 
cosmological data
Better than the baselines by 
10% in terms of classification 
accuracy
Cosmological 
data analysis
Missing the comparison of 
DeepSphere to various 
spherical CNN imple-
mentations with different 
sampling techniques
Mukherjee et al. 
(2020)
Construct a CNN-based 
generative model, 
namely “GenInSAR”, 
for combined coher-
ence estimation and 
phase filtering which 
directly learns inter-
ferometric synthetic 
aperture radar (InSAR) 
data distribution
Compared to the related methods, 
the phase cosine error,
coherence and phase root-mean-
square-error of GenInSAR were 
improved by 0.05, 0.07 and 
0.54, respectively
Synthetic 
aperture 
radar data 
distribution
The InSAR machine learn-
ing can be improved by 
GenInSAR’s ability to 
produce new interfero-
grams

13576
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Recurrent neu-
ral network 
(RNN)
RNNs are neural networks with memories capable 
of capturing all information recorded sequen-
tially in the preceding unit. It is advantageous in 
forecasting time series since the highlight point 
works as a reminder of previous inputs. RNNs 
are useful due to the fact that they execute the 
same computation for each sequence element. 
But they suffer from gradient and exploding 
vanishing issues, which limits longer sequences
Siami-Namini 
et al. (2019)
Compare LSTM and 
BiLSTM in time series 
data modelling
Enhanced forecasting accuracy by 
37.78% to standard LSTM-based 
models
Time series 
modelling
BiLSTM based models 
appear to achieve slower 
performance than the 
LSTM-based models
Basiri et al. 
(2021)
Build CNN-RNN model 
that can find out the 
sentiment from long 
reviews as well as short 
tweet text
Improved from 1.85% to 3.63% 
for five long review datasets in 
terms of accuracy
Sentiment 
analysis
There is potential to investi-
gate sentiment classifica-
tion at the sentence and 
aspect levels
Majumder et al. 
(2019)
Introduced Dia-
logueRNN built on 
RNN with attention 
mechanism for emotion 
detection in textual 
conversations with one 
of six emotion labels
Outperformed the baseline meth-
ods by achieving a 6.62% higher 
F1-score on average
Emotion detec-
tion
Time-consuming for train-
ing and not parameter-
efficient for global or 
local contexts
Camgoz et al. 
(2018)
Recognize sign language 
gestures from a video 
of someone performing 
continuous signs
Scored 18.13 on the BLEU-4 
matric and 43.80 on the ROUGE 
matric
Neural 
machine 
translation
CNN could learn good fea-
ture representation, but 
this hypothesis’s validity 
was not evaluated
G. Rao et al. 
(2018a, b)
Model long texts for 
generating semantic 
relations between 
sentences for sentiment 
analysis
Showed better performance than 
other models by obtaining an 
accuracy of 44% and 63.9%
Sentiment 
analysis
- Considered only the 
sequential order of the 
documents
- It is possible to represent 
the documents using tree-
structured LSTM

13577
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Uddin et al. 
(2020)
Present a multi-sensors 
data fusion network 
to recognize human 
activities and behavior
The average performance was 
measured as 99% using 
precision, recall, and F1-score 
matrices
Intelligent 
health care 
systems
The work can be extended 
to develop a real-time 
human behavior monitor-
ing system with consider-
ing more complex human 
activities
Sahoo et al. 
(2019)
Analyze the applicability 
of LSTM-RNN to fore-
cast daily flows during 
low-flow periods
LSTM-RNN model performance 
(RMSE = 0.487) on hydrological 
data outperformed the traditional 
RNN model (RMSE = 0.516) and 
naive method (RMSE = 0.793)
Time series 
modelling
Multiple hidden LSTM 
layers can be used to 
boost the performance of 
the model
Alemany et al. 
(2019)
Propose a fully con-
nected RNN to predict 
hurricane trajectories 
from historical cyclone 
data that could learn 
from all types of hur-
ricanes
For hurricane SANDY, the mean 
absolute error from the RNN 
model (0.0842) is better than the 
previous sparse RNN average 
(0.4612) model
Typhoon 
prediction
The model may take 
advantage of convert-
ing the grid locations 
to latitude–longitude 
coordinates to reduce the 
conversion error
Recursive neu-
ral network 
(RvNN)
RvNN is a nonlinear model that operates on 
structured inputs and is useful to parse trees 
in natural language processing (NLP), image 
analysis, and protein topologies, among other 
structured domain applications
It works exceptionally well in NLP-related tasks
Ma et al. (2018)
Develop two recursive 
models for rumor 
detection, based on 
top-down and bottom-
up tree-structured 
neural networks
Showed a strong ability to identify 
rumors at an early stage. Accu-
racy on two different datasets 
was calculated as 72.3% and 
73.7%, better than other existing 
approaches
Rumor detec-
tion on 
Twitter
Other types of data can be 
added into the structured 
neural models, such as 
user properties, to boost 
representation learning 
even further
Biancofiore et al. 
(2017)
Analyze atmospheric 
particulate matter, and 
forecast daily averaged 
concentration of PM10 
and PM2.5 from one to 
three days ahead
Correctly predicted 95% of the 
days analyzed in this study
Forecasting 
PM10 and 
PM2.5
Actual prediction accuracy 
is decreased if only the 
days where the exceeded 
limits are considered

13578
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Lim and Kang 
(2018)
Extract relationships 
between chemical 
compounds and genes
F- scores for the model including 
extra pre-processing and the 
SPINN model were calculated at 
63.7 and 64.1%, respectively
Chemical 
compounds 
and genes
Coordination is not 
detected which may be 
avoided with the use of a 
separate module
Neural tensor 
network 
(NTN)
In contrast to conventional neural network mod-
els, NTN can directly connect two input vectors 
to a tensor. NTNs have been successful in vari-
ous natural language processing applications
Although the NTN model is effective, it is compu-
tationally intensive
Qiu and Huang 
(2015)
Construct a convolutional 
NTN for community-
based question 
answering, integrating 
sentence modelling and 
semantic matching into 
one model
Outperformed the state-of-the-arts 
on two different languages data-
sets, English and Chinese
Community-
based 
question 
answering
The convolutional NTN 
can handle more complex 
interactions with tensor 
layers than existing 
models
Bai et al. (2018)
Develop deep attention 
NTN for visual ques-
tion answering
Increased performance of 1.98% 
and 1.70% than existing MLB 
and MUTAN models respec-
tively
Visual question 
answering
This method could be 
applied to more visual 
question answering mod-
els for further verification
Hu et al. (2017)
Demonstrate how the 
combination of face 
recognition features 
and facial attribute 
features can improve 
face recognition per-
formances in different 
challenges
The model obtained almost 100% 
accuracy on three databases 
CASIA NIR-VIS2.0, MultiPIE, 
and LFW
Face recogni-
tion
The approach used in the 
study can be scaled to 
big data using effective 
mini-batch SGD-based 
learning
Deep belief 
network 
(DBN)
In DBN, a stack of restricted Boltzmann machines 
(RBMs) is typically utilized. The DBN is used 
to stack multiple unsupervised networks, with 
the hidden layer of each network serving as the 
input for the subsequent layer. The RBM has the 
advantage of fitting sample characteristics
Abdel-Zaher and 
Eldeib (2016)
Diagnose breast cancer 
through a weight-
initialized backpropa-
gation neural network 
from a trained DBN 
having identical archi-
tecture
The accuracy of the model was 
evaluated as 99.68% on the Wis-
consin breast cancer dataset
Breast cancer 
detection
Since DBN requires signifi-
cant computational effort 
on hardware, building a 
real-life computer-aided 
diagnosis system is quite 
challenging

13579
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Zhao et al. 
(2017)
Propose a feature learn-
ing technique named 
discriminant DBN 
for synthetic aperture 
radar (SAR) image 
classification
Significantly outperformed the 
state-of-the-art
SAR image 
classification
The neighbor selection 
process of the training 
strategy of a weak classi-
fier may cause significant 
variance in pseudo-
labelling as it is governed 
by fixed neighbors. Some 
adaptive strategies can be 
followed to pick specific 
samples for training the 
weak classifiers
Li et al. (2022)
To develop MMDBN 
model, a manifold-
based multi-DBN to 
acquire deep manifold 
characteristics of 
hyperspectral imaging
Experimental findings on the Sali-
nas, Botswana and Indian Pines 
datasets reach 90.48%, 97.35%, 
and 78.25%, respectively, 
demonstrating that MMDBN 
outperforms some state-of-the-
art algorithms in classification 
performance
Hyperspectral 
imaging
MMDBN’s classifica-
tion performance can 
be further improved by 
designing the combined 
spectral-spatial deep 
manifold networks
Convolutional 
deep belief 
network 
(CDBN)
CDBN is a hierarchical generative model for a 
real size image. This model stacks convolu-
tional RBMs (CRBMs) to construct a multilayer 
structure similar to DBNs. Unlike RBM, the 
CRBM distributes the weight of the hidden and 
visible layers across the image
Wu et al. (2018)
Present a novel technique 
for pathological voice 
detection based on 
CNN structure
For the validation and testing sets 
the accuracy of CNN was 66% 
and 77% respectively whereas 
CDBN achieved 68% and 71% 
respectively
Pathological 
voice detec-
tion
CNN can be tuned more 
robustly by applying 
CDBN to initiate the 
weights, and it can keep 
away the overfitting issue
Li et al. (2019a, 
b, c, d)
Propose a model based 
on Gaussian Bernoulli 
restricted Boltzmann 
machines (GBRBM) 
to take the benefit of 
GBRBM and convolu-
tion neural networks
By considering variance and 
convolution, feature extraction 
performance was improved. The 
model showed low computa-
tional cost compared with the 
existing methods
Image feature 
extraction
This experiment just built 
one GCDBN with only 
five layers. The recogni-
tion accuracy can be 
increased by adding more 
convolutional and pool-
ing layers

13580
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Hybrid neural 
network 
(HNN)
The HNN is comprised of a partial first principal 
model that provides previous information about 
the process with a neural network, which acts as 
an estimate of unmeasured process arguments. 
It is useful for sentiment classification, energy 
forecasting, disease diagnosis, and many other 
applications
Arabasadi et al. 
(2017)
Develop a hybrid tech-
nique that combines 
genetic algorithms with 
neural networks for 
diagnosing coronary 
artery disease
The hybrid approach improves the 
performance of a neural network 
by around 10% by upgrading 
its initial weights with a genetic 
algorithm
Diagnosing 
coronary 
artery 
disease
Some other parameters 
such as learning rate and 
momentum factor could 
be optimized
Abedinia et al. 
(2018)
Suggest a new forecast-
ing methodology based 
on a hybrid forecasting 
engine by integrat-
ing a neural network 
with a Metaheuristic 
algorithm
The proposed model provided 
better prediction accuracy than 
other models in the domain
Solar energy 
forecasting
The neural network-based 
forecasting engine is able 
to prevent underfitting 
and overfitting issues 
with the help of this 
hybrid method
Ghosh et al. 
(2016)
Propose an architecture 
using probabilistic neu-
ral network (PNN) and 
restricted Boltzmann 
machine (RBM) 
together
Performed better than other mod-
els in Books and DVD datasets 
but could not perform better in 
Electronics, and Kitchen appli-
ance datasets
Sentiment clas-
sification
This model does not rely on 
external resources, such 
as sentiment dictionar-
ies, and thus reduces the 
system’s complexity
(Liu et al. 2022)
Use HNN with Wavelet 
Transform and Bayes-
ian Optimization to 
predict the copper 
price for the short term 
and long-term
The proposed approaches, GRU 
or LSTM, accurately forecasted 
the copper price in the short 
and long term with the mean 
squared errors of less than 3% in 
both cases
Price forecast-
ing
With the HNN, the 
unnecessary data can 
be filtered out while the 
optimal hyperparameter 
set is searched
Dynamic neu-
ral network 
(DNN)
Dynamic neural networks (DNNs) are an emerg-
ing technique that can outperform traditional 
static models in terms of accuracy, adaptive-
ness, and computational complexity
Godarzi et al. 
(2014)
Improve the performance 
of an ANN to predict 
oil prices by develop-
ing a dynamic neural 
network
Better accuracy was achieved 
using DNN than time-series 
and ANN models for oil price 
prediction
Oil price 
prediction
The model adjusts the 
outputs obtained from the 
time-series model and 
increases the prediction 
accuracy

13581
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
CBOW-DA-LR
CBOW-logistic regression (LR) is an extension 
of the CBOW algorithm. CBOW-DA-LR is an 
enhancement of CBOW-LR that incorporates 
visual data, such as images in tweets
Baecchi et al. 
(2016)
Analyze sentiments with 
the use of multimodal 
learning techniques by 
implementing neural 
network-based models 
for microblogging con-
tent that might consist 
of texts and images
Outperformed the SentiBank 
approach, which is a well-
established approach
Sentiment 
analysis
Can be performed well in 
syntactic/semantic word-
similarities
Deep echo 
state network 
(DeepESN)
The DeepESN can enhance the efficiency of a 
general echo state network (ESN) in several 
domains. The DeepESN output is produced 
using a linear structure of the recurrent units 
across all recurrent layers. The usual ESN tech-
nique is subject to stability limitations. Such 
limits are stated in DeepESN by the criteria 
for the ESN of the deep reservoir computing 
network
Gallicchio et al. 
(2018a)
Develop a novel tech-
nique based on Deep-
ESN for diagnosing 
Parkinson’s disease
DeepESN showed significant 
performance compared to the 
echo state network (ESN). For 
training, validation and testing 
set, its accuracy was 2.67, 2.95 
and 3.07% more than ESN
Diagnosing 
Parkinson’s 
disease
This is a significant initial 
work in the domain of 
DeepESN that shows the 
superiority of DeepESN 
over the shallow ESN 
model
Gallicchio et al. 
(2018b)
Construct a DeepESN 
model denoted by 
AD-DeepESN for the 
time series data predic-
tion where additive 
decomposition (AD) 
technique was used as 
a pre-processing step 
to the model
AD-DeepESN model performed 
well on six datasets with a low 
standard deviation
Time series 
prediction
A low standard deviation 
proves the stability of the 
model. Significant per-
formance can be achieved 
for a large multidimen-
sional data
Elman recur-
rent neural 
network 
(ERNN)
In ERNN, the hidden layer’s output is used as 
input for the context layer in the former. The 
ERNN architecture comprises four layers: input 
layer, recurrent layer, hidden and output layer. 
Each layer has one or multiple neurons that use 
a non-linear function of their weighted sum of 
inputs to transfer information from one layer to 
the next one
Wang et al. 
(2016a, b, c)
Build an architecture 
by combining ERNN, 
multilayer perceptron, 
and stochastic-time-
effective function
The proposed model showed an 
improvement in forecasting 
precision in comparison with 
BPNN, STNN, and ERNN
Stock indices 
forecasting
Nonlinear and nonstation-
ary data can be used for 
getting a noticeable per-
formance of the model

13582
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Krichene et al. 
(2017)
Apply a non-linear 
chaotic system named 
Mackey–Glass to RNN 
that shows a good 
benchmark test since 
its elements are chal-
lenging for prediction
The proposed model’s normalized 
root mean square error value 
was minimal (0.0165) compared 
to other traditional RNN models
Forecasting 
Mackey 
Glass 
time-series 
elements
Randomly initializing the 
weights of the context 
units can produce the 
optimal results
Deep energy 
model 
(DEM)
DEM is a deep learning training technique for 
deep networks and architects based on the RBM 
learning methodology. It includes a feed-
forward neural network that transforms data 
inputs deterministically rather than modelling 
the output via a layer of stochastic hidden units 
(perceptron/neuron). In contrast to DBNs and 
deep Boltzmann machines, DEM consists of a 
single stochastic hidden layer, which enables 
rapid inference and simultaneous training of all 
the layers within the network
Bartunov et al. 
(2019)
Employment of 
meta-based learning 
method to energy-
based memory model 
(EBMM) for storing 
patterns
The method resolved the function-
ing pace of EBMMs, having fast 
writing and limited parameter 
updates, adding new inputs for 
the weights
Building 
compressed 
memories
Compared to past DEMs, 
EBMMs can utilize slow 
gradient learning, having 
effective convolutional 
memories, particularly 
due to fast writing rules
Saremi et al. 
(2018)
Demonstrate the utility 
of deep learning 
estimator network 
(DEEN) in learning 
scoring function, the 
energy, and single-step 
denoising operations 
for high-dimensional 
and synthetic data
Deep learning estimator network 
performs well for consistent 
estimation
Density 
estimation 
in statistical 
learning
The DEEN model is 
unexamined for linear 
complex higher dimen-
sions and parameters
Haarnoja et al. 
(2017)
Explore maximum 
reinforcement learn-
ing via DEM, using 
the Markov decision 
process
The model is capable of accurately 
representing complicated multi-
modal behavior in a variety of 
contexts
Robotic tasks; 
Building 
humanoid 
robots
Effectively captures com-
plex multimodal behavior 
pre-training general-pur-
pose stochastic policies

13583
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Nguyen-Thanh 
et al. (2020)
Directly minimizes 
potential energy
Fulfils equilibrium state when 
potential energy is minimized
Finite deforma-
tion hyper-
elasticity
- Nonconvexity of the loss 
function when neurons 
are evaluated by a nonlin-
ear activation
- Imposition of boundary 
conditions, integration 
techniques need improve-
ments
Scellier and 
Bengio (2017)
Propose equilibrium 
propagation to bridge 
gaps between back-
propagation and the 
energy-based model
The study makes static back-
propagation more conceivable
Analog cir-
cuits; digital 
hardware
(GPU)
Stores every previous state 
in the training sequences; 
lengthy relaxation 
towards a fixed point 
demonstrates negative 
impacts
Deep coding 
network 
(DCN)
DCN is a bio-inspired framework based on 
the theoretical knowledge of how the brain 
interprets sensory data. The method through 
which the brain predicts judgments based on 
specific facts (such as visual information) has 
been described as the foundation for predic-
tive coding, followed by the adaption of filter 
objectives and training of modules via gradient 
descent. These networks are extensively utilized 
in computer vision, where image and video 
classification is accomplished. The DCN is also 
used in many other sectors including building 
security and surveillance, autonomous vehicle 
control, communication services, object detec-
tion and classification
Zhang et al. 
(2017a, b, c)
Image feature learning 
by deep sparse-coding 
network
Deep sparse-coding network 
demonstrated effective results in 
extracting high distinct features 
from raw image pixels
Image clas-
sification, 
compression, 
denoising
Although the deep sparse-
coding network detects 
odd features from raw 
images automatically, the 
speed of the deep sparse-
coding network needs to 
be further improved

13584
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Dora et al. 
(2018)
Develop a generative 
model, based on deep 
predictive coding, 
trained using unsu-
pervised learning, for 
processing real-world 
images
The model was found suitable for 
various image classification and 
computer vision tasks
Image transla-
tion; com-
puter vision 
tasks
More studies are neces-
sary to understand the 
organization of the brain 
to infer real-world images 
in order to improve the 
algorithm
Sun et al. (2017)
Intermediate representa-
tions with non-negative 
sparse coding
Efficiently extended
the conventional sparse coding to 
multilayer architectures;
expanded learning capacity
Object detec-
tion; Image 
classification
Reduces the computational 
costs of sparse coding 
network; compatible 
with batch normalization 
and other deep learning 
tools; Complies with few 
parameters and layers
Tandiya et al. 
(2018)
Monitorization and 
analysis of radiofre-
quency by deep predic-
tive coding
The use of deep predictive coding 
was found faster and more 
efficient than other machine 
learning-based approaches
Autonomous 
vehicle 
control; 
communica-
tion services
Scalable to networks with 
many devices robustness 
would require improve-
ment for complex anoma-
lies, evaluating longer 
run-times and employing 
machine learning 
techniques to process raw 
data in different forms
Ye et al. (2019)
Improve video anomaly 
detection
The predictive coding network 
with an error refinement 
module was able to refine coarse 
predictions, reconstruct errors, 
and create a framework that 
assembles reconstruction and 
prediction modules
Building 
security and 
surveillance
Auto-tuning the hyper-
parameters could be a 
significant improvement 
for the predictive coding 
networks

13585
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Capsule neural 
network 
(CapsNet)
CapsNets use “capsule” neural units to encode 
the relationship between features and location 
with capsules as well as transformation matri-
ces. Since this approach acquires translation 
equivariance, CapsNets are more powerful 
than CNN for samples with misled spatial and 
pose information. CapsNets encode part-whole 
relationships like orientations, brightness, and 
scales among different entities that are objects’ 
features or feature parts. They use shallow 
CNN to acquire spatial information. However, 
the CapsNets perform poorly on classification 
tasks for missing semantic information
Chang & Liu 
(2020)
The strict-squash 
(MLSCN) solved the 
problem of the tradi-
tional capsule network 
of turning to account 
for every property of 
an image
The novel squash functions solved 
the problem of poor perfor-
mance issues; due to being 
sensitive to noise of traditional 
capsule networks
Image recogni-
tion
The dropout mechanism 
needs further research
J. He et al. 
(2019)
Extracting the high-level 
information of multi-
scale complex-valued 
features in order to 
adopt complex datasets
Novel encoding unit of restricted 
complex-value dense network 
with another complex-valued 
capsule, generalizing the 
dynamic routing algorithm for 
implementation in the complex-
valued domain
Information 
extraction
Applying the generalized 
dynamic routing algo-
rithm to fuse the real- 
and imaginary values of 
primary capsules that are 
complex-valued highly 
decreased the param-
eters to be trained for 
complex-valued models 
compared to real-valued 
models of similar dimen-
sion capsules. However, 
the models had computa-
tional complexity

13586
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Deng et al. 
(2018)
A two-layer CapsNet 
architecture was 
presented in this 
paper. The architecture 
was designed to be 
trained with limited 
training examples for 
Hyperspectral Image 
Classification (HSI)
The presented CapsNet architec-
ture achieved an overall 94% 
accuracy and 95.90% on average 
for the PU and SalinsA datasets; 
whereas CNN gave 93.45% and 
95.63% accuracies respectively
Hyperspectral 
Image Clas-
sification
CapsNets was brought for 
training HSI classifica-
tion and made a com-
parison with the Random 
Forests, Support Vector 
Machines and CNN-
based state-of-the-art 
classifiers to prove that 
CapsNets work better for 
HSI classification
Xiang et al. 
(2018)
Enhancing the compu-
tational efficiency and 
capacity of representa-
tion of traditional 
capsule networks
Between a two-staged architecture, 
the first stage is responsible for 
obtaining semantic and structural 
information by employing multi-
scale information learning; and 
the second stage is responsible 
for encoding the hierarchy levels 
of features for multi-dimensional 
capsules
Information 
extraction
The improved dropout 
enhanced the robustness 
of the traditional capsule 
network and MS-Cap-
sNets outperformed 
traditional CapsNets. 
No detailed analysis was 
performed of the network 
architectures over com-
plex datasets
Generative 
adversarial 
network 
(GAN)
GAN is a machine learning algorithm in which 
two neural networks compete to increase accu-
rate predictions. It often operates unsupervised 
and utilizes a framework based on coopera-
tive zero-sum games to learn. It is capable of 
parallelizing the sampling of generated data. 
However, it is harder to train as various forms 
of data need to be provided constantly in order 
to determine whether GAN operates well or not
Pfau (2017)
Stabilizing GANs 
through defining the 
generator objective 
regarding unrolled 
optimization of the 
discriminator
The introduced method solved 
the problems of mode collapse 
and stabilized GANs’ training 
with recurrent generators. It also 
increased the assortment and 
scope of data distribution
Stabilizing 
GAN train-
ing
The computational cost 
of each training step is 
as high as it increased 
linearly with the amount 
of unrolling steps

13587
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Karras et al. 
(2019)
A style transfer-based 
alternate version of the 
generative adversarial 
network
The proposed generator improved 
the general distribution of 
quality metrics, leading to 
understanding more accurate 
interpolation. The generator also 
disentangled the variation for 
the latent factors
Redesigning 
generator 
architecture
The style-based genera-
tors can perform better 
than traditional GAN 
generators
Y. Yan & Guo 
(2020)
-The model worked 
through two levels 
of a label based 
and a feature-based 
adversarial generator, 
designed under a 
bidirectional mapping 
network framework
The noise label generator model 
performed non-random aspects 
of noise labels which are condi-
tioned on the true label. Moreo-
ver, the data feature generator 
model performed conditioning 
on data samples on the respec-
tive true labels. A prediction 
model was also presented in the 
paper which performed inverse 
mappings between labels and 
features
Label learning
Both of the generators 
worked simultaneously to 
identify ground truth labels 
from the training samples. 
These training samples 
were perceived from the 
features and the candidate 
points. The authors 
tested the model across 
real-world and synthesized 
datasets and got state-of-
the-art result performance
Wu & Guo 
(2020)
The authors proposed 
a novel approach of 
co-learning with dual 
adversarial networks 
for multi-domain senti-
ment classification
The proposed approach pulled out 
features of both domain-invari-
ant and domain-specific texts
Sentiment clas-
sification
The proposed method 
aligned data across 
domains through the 
extracted feature space 
and also situated labelled 
and unlabeled data 
between each domain. 
The proposed methodol-
ogy was able to avoid 
overfitting in case of 
limited data

13588
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Deep 
Boltzmann 
Machines 
(DBM)
DBM is a deep neural network architecture that is 
trained in a semi-supervised approach. Its archi-
tecture allows the network to acquire knowledge 
about complex feature-based relationships. 
DBMs have a wide range of applications like 
facial expression recognition, text recognition, 
person identification from audio-visual data, 3D 
model recognition, and many more
Taherkhani et al. 
(2018)
The proposed research 
work introduced a 
unique feature selec-
tion method to embed 
in a Restricted Boltz-
mann Machine
A novel algorithm was proposed 
for input feature selection from 
large datasets. The algorithm 
was embedded into Deep Boltz-
mann Machines classifiers to 
reduce input features and learn-
ing errors from large datasets
Feature selec-
tion
The novel algorithm is 
very effective for feature 
reduction purposes from 
large datasets. Along 
with reducing the number 
of features, the algorithm 
also reduced error rate 
and increased classifica-
tion performance with 
respect to time variation
Tran et al. 
(2020)
To address the difficulty 
of learning and inter-
ference in Recurrent 
Temporal Restricted 
Boltzmann Machine 
models of the expo-
nential character of 
gradient computing
To achieve better results in repre-
sentation learning and dynamic 
interference upon sequence 
classification, the authors 
introduced SCRBM. The model 
was designed through rolling 
RBMs with their class nodes 
with respect to time
Learning and 
interference
Comparing to standard 
RNNs, SCRBM is more 
compact with respect to 
a number of parameters 
to learn with an equal 
number of hidden neural 
units. However, SCRBM 
could not accumulate 
long-term information
Vaswani (2017)
A transformer-based 
attention mechanism 
dispensed with recur-
rence and convolution 
was presented in the 
paper
Two machine translation tasks 
were performed that showed bet-
ter results that were paralleliz-
able and it required less time to 
be trained
Object detec-
tion
Transformer-based models 
were yet to experiment 
on problems of input and 
output modalities which 
include images, audio 
and video data
Dahl et al. 
(2010)
Develop a novel method 
based on DBN 
architecture and 
mean-covariance RBM 
(mcRBM) for phone 
recognition
Through the use of mcRBM 
features in conjunction with 
DBNs, a 20.5% phone error rate 
was achieved
Phone recogni-
tion, face 
labelling
The mcRBM is useful for a 
small training set but suf-
fers from representational 
inefficiency issues

13589
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 2   (continued)
Model
General description
Study surveyed
Main task(s)
Outcome(s)
Application(s)
Remarks
Stacked 
denoising 
autoencoders
(SDAE)
SDAE is an expansion of the stacked autoencoder. 
Several denoising autoencoders are connected 
in a chain to form a SDAE. An important 
feature of SDAE is unsupervised pre-training, 
which occurs layer by layer as input data is 
passed through. However, it has a high compu-
tational cost
Liou et al. 
(2014)
Using Elman network 
to work with word 
sequences from litera-
ture work
The training method consisted of 
encoding each word into sepa-
rate vectors in semantic space 
and it was related to correspond-
ing entropy coding. The trained 
codes had reduced entropy
Indexing, 
ranking, and 
categoriza-
tion of liter-
ary tasks
It is necessary to investi-
gate whether reduced 
errors were attainable 
without utilizing the 
revised codes and the 
same methods

13590
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
well as the main surveyed studies in terms of their main objectives, outcomes, and applica-
tions, have been summarized in Table 2.
5  Advantages and challenges of deep learning models
The several advantages underpinning deep learning models, including image processing 
and recognition, speech recognition, self-driving cars, and so on, have sparked such wide-
spread attention. The main benefit of using deep learning models over machine learning 
(ML) technologies is their capacity to produce new features through a limited range of 
features in the trained dataset (Kotsiopoulos et al. 2021). These models can generate new 
tasks for solving current ones as well as they also cover a variety of human life aspects. 
A significant amount of time can be saved using deep learning models when dealing with 
massive datasets, as deep learning algorithms can generate features without the need for 
human intervention (Gupta et al. 2021).
Despite their numerous advantages, deep learning models have a number of noticeable 
challenges. First, they are unable to provide arguments supporting the fact that a particular 
conclusion is reached (Signorelli 2018). In addition, unlike typical machine learning, peo-
ple are not able to follow an algorithm to figure out why the system decides that the image 
portrayed is a dog rather than a cat. To correct these types of errors in deep learning algo-
rithms, the entire algorithm must be revised, which requires additional time. Also, high-
performance computing units, high powerful GPUs and enormous quantities of storage are 
needed to train the models. Therefore, deep learning models require more time compared 
to traditional ML methods (Palanichamy 2019). The challenges of applying the deep learn-
ing models are summarized in Table 3 along with their advantages.
In general, deep learning (DL) often produces better results as opposed to machine 
learning. For example, the largest data portion of an institute/organization is unstructured 
since it appears in so many different formats, including texts and images. Most machine 
learning (ML) algorithms struggle to make sense of unstructured data, therefore this type 
of data is underutilized. Herein lies the strength of deep learning. The main benefit of using 
DL over other ML algorithms is its capacity to produce novel features from limited sets of 
features already present in the training dataset. It follows that DL algorithms can devise 
new challenges to address existing problems. DL enables full-cycle learning by using neu-
ral networks’ capability for featurization, from inputting raw data to producing an outcome. 
This approach allows for the optimization of all relevant parameters, which ultimately 
results in improved precision.
A key advantage of using the DL approach is that it can perform feature engineering 
on its own. In this method, the algorithm is not given any explicit instructions, but rather 
it automatically searches through the data for features that correlate and then combines 
them to facilitate faster learning. Because of its ability to handle massive data, DL scales 
extremely well. The algorithms of DL can be learned on a wide range of data formats 
while still producing insights relevant to the objectives of the training. For instance, DL 
algorithms can be utilized to identify correlations between social media activities, market 
research, and other factors in order to predict the future stock value of a particular firm.
There are a number of issues with DL models as well. In order to outperform alternative 
methods, deep learning needs access to a massive dataset. Therefore managing data is the 
key challenge that hinders DL in industrial implementations. Deep learning is currently 

13591
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 3   Advantages and challenges of deep learning modelling techniques
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Vector space model (VSM)
- Ranks retrieved documents by identifying and rating the most 
relevant text documents for a specific query
- Identifies similarities among distinct documents, and thus 
assists to detect plagiarism
- Simple in structure as it is constructed on the basis of linear 
algebra
- Permits for partial matching
- Term weights are not binary
- Allows for the computation of the similarity degree between 
documents and queries on a continuous scale
- Textual VSM is incapable of coping with linguistic ambiguity 
and a variety
- Theoretically, terms are assumed to be statistically independent
- In the presentation of vector space, the order of the terms that 
appeared in the documents is lost
- Keywords search must exactly match the terms in the docu-
ment; word substrings can lead to a match of "false positive "
- Due to their low similarity values, long documents/papers are 
poorly represented
- Suffers from polysemy and synonym
- The process of weighting is intuitive, although it is not very 
much formal
- Sensitivity to semantics; papers with a similar context and a 
distinct term vocabulary will not be associated, causing a match 
of "false negative"
Convolutional neural network (CNN)
- Feature engineering is a time-consuming and complicated 
process used traditionally in image processing that is not 
required in CNN
- The models are considered robust under different challenging 
circumstances such as complex background, system orienta-
tion and size, various resolutions, and illumination
- After training, the efficiency of testing time is substantially 
higher than that of other approaches including SVM
- Requires less time in classification
- Without human supervision, automatically can detect critical 
parameters
- High precision in the problems of image recognition
- Poor data labelling, which can significantly reduce system 
performance and accuracy
- Comparatively larger data sets are required to train, as well as 
correct annotation, which requires domain expertise
- Optimization challenges arising from the complexity of the 
models, and hardware limitations
- Sometimes take a longer time to train data
- Computational cost is high
- Takes more time to train using a bad GPU

13592
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Recurrent neural network (RNN)
- RNNs are frequently used in conjunction with convolutional 
layers to extend the effective pixel neighborhood
- It is advantageous in forecasting time series since the highlight 
point works as a reminder of previous inputs
- It takes a long time to train an RNN for computational prob-
lems
- Time series inputs allow RNNs to handle nonlinear dynamics, 
as well as long-term correlations
- In RNN, weight remains the same over all the layers, limiting 
the parameters the network needs to learn
- Any length of input can be processed by RNN
- The model dimension remains constant even the input dimen-
sion is increased
- Suffers from gradient and exploding vanishing issue, which 
limits longer sequences
- Unable to stack up
- Training processes are complex and slow
- RNN is less powerful than CNN
- When Relu or Tanh is used as an activating feature, it cannot 
handle exceedingly long sequences
- The flow of information across the layers/levels makes it a 
nightmarish task
- It cannot be progressed without knowing the structure of the 
tree for each input sample
- The computation process is comparatively slow because of its 
repeated/recurrent nature
Hierarchical bidirectional recurrent 
neural network (HBRNN)
- Each layer in the HBRNN handles classification tasks and 
plays a critical role in the effectiveness of the entire network
- Each layer in the network can constitute a classifier hierarchy
- In most cases, its efficiency and accuracy are comparatively 
better than the other networks as the HBRNN is constructed 
through the extensions of bidirectional recurrent neural net-
work (BRNN) and RNN
- Simultaneously forecasts both negative and positive time 
directions
- Must be known of both the beginning and end of the sequence
- Suffers from computational complexity because of considering 
more parameters than an RNN
- May not be suitable in the applications of real-time speech 
recognition
- It is necessary to have access to the entire sequence before mak-
ing predictions
- Since HBRNN anticipates future words, it may not be appropri-
ate to forecast the next word based on the prior ones. In this 
case, using HBRNN will result in poor accuracy
- Large datasets are needed for better prediction accuracy

13593
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Recursive neural network (RvNN)
- Extremely beneficial for analyzing language and natural 
scenes
- It can be utilized to learn the tree-like structure
- Useful for categorization tasks such as classifying metagen-
omic sample morphologies
- RvNN is capable of identifying the samples which are com-
paratively similar to one another on the basis of the scoring 
function
- Future data can be annotated with class relationships using the 
recursive neural network
- Provides a representation of high-dimensional features
- Capable of generating a tree-like hierarchical relationship 
between the samples
- Suitable for both supervised and unsupervised learning tasks 
as it is capable of addressing both regression and classifica-
tion problems
- Recursive neural networks may not be as accurate as deep belief 
networks and graph neural networks
- It faces a problem with vanishing gradient
- Tree structures of the input samples need to be known during 
the training period
- Parsing is domain-specific and slow
- RvNN is afflicted by the problem of long-distance reliance
- Due to the intrinsic complexity, the recursive neural networks 
are intrinsically complicated
- Computationally quite expensive during the learning phase
- The process of obtaining labelled data for RvNNs is excruciat-
ingly difficult and time-consuming
- Labels are required for every bigram and its supersets that is not 
easy to find in real world
Neural tensor network (NTN)
- NTN can effectively explain the complicated semantic link-
ages between relationships and entities
- Minimize the entity representation learning sparseness 
problem
- Generalizes numerous previous models of the neural network
- Provides a comparatively powerful way for modelling rela-
tional data than a typical neural network layer does
- It can multiply the two inputs rather than only implicitly via 
non-linearity
- Able to provide higher precision in the prediction of invisible 
connections between entities via reasoning within a specified 
knowledge base
- Allows database extension even when no exterior textual 
resources are available
- The level of computational complexity is extremely high
- Huge triplet samples are required to properly learn
- Has a minimal impact on sparse knowledge graphs on a wide 
scale
- Require the estimation of a huge amount of parameters, which 
frequently leads to overfitting
- Long training period is needed compared to the other neural 
network models as it comprises so many parameters

13594
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Deep belief networks (DBN)
- The greedy learning approach with DBNs can address the dif-
ficulty of appropriate parameter selection
- No labelled data is required as it is also an unsupervised 
process
- Have significant benefits in learning input features applied 
broadly in numerous fields including disease diagnosis, 
speech and face recognition, image processing, traffic flow 
forecasting, breast cancer classification, and interpretation of 
natural language
- DBNs benefit from the steady characteristic learning of ran-
domly input samples, enabling highly efficient application in 
the areas of handwriting, face and speech recognition
- It uses layer-by-layer training to effectively learn a deep hier-
archy probabilistic model for the performance optimization of 
classification problems
- DBNs do not take into consideration the two-dimensional 
framework of input images, which could considerably impact 
their performance as well as application in multimedia analysis 
and computer vision problems
- High computational cost to train a DBN
- The lack of clarity regarding the processes necessary to further 
optimize the network using maximum training approximation
- Due to the vast amount of data involved, the DBN training 
processes are time-intensive, and thus may not meet the needs 
of real-time application systems
- Performance is poor due to the input data being clamped when 
a contrastive divergence learning algorithm is used to pre-train 
DBN
Generative adversarial network (GAN)
- It is capable of parallelizing the sampling of generated data
- GAN does not require to estimate a probability distribution by 
the introduction of a lower bound like a variational autoen-
coder
- It has been empirically demonstrated to yield sharper and bet-
ter results than any other type of generative model, particu-
larly variational autoencoder
- Capable to generate similar types of data, image, audio, video 
and texts to the original one
- GANs delve into the minutiae of data and can quickly interpret 
it into many formats, making them useful for machine learn-
ing tasks
- Different types of objects such as trees, bicyclists, parking car 
on streets, and people can be recognized easily using GANs
- Able to measure the distance between two different objects
- The data generating process is inherently slow, which is exac-
erbated when dealing with the generation of high-dimensional 
data, such as voice recognition
- GAN training is unstable and challenging to converge
- It suffers from mode collapse issue
- Harder to train as various forms of data need to be provided 
constantly in order to determine whether GAN operates well 
or not
- Producing outcomes from speech or text is an extremely com-
plicated process
- Due to the instability of training and the approach of unsuper-
vised learning, it becomes more difficult to generate output
- Lack of intrinsic evaluation metrics
- Unable to forecast the density accuracy and identify an image is 
dense enough to proceed with
- Inverting in GANS is not simple

13595
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Capsule neural network (CapsNet)
- CapsNet can achieve state-of-the-art performance due to the 
less complexity in its structure
- It does not require so many parameters like convolutional 
neural network
- Well generalized ability on smaller datasets makes CapsNets 
suitable for usage in a wide range of applications
- The usage of pose matrices or parameter vectors allows Cap-
sNets to recognize objects, irrespective of the viewpoint
- Capable of capturing class object instantiation parameters
- CapsNets represent more specific features to understand what 
and how the network is learning
- CapsNets are not able to perform consistently across various 
datasets, particularly large datasets such as ImageNet
- The rigid concept of capsule entities may make the concept 
inappropriate for applications not related to computer vision
- Not suitable for online-based training
- Possesses higher complexity to implement compared to convo-
lutional neural networks
- As the CapsNet generates matrix or vector outputs it cannot 
simply reuse previous loss functions
- Not able to distinguish closer objects
- The routing process is dynamic as well as difficult to paral-
lelize, limiting GPUs from fully utilizing their computational 
capability
Attention mechanism
- Allows guidance of any tasks of a complex system including 
prediction, modelling, and identification
- It is incorporated with a recurrent neural network and long 
short-term memory which enables the modelling of lengthy 
temporal dependencies
- Controls the cognitive process flexibly by concentrating on a 
collection of elements
- It is capable of focusing on spatial dimensions, temporal 
dimensions, or various features of the input vectors
- Attention mechanism can link each input vector to generate 
the output vector more directly and symmetrically
- It can deduce information from an input that is most relevant 
to completing a task, which improves performance, particu-
larly in language processing
- Attention mechanism adds additional weight parameters in the 
model, which might lengthen training time, particularly if the 
model’s input data contains long sequences of data
- It is a long and tedious process to parallelize the system
- Attention mechanisms often keep them distinct and disjoined 
using the dedicated channel and spatial attention module, 
preventing interaction between these two modules, thus not 
optimal
- Numerous attention methods do not prioritize channel interac-
tion when computing attention weights, hence reducing infor-
mation transmission
- The majority of attention techniques introduce significant addi-
tional computation in model parameter form, causing slower 
and larger architectures

13596
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Deep Boltzmann machine (DBM)
- Capable of learning various levels of representation from input 
data using multilayer structures
- Promising in solving speech and object recognition issues
- DBM model can effectively use large volumes of unlabeled 
data
- Can handle ambiguous inputs more robustly
- Efficiently performs learning inferences and parameters with 
greedy-layered training
- Capable of identifying latent features in data
- DBM model can integrate multiple data sources into a single 
representation that incorporates useful retrieval and classifica-
tion features
- Maximum probabilistic learning in deep Boltzmann machines is 
a challenge due to the hard inference issue caused by partition 
functions
- Multiple hidden layers exacerbate the difficulty of learning in 
deep Boltzmann machines
- Approximate inference is noticeably slower than a single pass 
(bottom-up) as in DBNs
- DBM training is computationally expensive compared to the 
training of the deep belief network
- Less intuitive and difficult to train as they require layer-by-layer 
sampling and pre-training
Stacked denoising autoencoders (SDAE)
- Using SDAE, the weight errors of the process of fine-tuning 
can be reduced
- Can effectively avoid gradient vanishing and over-fitting issues
- Unsupervised learning process utilizing the SDAE is reliable 
in the load forecasting
- Can be used in learning compact data representation
- SDAE improves deep learning accuracy by embedding noisy 
autoencoders in the layers
- It can be used to distort data and to introduce some noise to 
generalize throughout the test set
- Delivers a raw data version with detailed as well as notewor-
thy feature information
- Optimizing a threshold that is sufficiently generalizable to 
previously unseen test scenarios is challenging
- Lose random control over the input
- High computational cost
- Inability to scale to the features with high-dimension
- SDAE training is comparatively slower than the other compet-
ing algorithms as it relies on iterative as well as numerical 
optimization in learning model parameters
- Complicated by the input data’s dimensionality and the 
requirement for computationally demanding model selection 
techniques to adjust hyperparameters
- A lengthy training time may be required for highly optimized 
execution

13597
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Deep energy model (DEM)
- Capable to incorporate several hidden deterministic layers 
with single hidden stochastic layers
- Joint-based learning of DEM enhances generative perfor-
mance as well as alters the representations learnt at every 
level
- It can perform interface and learning efficiently using hidden 
deterministic layers rather than hidden stochastic layers
- DEMs are flexible in modelling
- Useful in object recognition, sequence labelling and image 
restoration
- Useful tool to model probability distributions of high-dimen-
sion
- No direct sampling method in DEM like flow or autoregressive 
models as it is not able to compute easily how likely a probable 
sample is
- DEMs can yield a longer period to converge although they work 
in theory
- Less popular as a result of computational difficulties
- It is difficult to evaluate likelihood (learning) in DEMs
- Feature learning is not available
- Inference in the deep energy-based models is quite difficult 
due to the function of partition, which is often impossible to 
compute precisely
Predictive coding network (PCN)
- Effective for several classification problems, such as image 
classification
- Can be trained using unsupervised learning
- Faster and more efficient than other machine learning-based 
approaches
- Automated adjustment of hyperparameters could improve 
PCNs considerably
- Applicable in the field of computer vision, where natural 
image and video classifications are performed
- Single architecture can be reused in PCNs to run top-down 
and bottom-up processes recursively to refine their presenta-
tion concerning more exact and conclusive object recognition
- It is difficult to develop mature and complicated deep predictive 
coding network designs
- Computational time is longer than ordinary networks having the 
same amount of layers
- More layers are needed to model complicated and nonlinear 
relations in data
- A more difficult task simply requires the brain to process infor-
mation more slowly through the same network
- Suffers from the uncertainty about how the estimated error 
minimization functions
- Each stage of the PCN framework’s sub computation may 
conceal an intractable computing challenge

13598
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Table 3   (continued)
Deep learning models
Advantages
Challenges
Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM)
- Modelling capacity can be enhanced by incorporating more 
hidden variables
- The hidden and visible unit sets are not conditionally depend-
ent in RBMs
- Suitable for classification, dimensionality reduction, regres-
sion, topic modelling, feature learning, and collaborative 
filtering
- RBMs are able to be trained in both supervised and unsuper-
vised processes based on the particular task
- Capable to examine and determine several hidden variables 
including drama, action, and fantasy
- Useful for learning unsupervised features
- It is comparatively faster than a traditional DBM because of 
the limitations in the number of connections among the nodes
- Computationally intensive process to learn an RBM
- The approximation inference is significantly slower than the 
single bottom-up pass used in RBMs
- In the case of large datasets, the combined optimization of the 
parameters is not feasible due to the slower approximation 
interface of RBMs
- Training is quite complicated since calculating the function of 
the energy gradient is not easy
- Suffers from weight Adjustment
- The training algorithms of RBMs such as contrastive diver-
gence and parallel tempering have limitations for complex and 
high-dimensional data processing
- With lower temperature chains, training can be converged more 
rapidly, but the accuracy suffers

13599
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
limited in its applicability because of the extensive computer resources and training data-
sets it necessitates. It is still a mystery as to how exactly DL models arrive at their conclu-
sions. Not like in traditional ML, where we can trace back the reasoning behind a system’s 
identification of a given image as representing a cat rather than a dog. To rectify errors in 
DL algorithms, the entire algorithm must be modified. However, no universally applicable 
theory is available that can help us to choose the appropriate DL tools as it needs knowl-
edge of training methods, topology, and other features.
6  Comparative analysis of deep learning modelling techniques
Through the present review, it has been determined to what extent deep learning (DL) 
modelling techniques can be used in real-world applications. In addition, the methods 
employed, the outcomes, and the challenges of DL that have been modelled are identi-
fied. The comparative study compares available DL techniques based on their strengths and 
weaknesses, as well as performance metrics. The advantages and challenges outlined in the 
previous section make up the basis for the comparative study on strengths and weaknesses.
6.1  Comparative study based on weakness and strength
One of the common DL models, namely the vector space model (VSM) is found simple 
in structure and allows the computation of the similarity degree between documents and 
queries on a continuous scale. In contrast, the VSM assumes that words are statistically 
independent. Additionally, documents with a similar context and distinct term vocabulary 
will not be connected, resulting in a "false negative" match. Convolutional neural network 
(CNN), on the other hand, uses less time for classification and has good precision in image 
recognition challenges. However, comparatively larger data sets are required to train for 
CNN. Poor data labeling is another disadvantage of CNN, which can dramatically affect 
system performance and precision. Several classification issues, including image classifica-
tion, have been successfully addressed using a predictive coding network (PCN). One of its 
drawbacks is that there is a lack of certainty regarding how the estimated error minimiza-
tion functions.
It is observed that the recurrent neural network (RNN) is useful for time series forecast-
ing. In RNN, weight remains constant across all levels, minimizing the number of param-
eters the network must learn. However, gradient and explosion vanishing issues limit the 
length of RNN sequences. Its computation process is comparatively slow because of its 
repeated/recurrent nature. However, for highly optimal execution, a long training period 
may be needed. In most cases, the efficiency and accuracy of the Hierarchical bidirectional 
recurrent neural network (HBRNN) are comparatively better than the other networks as it 
is constructed through the extensions of bidirectional recurrent neural network (BRNN) 
and RNN. Before predictions can be made with HBRNN, the full sequence must be acces-
sible. On the basis of the scoring function, the recursive neural network (RvNN) is capable 
of detecting samples that are relatively similar to one another. Obtaining labeled data for 
RvNNs is an incredibly challenging and time-consuming task. Compared to a typical neu-
ral network layer, a neural tensor network (NTN) is a powerful tool for modelling relational 

13600
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
data. Massive triplet samples are required for NTN to properly train, however, this has a 
little effect on sparse knowledge graphs on a global scale.
Deep belief network (DBN) enables highly efficient applications in the domains of 
handwriting, face, and speech recognition due to the model’s continual learning of the 
characteristics of randomly input samples. However, DBNs do not account for the two-
dimensional structure of input images, which could significantly affect their performance. 
Attention mechanism can deduce information from an input that is most pertinent to 
accomplishing a task, hence enhancing performance, especially in language processing. 
Ambiguous inputs can be handled by Deep Boltzmann machine (DBM) more robustly. 
DBM is capable of identifying latent features in data. One of the limitations of DBM is 
that maximum probabilistic learning in DBM is a challenge due to the hard inference issue 
caused by partition functions. The restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) is comparatively 
faster than a traditional DBM because of the limitations in the number of connections 
among the nodes. But the process of learning an RBM is computationally intensive, and in 
the case of large datasets, the combined optimization of the parameters is not feasible due 
to the slower approximation interface of RBMs.
A well-generalized ability on smaller datasets makes capsule neural network (CapsNet) 
suitable for use in a wide range of applications. CapsNets are not able to perform consist-
ently across various datasets, particularly large datasets such as ImageNet. Using hidden 
deterministic layers as opposed to hidden stochastic layers, the deep energy model (DEM) 
can perform interface and learn quickly. It is less popular due to computational difficulties 
and the difficulty of evaluating the likelihood (learning) in DEMs. A generative adversar-
ial network (GAN) does not require estimating a probability distribution by introducing a 
lower bound like a variational autoencoder. But GAN has a mode collapse problem, and its 
data-generation process is intrinsically slow.
6.2  Comparative study based on performance criteria
This section compares the performance of several deep learning modelling techniques 
based on two key performance factors such as prediction accuracy and complexity level, 
which are crucial for suitable model selection. The study of the computational complex-
ity of deep learning models is important because it can answer the fundamental question 
of why deep learning architecture performs substantially better than traditional machine 
learning algorithms. In addition, understanding the complexity is useful to analyze and 
compare different deep learning models and improve their performance. The complexity 
analysis of deep learning models highly depends on the model structure; on the other hand, 
the models are structurally different. Therefore, they cannot be generalized and directly 
compared to one another.
One of the recent studies (Hu et al. 2021) surveyed the latest research on model com-
plexity in deep learning. In the study, four factors that influence the deep learning model 
complexity were surveyed: (i) model framework including activation functions such as tanh, 
ReLu, and others, (ii) model size, including the depths of the neural network layers and the 
number of trainable parameters, (iii) optimization process such as the number of iterations 
(epochs) to optimize the model, optimization algorithms, hyperparameters, and (iv) data 
complexity, which includes class imbalance and high dimensional data. The performance 
of a DL model also relies on other parameters such as hardware platforms (high-end GPU), 
compiler optimization, and implementation tools. Based on some of those factors and lit-
erature availability, we analyze the performance and computational complexity of different 

13601
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Table 4   Comparison of different variants of deep learning architectures applied in different fields based on 
performance criteria and complexity
Deep learning model
Applied field
Performance (prediction accu-
racy or other matrices)
Compu-
tational 
complexity
AE
Time Series Prediction
High
High
BD-LSTM
Sentiment Analysis
High
High
Bi-LSTM
Time Series Prediction
Medium
High
CNN
Sentiment Analysis
Medium
High
Malicious URLs Detection
High
Medium
Human Activity Recognition
High
High
Intrusion Detection Systems
Medium
Medium
CNN-LSTM
Malicious URLs Detection
High
Medium
GRU​
Time Series Prediction
Medium
Medium
LSTM
Time Series Prediction
Medium
Medium
RNN
Sentiment Analysis
Low
Low
Time Series Prediction
Low
Medium
Intrusion Detection Systems
High
Medium
RNN-GRU​
Sentiment Analysis
Medium
Medium
RNN-LSTM
Sentiment Analysis
High
Medium
RNN-LSTM
Human Activity Recognition
Medium
Medium
variants of deep learning models across different application fields (Seo et al. 2020; Zeroual 
et al. 2020; Cui et al. 2018; Vazhayil et al. 2018; Shakya et al. 2018), and classify them into 
three categories: Low, Medium, and High, as illustrated in Table 4. The lack of relevant 
comparative DL literature is identified as the key challenge behind this comparative survey.
The time complexity of an algorithm mainly depends on the input data, and it can be 
described using the big-oh notation. Due to its complex nature of architecture, structural 
differences, and many other factors, the time complexity of the deep learning model is usu-
ally measured by how long it takes a model to solve a problem on specified hardware. 
An empirical analysis of how the configuration settings affect the running time of deep 
learning models was conducted by Lee and Chen (2020). The analysis demonstrated that 
model complexity increases the running time, but if the data quality is below average, it 
is not worthwhile to increase model complexity. In the sentiment analysis task, increasing 
the CNN model’s complexity may not improve the performance, whereas increasing the 
RNN model’s complexity invariably improves the model performance. Bi-LSTM is found 
to be superior to other CNN and RNN models for sentiment analysis (Seo et al. 2020). In 
malicious URL detection, CNN-LSTM gives comparatively high accuracy than ordinary 
CNN with a little more computational cost (Vazhayil et al. 2018). However, CNN shows a 
significant improvement over RNN-LSTM in computer vision tasks such as human activity 
recognition (Shakya et al. 2018). CNN is a better choice in intrusion detection systems if 
it is a binary classification problem (Cui et al. 2018). For multi-class classification, regular 
CNN performs poor than others while RNN is a good choice because of the sequential 
data. It is much more computationally expensive than RNN in its architecture. Compared 
to RNN, Auto Encoder (AE) shows superior performance in forecasting time-series data. 
But RNN is relatively faster and needs less computational cost than LSTM, Bi-LSTM, and 
AE (Zeroual et al. 2020).

13602
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
7  Future of deep learning
As we step foot into a new era of surplus big data and information, the future of deep learn-
ing is not only prominent but vital for the advancement, resilience, and problem-solving 
endeavors of the globe. Deep learning has become a necessary tool across every discipline 
from science, engineering, humanity, and health to climate studies and many more. From 
developing cybersecurity and surveillance to performing quantum computing, deep learn-
ing will be an evident constant of the future. With the great success of deep networks in 
the field of computer vision and the development of artificial intelligence, being able to 
extract meaningful and correct features from data to generate necessary outcomes, without 
discrimination and being more tolerant of nuisance variations in data (Deng 2014; Guo 
et al. 2016), deep learning is the basis for future innovations. As of yet, further knowledge 
and understanding are required to improve and construct deep learning networks that deal 
with complex high dimensionality data and variations to characterize inputs and outputs 
efficiently (Kato et al. 2016).
The growing interest in investments, particularly of giant tech companies (Google, 
Facebook, Apple), represents and signals the value and potency of deep learning in the pre-
sent and future. Although deep learning demands high computational power and constant 
training to generate reliable results, more work is yet to be done to ensure that deep learn-
ing networks are efficient and cost-effective in extracting and identifying distinct features 
from real-world data, mimicking the ability of biological intelligence. Therefore, when 
constructing a deep learning methodology, it is important to ensure that the model can deal 
with uncertainty, is scalable, and has transferable qualities to be implemented and applied 
to multiple problem systems (Zhang et al. 2020). Alongside the development of deep learn-
ing techniques, the availability of user-friendly hardware and software systems are signifi-
cant future prospects for deep learning.
Larger and more extensive datasets are necessary for enhancing the performance of 
DL models in a complex and dynamic construction environment including many human 
resources, several types of equipment, and a variety of human and equipment activities 
(Fink et al. 2020). As humanity surfs the wave of artificial intelligence and deep learning, 
ethical frameworks must be developed to ensure the sound employment and enhancement 
of deep learning techniques in order to manage proper conduction and utilization of big 
data that are fed into deep learning architectures, subsequently generating beneficial and 
sustainable solutions. Due to the small sample size of training and limited unsafe activities 
considered, several workers’ actions can not be recognized (Ding et al. 2018). With a larger 
dataset, the model can therefore improve and give more precise results. Nevertheless, there 
is presently no publicly available complete and standardized dataset, also for particular 
tasks like activity recognition, pose detection and object detection, as well as for different 
views, a wide range of construction sites, occlusion circumstances, and lighting.
Combining deep learning with expert knowledge can be a fruitful area of research since 
models may be dynamically augmented with acquired new data, resulting in effective digi-
tal twins which can help in maintenance decision making. Despite the fact that physics-
induced deep learning is now pursuing multiple directions, there is no agreement or no 
consolidation on various directions as well as how they can be translated to industrial appli-
cations. There is a need for additional studies to refine and consolidate these techniques, 
which may help increase the generalization ability of the models developed. Another issue 
that must be addressed in future studies is the effective selection and composition of sets of 
training data. This is especially important in environments that are constantly changing and 

13603
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
have extremely variable operating conditions, where the training dataset is not representa-
tive of the whole range of predicted operating conditions. Continuous decisions must be 
made as to whether new data needs to be included in training datasets and the algorithms 
updated, or whether the information is repetitive and included already in the datasets used 
for training the algorithms.
8  Conclusion
Deep learning (DL) is a thriving multidisciplinary field that is still in its nascent phase. 
With the growing availability of data, DL architectures can be successfully applied to 
problems across various sectors in the modern world. This paper provides a comprehen-
sive systematic review of the state-of-the-art DL modelling techniques. Some models can 
be trained by two or more methods, which means their efficiency relies on the domain in 
which they are used. The use of hierarchical layers for proper data classification, as well 
as supervision in learning to determine the importance of the database of interest, are 
both important factors to develop robust DL models. While nearly all of the models dis-
play robustness to some extent, existing techniques are still flawed, which subjects them 
to criticisms. With the availability of big data across various domains, the quality of data 
can become an issue when training DL models. Training DL models can also be very time-
consuming, expensive, and requires hundreds of correct examples for better accuracy, 
which can limit their use for everyday purposes or in sensitive security systems. The result-
ing models may also be domain-specific and, therefore, may have restricted applications. 
In addition, DL is susceptible to deception and misclassification, which can threaten the 
social and financial securities of individuals and/or corporations. Getting stuck on local 
minima also makes most models unsuitable for online modes.
CNNs, RNNs, GANs, and autoencoders are the more frequently used DL architectures 
across various sectors. However, the potential application of other architectures in cur-
rent areas that use DL is widely unexplored. This paper found that advanced DL models, 
which are essentially hybrid conventional DL architectures, have the potential to overcome 
the challenges experienced by conventional models. Moreover, generative models exhibit 
greater capabilities as they are less reliant on examples. Future networks should strive to 
generate a set of possible outcomes, instead of providing one final prediction for the input, 
which may help tackle the issue of distorted or unclear inputs. Developing new strategies 
to optimize parameters, particularly hyperparameters, is another possibility that requires 
further investigation. Capsule architectures may dominate future DL models as they offer 
an enhanced way of routing information between layers. If the current challenges can be 
addressed, DL models can potentially contribute to further innovations in the field of AI 
and for solving far more complex problems.
Acknowledgements  The authors highly express their gratitude to Asian University for Women, Chatto-
gram, Bangladesh for their support in carrying out this study.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could appear to have influenced the work reported in this study.

13604
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Abbas AA, Naderi E, Gandali A, Hanieh M (2016) Comparative study of static and dynamic artificial neural 
network models in forecasting of tehran stock exchange. Int J Bus Dev Stud 8:43–59. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​22111/​IJBDS.​2016.​2635
Abdel-Zaher AM, Eldeib AM (2016) Breast cancer classification using deep belief networks. Expert Syst 
Appl 46:139–144. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eswa.​2015.​10.​015
Abedinia O, Amjady N, Ghadimi N (2018) Solar energy forecasting based on hybrid neural network and 
improved metaheuristic algorithm. Comput Intell 34(1):241–260. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​coin.​12145
Achanta S, Gangashetty SV (2017) Deep Elman recurrent neural networks for statistical parametric speech 
synthesis. Speech Commun 93:31–42. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​specom.​2017.​08.​003
Adhikari A, Ram A, Tang R, Lin J (2019) DocBERT: BERT for document classification. arXiv:​1904.​08398
Afshar P, Mohammadi A, Plataniotis KN (2018) Brain tumor type classification via capsule networks. In: 
Proceedings - international conference on image processing, ICIP. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICIP.​2018.​
84513​79
Ahmad J, Farman H, Jan Z (2019) Deep learning methods and applications. In: SpringerBriefs in computer 
science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-​981-​13-​3459-7_3
Akkus Z, Galimzianova A, Hoogi A, Rubin DL, Erickson BJ (2017) Deep learning for brain MRI seg-
mentation: state of the art and future directions. J Digit Imaging 30:449–459. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10278-​017-​9983-4
Alain G, Bengio Y, Courville A, Fergus R, Manning C (2014) What regularized auto-encoders learn from 
the data-generating distribution. J Mach Learn Res 15(1):3563–3593
Alam MR, Bennamoun M, Togneri R, Sohel F (2017) A joint deep Boltzmann machine (jDBM) model for 
person identification using mobile phone data. IEEE Trans Multimed 19(2):317–326. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1109/​TMM.​2016.​26155​24
Alemany S, Beltran J, Perez A, Ganzfried S (2019) Predicting hurricane trajectories using a recurrent neural 
network. In: 33rd AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, AAAI 2019, 31st innovative applica-
tions of artificial intelligence conference, IAAI 2019 and the 9th AAAI symposium on educational 
advances in artificial intelligence, EAAI 2019.  https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aaai.​v33i01.​33014​68
Ali F, Kwak D, Khan P, El-Sappagh S, Ali A, Ullah S, Kim KH, Kwak KS (2019) Transportation sentiment 
analysis using word embedding and ontology-based topic modeling. Knowledge-Based Syst. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​knosys.​2019.​02.​033
Al-Jumeily D, Ghazali R, Hussain A (2014) Predicting physical time series using dynamic ridge polynomial 
neural networks. PLoS ONE 9(8):e105766. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1371/​journ​al.​pone.​01057​66
Alpaydin E (2020) Introduction to machine learning. MIT Press, Cambridge
Arabasadi Z, Alizadehsani R, Roshanzamir M, Moosaei H, Yarifard AA (2017) Computer aided decision 
making for heart disease detection using hybrid neural network-genetic algorithm. Comput Methods 
Programs Biomed. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cmpb.​2017.​01.​004
Arora S, Ma T, Moitra A (2015) Simple, efficient, and neural algorithms for sparse coding. PMLR, pp 
113–149
Arulkumaran K, Deisenroth MP, Brundage M, Bharath AA (2017) A brief survey of deep reinforcement 
learning. In: IEEE signal processing magazine, special issue on deep learning for image understand-
ing pp 1–16
Ba J, Hinton G, Mnih V, Leibo JZ, Ionescu C (2016) Using fast weights to attend to the recent past. Adv 
Neural Inf Process Syst 29:4338–4346
Baecchi C, Uricchio T, Bertini M, Del Bimbo A (2016) A multimodal feature learning approach for sen-
timent analysis of social network multimedia. Multimed Tools Appl. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11042-​015-​2646-x

13605
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Bai Y, Fu J, Zhao T, Mei T (2018) Deep attention neural tensor network for visual question answering. In: 
Lecture notes in computer science (including subseries lecture notes in artificial intelligence and lec-
ture notes in bioinformatics). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​01258-8_2
Barré P, Stöver BC, Müller KF, Steinhage V (2017) LeafNet: a computer vision system for automatic plant 
species identification. Ecol Inform. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ecoinf.​2017.​05.​005
Bartunov S, Rae JW, Osindero S, Lillicrap TP (2019) Meta-learning deep energy-based memory models. 
https://​arXiv.​org/​1910.​02720
Basiri ME, Nemati S, Abdar M, Cambria E, Acharya UR (2021) ABCDM: an attention-based bidirectional 
CNN-RNN deep model for sentiment analysis. Futur Gener Comput Syst 115:279–294. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​future.​2020.​08.​005
Bau D, Zhu JY, Strobelt H, Zhou B, Tenenbaum JB, Freeman WT, Torralba A (2019) GaN dissection: visu-
alizing and understanding generative adversarial networks. In: 7th international conference on learn-
ing representations, ICLR 2019
Bengio Y, Simard P, Frasconi P (1994) Learning long-term dependencies with gradient descent is difficult. 
IEEE Trans Neural Netw 5(2):157–166. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​72.​279181
Bengio Y, Courville A, Vincent P (2013) Representation learning : a review and new perspectives. IEEE 
Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 35:1798–1828
Ben-Younes H, Cadene R, Cord M, Thome N (2017) MUTAN: multimodal tucker fusion for visual question 
answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1109/​ICCV.​2017.​285
Biancofiore F, Busilacchio M, Verdecchia M, Tomassetti B, Aruffo E, Bianco S, Di Tommaso S, Colangeli 
C, Rosatelli G, Di Carlo P (2017) Recursive neural network model for analysis and forecast of PM10 
and PM25. Atmos Pollut Res. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​apr.​2016.​12.​014
Bordes A, Weston J, Chopra S (2014) Question answering with subgraph embeddings. https://​arXiv.​org/​
1406.​3676
Bousmalis K, Trigeorgis G, Silberman N, Krishnan D, Erhan D (2016) Domain separation networks. In: 
Advances in neural information processing systems
Brahma S (2018) Improved sentence modeling using suffix bidirectional LSTM. https://​arXiv.​org/​1805.​
07340
Brocardo ML, Traore I, Woungang I, Obaidat MS (2017) Authorship verification using deep belief network 
systems. Int J Commun Syst 30:e3259. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​dac.​3259
Brock A, Donahue J, Simonyan K (2019) Large scale GaN training for high fidelity natural image synthesis. 
In: 7th international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2019
Camgoz NC, Hadfield S, Koller O, Ney H, Bowden R (2018) Neural sign language translation. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2018.​00812
Cao Z, Duan L, Yang G, Yue T, Chen Q (2019) An experimental study on breast lesion detection and clas-
sification from ultrasound images using deep learning architectures. BMC Med Imaging 19:1–9
Carrio A, Sampedro C, Rodriguez-ramos A, Campoy P (2017) A review of deep learning methods and 
applications for unmanned aerial vehicles. J Sensors 14:2017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​2017/​32968​74
Case C, Casper J, Catanzaro B, Diamos G, Elsen E (2014) Deep speech: scaling up end-to-end speech rec-
ognition. https://​arXiv.​org/​1412.​5567
Chang S, Liu J (2020) Multi-lane capsule network for classifying images with complex background. IEEE 
Access 8:79876–79886. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2020.​29907​00
Chen X, Kundu K, Zhu Y, Ma H, Fidler S, Urtasun R (2018a) 3D object proposals using stereo imagery for 
accurate object class detection. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 40(5):1259–1272. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1109/​TPAMI.​2017.​27066​85
Chen Y, Li W, Sakaridis C, Dai D, Van Gool L (2018b) Domain adaptive faster R-CNN for object detection 
in the wild. In: Proceedings of the IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern 
Recognition. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2018.​00352
Chen YY, Lin YH, Kung CC, Chung MH, Yen I (2019) Design and implementation of cloud analytics-
assisted smart power meters considering advanced artificial intelligence as edge analytics in demand-
side managment for smart homes. Sensors 19:2047
Cheng J, Dong L, Lapata M (2016) Long short-term memory-networks for machine reading. EMNLP con-
ference on empirical methods in natural language processing, proceedings. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18653/​
v1/​d16-​1053
Chicco D, Sadowski P, Baldi P, Milano P, Elettronica D (2014) Deep autoencoder neural networks for gene 
ontology annotation predictions. In: 5th ACM conference on bioinformatics, computational biology, 
and health informatics - BCB’14. pp 533–540. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​26493​87.​26494​42

13606
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Chu Q, Ouyang W, Li H, Wang X, Liu B, Yu N (2017) Online multi-object tracking using CNN-based 
single object tracker with spatial-temporal attention mechanism. In: Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCV.​2017.​518
Cireşan D, Meier U, Masci J, Schmidhuber J (2012) Multi-column deep neural network for traffic sign clas-
sification. Neural Netw 32:333–338. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neunet.​2012.​02.​023
Collobert R, Weston J, Bottou L, Karlen M, Kavukcuoglu K, Kuksa P (2011) Natural language processing 
(Almost) from scratch. J Mach Learn Res 12:2493–2537
Cui J, Long J, Min E, Liu Q, Li Q (2018) Comparative study of CNN and RNN for deep learning based 
intrusion detection system. In: Lecture notes in computer science (including subseries lecture notes in 
artificial intelligence and lecture notes in bioinformatics). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​00018-
9_​15
Da’u A, Salim N (2020) Recommendation system based on deep learning methods: a systematic review and 
new directions. Artif Intell Rev 53:2709–2748. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10462-​019-​09744-1
Dahl GE, Ranzato M, Mohamed AR, Hinton G (2010) Phone recognition with the mean-covariance 
restricted Boltzmann machine. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 23:469–477
De S, Maity A, Goel V, Shitole S, Bhattacharya A (2017) Predicting the popularity of instagram posts for 
a lifestyle magazine using deep learning. In: 2017 2nd international conference on communication 
systems, computing and IT applications (CSCITA) pp 174–177
Demeester T, Sutskever I, Chen K, Dean J, Corado G (2016) Distributed representations of words and 
phrases and their compositionality. EMNLP 2016 - Conference empirical methods natural language 
process processing
Deng L (2014) A tutorial survey of architectures, algorithms, and applications for deep learning. APSIPA 
Trans Signal Inf Process 3:e2. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​atsip.​2013.9
Deng L, Yu D (2014) Deep learning: methods and applications. Found Trends Signal Process 7:197–387
Deng F, Pu S, Chen X, Shi Y, Yuan T, Shengyan P (2018) Hyperspectral image classification with capsule 
network using limited training samples. Sensors 18(9):3153. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​s1809​3153
Deoras A, Povey D, Mikolov T, Burget L, Černocký J (2011) Strategies for training large scale neural net-
work language models. In: IEEE workshop on automatic speech recognition and understanding pp 
196–201
Dhyani M, Kumar R (2019) An intelligent Chatbot using deep learning with Bidirectional RNN and atten-
tion model. Mater Today Proceedings. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​matpr.​2020.​05.​450
Dick S (2019) Artificial intelligence. Harvard Data Sci Rev 1:1–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​99608​f92.​92fe1​
50c
Ding L, Fang W, Luo H, Love PED, Zhong B, Ouyang X (2018) A deep hybrid learning model to detect 
unsafe behavior: integrating convolution neural networks and long short-term memory. Autom Constr 
86:118–124
Dixit M, Tiwari A, Pathak H, Astya R (2018) An overview of deep learning architectures, libraries and its 
applications areas. In 2018 international conference on advances in computing, communication con-
trol and networking. pp 293–297. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICACC​CN.​2018.​87484​42
Do Rosario VM, Borin E, Breternitz M (2019) The multi-lane capsule network. IEEE Signal Process Lett 
26:1006–1010. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​LSP.​2019.​29156​61
do Rosario VM, Breternitz M, Borin E (2021) Efficiency and scalability of multi-lane capsule networks 
(MLCN). J. Parallel Distrib Comput. 155:63–73. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/J.​JPDC.​2021.​04.​010
Dora S, Pennartz C, Bohte S (2018) A deep predictive coding network for inferring hierarchical causes 
underlying sensory inputs, Lecture notes in computer science (including subseries lecture notes in 
artificial intelligence and lecture notes in bioinformatics). Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​
030-​01424-7_​45
Dumoulin V, Perez E, Schucher N, Strub F, Vries H, Courville A, Bengio Y (2018) Feature-wise transfor-
mations. Distill. https://​doi.​org/​10.​23915/​disti​ll.​00011
Dumoulin V, Shlens J, Kudlur M (2017) A learned representation for artistic style. In: 5th international con-
ference on learning representations, ICLR 2017 - conference track proceedings
Elman JL (1990) Finding structure in time. Cogn Sci 14(2):179–211. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​0364-​0213(90)​
90002-E
Elman JL (1998) Generalization, simple recurrent networks, and the emergence of structure. In: Proceedings 
20th annual conference cognitive science society
Eslami SMA, Heess N, Williams CKI, Winn J (2014) The shape boltzmann machine: a strong model of 
object shape. Int J Comput Vis 107:155–176. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11263-​013-​0669-1
Fayek HM, Lech M, Cavedon L (2017) Evaluating deep learning architectures for speech emotion recogni-
tion. Neural Netw 92:60–68. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neunet.​2017.​02.​013

13607
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Feng X, Zhang H, Ren Y, Shang P, Zhu Y, Liang Y (2019) The deep learning-based recommender system 
“pubmender” for choosing a biomedical publication venue: development and validation study. J Med 
Internet Res 21:e12957. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2196/​12957
Fink O, Wang Q, Svensen M, Dersin P, Lee W-J, Ducoffe M (2020) Potential, challenges and future direc-
tions for deep learning in prognostics and health management applications. Eng Appl Artif Intell 
92:103678
Gallicchio C Micheli A Pedrelli L (2018a) Deep echo state networks for diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease. 
In: ESANN 2018a - Proceedings, European symposium on artificial neural networks, computational 
intelligence and machine learning
Gallicchio C, Micheli A, Pedrelli L (2018b) Design of deep echo state networks. Neural Netw 108:33–47. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neunet.​2018.​08.​002
Gao Y, Gao F, Dong J, Li HC (2021) SAR image change detection based on multiscale capsule network. 
IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett. 18(3):484–488  https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​LGRS.​2020.​29778​38
Gehring J, Auli M, Grangier D, Yarats D, Dauphin YN (2017) Convolutional sequence to sequence learn-
ing. In: 34th International conference on machine learning, ICML 2017
Gevaert CM, Suomalainen J, Tang J, Kooistra L (2015) Generation of spectral-temporal response surfaces 
by combining multispectral satellite and hyperspectral UAV imagery for precision agriculture appli-
cations. IEEE J Sel Top Appl Earth Obs Remote Sens. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​JSTARS.​2015.​24063​
39
Gheisari M, Wang G, Bhuiyan ZA (2017) A survey on deep learning in big data. In: 2017 IEEE Interna-
tional conference on computational science and engineering (CSE) and IEEE international conference 
on embedded and ubiquitous computing (EUC) 2:173–180
Ghiasi G, Lee H, Kudlur M, Dumoulin V, Shlens J (2017) Exploring the structure of a real-time, arbitrary 
neural artistic stylization network. In: British machine vision conference 2017, BMVC 2017. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​5244/c.​31.​114
Ghosh R, Ravi K, Ravi V (2016) A novel deep learning architecture for sentiment classification. In: 2016 
3rd International conference on recent advances in information technology, RAIT 2016. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1109/​RAIT.​2016.​75079​53
Godarzi AA, Amiri RM, Talaei A, Jamasb T (2014) Predicting oil price movements: a dynamic artificial 
neural network approach. Energy Policy 68: 371–382. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​enpol.​2013.​12.​049
Goodfellow IJ, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y (2014) 
Generative adversarial nets. Adv Neural Inform Process Syst. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3156/​jsoft.​29.5_​
177_2
Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A (2016) Deep learning. MIT Press, Cambridge
Goodfellow IJ, Warde-Farley D, Mirza M, Courville A, Bengio Y (2013) Maxout networks. In: 30th Inter-
national conference on machine learning, ICML 2013.
Govender M, Chetty K, Bulcock H (2007) A review of hyperspectral remote sensing and its application in 
vegetation and water resource studies. Water SA 33(2):145–151. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4314/​wsa.​v33i2.​
49049
Graves A, Schmidhuber J (2005) Framewise phoneme classification with bidirectional LSTM and other neu-
ral network architectures. Neural Netw 18(5–6):602–610. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neunet.​2005.​06.​
042
Graves A, Jaitly N, Mohamed AR (2013) Hybrid speech recognition with Deep Bidirectional LSTM. In: 
2013 IEEE workshop on automatic speech recognition and understanding, ASRU 2013 - proceedings 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ASRU.​2013.​67077​42
Günther F, Dudschig C, Kaup B (2016) Latent semantic analysis cosines as a cognitive similarity measure: 
evidence from priming studies. Q J Exp Psychol. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​17470​218.​2015.​10382​80
Guo Y, Liu Y, Oerlemans A, Lao S, Wu S, Lew MS (2016) Deep learning for visual understanding: a 
review. Neurocomputing 187:27–48. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neucom.​2015.​09.​116
Gupta A, Anpalagan A, Guan L, Khwaja AS (2021) Deep learning for object detection and scene perception 
in self-driving cars: survey, challenges, and open issues. Array 100057
PA Gutiérrez and C Hervás-Martínez (2011) Hybrid artificial neural networks: models, algorithms and data. 
In: 11th international work-conference on artificial neural networks
Haarnoja T, Tang, H, Abbeel P, Levine S (2017) Reinforcement learning with deep energy-based policies
Hamilton WL, Ying R, Leskovec J (2017) Representation learning on graphs: methods and applications. 
https://​arXiv.​org/​1709.​05584
Han Y, Huang G, Song S, Yang L, Wang H,  Wang Y (2021) Dynamic Neural networks: a survey. IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 44(11):7436–7456
Hasan M, Choi J, Neumann J, Roy-Chowdhury AK, Davis LS (2016) Learning temporal regularity in video 
sequences

13608
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Hassan M, Bin Alam MS, Ahsan, T (2018) Emotion detection from text using skip-thought vectors. In: 
2018 International conference on innovations in science, engineering and technology, ICISET 2018. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICISET.​2018.​87456​15
He J, Cheng X, He J, Xu H (2019) Cv-CapsNet: Complex-valued capsule network. IEEE Access 7:85492–
85499. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2019.​29245​48
He S, Wang S, Lan W, Fu H, Ji Q (2013) Facial expression recognition using deep boltzmann machine from 
thermal infrared images. In: Proceedings - 2013 humaine association conference on affective comput-
ing and intelligent interaction, ACII 2013. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACII.​2013.​46
Hinton GE (2009) Deep belief networks. Scholarpedia. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4249/​schol​arped​ia.​5947
Hinton G, Deng L, Yu D, Dahl GE, Mohamed AR, Jaitly N, Senior A, Vanhoucke V, Nguyen P, Sainath TN, 
Kingsbury B (2012) Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: the shared 
views of four research groups. IEEE Signal Process Mag 29(6):82–97
Hinton GE, Krizhevsky A, Wang SD (2011) Transforming auto-encoders. In: Lecture notes in computer sci-
ence (including subseries lecture notes in artificial intelligence and lecture notes in bioinformatics). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​642-​21735-7_6
Hong S, Yang D, Choi J, Lee H (2018) Inferring semantic layout for hierarchical text-to-image synthesis. 
In: Proceedings of the IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2018.​00833
Hu F, Xia GS, Hu J, Zhang L (2015) Transferring deep convolutional neural networks for the scene classifi-
cation of high-resolution remote sensing imagery. Remote Sens 7(11):14680–14707. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​3390/​rs711​14680
Hu X, Chu L, Pei J, Liu W, Bian J (2021) Model complexity of deep learning: a survey. Knowl Inf Syst. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10115-​021-​01605-0
Hu G, Hua Y, Yuan Y, Zhang Z, Lu Z, Mukherjee SS, Hospedales TM, Robertson NM, Yang Y (2017) 
Attribute-enhanced face recognition with neural tensor fusion networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 
international conference on computer vision. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCV.​2017.​404
Huang X, Belongie S (2017) Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization. In: 
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCV.​
2017.​167
Huang P, He X, Gao J, Deng L, Acero A, Heck L (2013) Learning deep structured semantic models for web 
search using clickthrough data. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on infor-
mation and knowledge management pp 2333–2338
Hughes M, Li I, Kotoulas S, Suzumura T (2017) Medical text classification using convolutional neu-
ral networks. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, pp 246–250. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3233/​
978-1-​61499-​753-5-​246
Irsoy O, Cardie C (2014) Deep recursive neural networks for compositionality in language. In: Advances in 
neural information processing systems
Ishihara T, Hayashi K, Manabe H, Shimbo M, Nagata M (2018) Neural tensor networks with diagonal slice 
matrices. In: NAACL HLT 2018 - 2018 conference of the North American chapter of the association 
for computational linguistics: human language technologies - proceedings of the conference. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​18653/​v1/​n18-​1047
Jaiswal A, AbdAlmageed W, Wu Y, Natarajan P (2019) CapsuleGAN: generative adversarial capsule net-
work. In: Lecture notes in computer science (including subseries lecture notes in artificial intelligence 
and lecture notes in bioinformatics). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​11015-4_​38
Jayaraman S, Ramachandran M, Patan R, Daneshmand M, Gandomi AH (2022) Fuzzy deep neural learn-
ing based on goodman and Kruskal’s Gamma for Search Engine Optimization. IEEE Trans Big Data 
8(1), 268–277
Jenkins IR, Gee LO, Knauss A, Yin H, Schroeder J (2018) Accident scenario generation with recurrent 
neural networks. In: 2018 21st International conference on intelligent transportation systems (ITSC). 
IEEE, pp 3340–3345
Jiang X, Zhang Y, Liu W, Gao J, Liu J, Zhang Y, Lin J (2020) Hyperspectral image classification with Cap-
snet and Markov random fields. IEEE Access 8:191956–191968. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​
2020.​30291​74
Jordan MI, Mitchell TM (2015) Machine learning: trends, perspectives, and prospects 349
Kae A, Sohn K, Lee H, Learned-Miller E (2013) Augmenting CRFs with Boltzmann machine shape priors 
for image labeling 2019–2026. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2013.​263
Kaiser Ł, Sutskever I (2016) Neural GPUs learn algorithms. In: 4th International conference on learning 
representations, ICLR 2016 - conference track proceedings

13609
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Karras T, Aila T, Laine S, Lehtinen J (2018) Progressive growing of GANs for improved quality, stability, 
and variation. In: 6th international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2018 - conference 
track proceedings
Karras T, Laine S, Aila T (2019) A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. 
In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition 2019 pp 4396–
4405. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2019.​00453
Kashyap PK, Kumar S, Jaiswal A, Prasad M, Gandomi AH (2021) Towards precision agriculture: iot-ena-
bled intelligent irrigation systems using deep learning neural network. IEEE Sens J 21(16):17479–
17491. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​JSEN.​2021.​30692​66
Kato N, Fadlullah ZM, Mao B, Tang F, Akashi O, Inoue T, Mizutani K (2016) The deep learning vision for 
heterogeneous network traffic control: proposal, challenges, and future perspective. IEEE Wirel Com-
mun 24:146–153 https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​MWC.​2016.​16003​17WC
Khamparia A, Singh MM (2019) A systematic review on deep learning architectures and applications. 
Expert Syst 36:e12400. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​exsy.​12400
Khan A, Sohail A, Zahoora U, Qureshi AS (2020) A survey of the recent architectures of deep convolutional 
neural networks. Artif Intell Rev 53:5455–5516. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10462-​020-​09825-6
Kim JH, On KW, Lim W, Kim J, Ha JW, Zhang BT (2017) Hadamard product for low-rank bilinear pool-
ing. In: 5th international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2017 - conference track 
proceedings
Kim TS, Reiter A (2017) Interpretable 3D human action analysis with temporal convolutional networks. 
IEEE Computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPRW.​2017.​207
Kiros R, Zhu Y, Salakhutdinov R, Zemel RS, Torralba A, Urtasun R, Fidler S (2015) Skip-thought vectors. 
Advances in neural information processing systems
Kotsiopoulos T, Sarigiannidis P, Ioannidis D, Tzovaras D (2021) Machine learning and deep learning in 
smart manufacturing: the smart grid paradigm. Comput Sci Rev 40:100341
Kraska T, Beutel A, Chi EH, Dean J, Polyzotis N (2018) The case for learned index structures. In: Proceed-
ings of the ACM SIGMOD international conference on management of data. Association for comput-
ing machinery, New York, pp 489–504. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​31837​13.​31969​09
Krichene E, Masmoudi Y, Alimi AM, Abraham A, Chabchoub H (2017) Forecasting using elman recur-
rent neural network.  Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, pp 488–497. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​978-3-​319-​53480-0_​48
Krizhevsky A, Hinton GE (2017) ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Com-
mun ACM 60:84–90
Kumar A, Ramachandran M, Gandomi AH, Patan R, Lukasik S, Soundarapandian RK (2019) A deep neural 
network based classifier for brain tumor diagnosis. Appl Soft Comput 82:105528
Landgrebe D (2002) Hyperspectral image data analysis. IEEE Signal Process Mag 19(1):17–28. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1109/​79.​974718
Lara-ben P, Carranza-garc M (2021) An experimental review on deep learning architectures for time series 
forecasting. Int J Neural Syst 31:2130001. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1142/​S0129​06572​13000​11
Lea C, Vidal R, Reiter A, Hager GD (2016) Temporal convolutional networks: a unified approach to action 
segmentation. In: Lecture notes in computer science (including subseries lecture notes in artificial 
intelligence and lecture notes in bioinformatics). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​319-​49409-8_7
LeCun YA, Bottou L, Orr GB, Müller K-R (2012) Efficient backprop BT - neural networks: tricks of the 
trade. In: Neural networks: tricks of the trade
Lecun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G (2015) Deep learning. Nature 521:463–444. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​natur​
e14539
Ledig C, Theis L, Huszár F, Caballero J, Cunningham A, Acosta A, Aitken A, Tejani A., Totz J, Wang Z, 
Shi W (2017) Photo-realistic single image super-resolution using a generative adversarial network. In: 
Proceedings - 30th IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, CVPR 2017. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2017.​19
Lee R, Chen IY (2020) The time complexity analysis of neural network model configurations. In: Pro-
ceedings - 2nd international conference on mathematics and computers in science and engineering, 
MACISE 2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​MACIS​E49704.​2020.​00039
Lee H, Grosse R, Ranganath R, Ng AY (2009) Convolutional deep belief networks for scalable unsuper-
vised learning of hierarchical representations. In: Proceedings of the 26th international conference on 
machine learning, ICML 2009 https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​15533​74.​15534​53
Lemley J, Bazrafkan S, Corcoran P (2017) Deep learning for consumer devices and services. IEEE Consum 
Electron Mag 6:48–56

13610
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Leng B, Zhang X, Yao M, Xiong Z (2015) A 3D model recognition mechanism based on deep Boltzmann 
machines. Neurocomputing 151:593–602. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neucom.​2014.​06.​084
Leung MKK, Xiong HY, Lee LJ, Frey BJ (2014) Deep learning of the tissue-regulated splicing code. Bioin-
formatics 30:i121–i129. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bioin​forma​tics/​btu277
Li Z, Huang H, Zhang Z, Shi G (2022) Manifold-based multi-deep belief network for feature extraction of 
hyperspectral image. Remote Sens 14:1484
Li J, Xiong D, Tu Z, Zhu M, Zhang M, Zhou G (2017a) Modeling source syntax for neural machine transla-
tion. In: ACL 2017a - 55th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, proceed-
ings of the conference (Long Papers). https://​doi.​org/​10.​18653/​v1/​P17-​1064
Li Z, Yang Y, Liu X, Zhou F, Wen S, Xu W (2017b) Dynamic computational time for visual attention. 
In: Proceedings - 2017 IEEE international conference on computer vision workshops, ICCVW 2017. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCVW.​2017.​145
Li JB, Schmidt FR, Kolter JZ (2019a) Adversarial camera stickers: a physical camera-based attack on deep 
learning systems. In: International conference on machine learning. pp 3896–3904
Li P, Chen X, Shen S (2019b) Stereo R-CNN based 3D object detection for autonomous driving. In: Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2019.​00783
Li Y, Qian M, Liu P, Cai Q, Li X, Guo J, Yan H, Yu F, Yuan K, Yu J, Qin L, Liu H, Wu W, Xiao P, Zhou Z 
(2019c) The recognition of rice images by UAV based on capsule network. Cluster Comput. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10586-​018-​2482-7
Li Z, Cai X, Liu Y, Zhu B (2019d) A Novel Gaussian-Bernoulli based convolutional deep belief net-
works for image feature extraction. Neural Process Lett 49:305–319. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11063-​017-​9751-y
Liao S, Wang J, Yu R, Sato K, Cheng Z (2017) CNN for situations understanding based on sentiment analy-
sis of twitter data. Procedia Comput Sci. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​procs.​2017.​06.​037
Lim S, Kang J (2018) Chemical-gene relation extraction using recursive neural network. Database.https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1093/​datab​ase/​bay060
Lin Z, Feng M, Dos Santos CN, Yu M, Xiang B, Zhou B, Bengio Y (2017) A structured self-attentive sen-
tence embedding. In: 5th international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2017 - confer-
ence track proceedings
Lin CY (2004) Rouge: a package for automatic evaluation of summaries. Proc work text summ branches out 
(WAS 2004)
Liou CY, Cheng WC, Liou JW, Liou DR (2014) Autoencoder for words. Neurocomputing 139:84–96. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neucom.​2013.​09.​055
Litjens G, Kooi T, Bejnordi BE, Arindra A, Setio A, Ciompi F, Ghafoorian M, Laak JAWMV, Der G, Van 
B, Clara IS (2017) A survey on deep learning in medical image analysis. Med Image Anal 42:60–88. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​media.​2017.​07.​005
Liu S, Wang Y, Yang X, Lei B, Liu L, Xiang S, Ni D, Wang T (2019) Deep learning in medical ultra-
sound analysis: a review. Engineering 5:261–275. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eng.​2018.​11.​020
Liu K, Cheng J, Yi J (2022) Copper price forecasted by hybrid neural network with Bayesian optimi-
zation and wavelet transform. Resour Policy 75:102520. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​resou​rpol.​2021.​
102520
Liu P, Qiu X, Xuanjing H (2016) Recurrent neural network for text classification with multi-task learn-
ing. In: IJCAI international joint conference on artificial intelligence
Liu W, Luo W, Lian D, Gao S (2017) Future frame prediction for anomaly detection—a new baseline. 
In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition 6536–6545
Lu H, Li Y, Chen M, Kim H, Serikawa S (2018) Brain intelligence: go beyond artificial intelligence. 
Mobile Netw Appl 23:368–375
Lukoševičius M, Jaeger H (2009) Reservoir computing approaches to recurrent neural network training. 
Comput Sci Rev 3(3):127–49. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​cosrev.​2009.​03.​005
Ma J, Sheridan RP, Liaw A, Dahl GE, Svetnik V (2015) Deep neural nets as a method for quantitative struc-
ture—activity relationships. J Chem Inf Model 55:263–274. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1021/​ci500​747n
Ma J, Gao W, Wong KF (2018) Rumor detection on twitter with tree-structured recursive neural net-
works. In: ACL 2018 - 56th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, pro-
ceedings of the conference (Long Papers). https://​doi.​org/​10.​18653/​v1/​p18-​1184
Majumder N, Poria S, Hazarika D, Mihalcea R, Gelbukh A, Cambria, E (2019) DialogueRNN: an atten-
tive RNN for emotion detection in conversations. In: 33rd AAAI Conference on artificial intel-
ligence, AAAI 2019, 31st innovative applications of artificial intelligence conference, IAAI 2019 
and the 9th AAAI symposium on educational advances in artificial intelligence, EAAI 2019https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aaai.​v33i01.​33016​818

13611
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Mendis GJ, Randeny T, Wei, J, Madanayake A (2016) Deep learning based doppler radar for micro VAS 
detection and classification Gihan J. Mendis. In: MILCOM 2016–2016 IEEE military communica-
tions conference pp 924–929
Mesnil G, Dauphin Y, Yao K, Bengio Y, Deng L, Hakkani-tur D, He X (2015) Using recurrent neural 
networks for slot filling in spoken language understanding. IEEE/ACM trans audio, speech Lang 
Process 23:530–539
Micheli A, Sperduti A, Starita A (2007) An introduction to recursive neural networks and kernel meth-
ods for cheminformatics. Curr Pharm Des 13(14):1469–1496. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2174/​13816​12077​
80765​981
Mikolov T, Karafiát M, Burget L, Jan C, Khudanpur, S (2010) Recurrent neural network based language 
model. In: Proceedings of the 11th annual conference of the international speech communication 
association, INTERSPEECH 2010
Mikolov T, Kombrink S, Burget L, Černocký J, Khudanpur S (2011) Extensions of recurrent neural net-
work language model In: ICASSP, IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal 
processing - proceedings. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICASSP.​2011.​59476​11
Mikolov T, Chen K, Corrado G Dean J (2013) Efficient estimation of word representations in vector 
space. In: 1st international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2013 - workshop track 
proceedings
Miotto R, Wang F, Wang S, Jiang X, Dudley JT (2018) Deep learning for healthcare: review, opportuni-
ties and challenges. Brief Bioinform 19:1236–1246. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bib/​bbx044
Misra D (2019) Mish: a self regularized non-monotonic neural activation function. https://​arXiv.​org/​
1908.​08681
Mitra B, Craswell N (2017) Neural text embeddings for information retrieval (WSDM 2017 tutorial) 
In: WSDM 2017 - Proceedings of the 10th ACM international conference on web search and data 
mining https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​30186​61.​30227​55
Miyato T, Kataoka T, Koyama M, Yoshida Y (2018) Spectral normalization for generative adversarial 
networks. In: 6th international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2018 - conference 
track proceedings
Mobiny A, Van Nguyen H 2018 Fast CapsNet for lung cancer screening. In: Lecture notes in computer 
science (including subseries lecture notes in artificial intelligence and lecture notes in bioinfor-
matics). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​00934-2_​82
Mohd M, Jan R, Shah M (2020) Text document summarization using word embedding. Expert Syst 
Appl. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eswa.​2019.​112958
Mousavi M, Gandomi AH (2021) Deep learning for structural health monitoring under environmental 
and operational variations. In: Nondestructive characterization and monitoring of advanced mate-
rials, aerospace, civil infrastructure, and transportation XV. International society for optics and 
photonics p 115920H
Mühlhoff R (2020) Human-aided artificial intelligence: or, how to run large computations in human brains? 
Toward a media sociology of machine learning. New Media Soc 22:1868–1884. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1177/​14614​44819​885334
Mukherjee S, Zimmer A, Sun X, Ghuman P, Cheng I (2020) An unsupervised generative neural approach 
for InSAR phase filtering and coherence estimation. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 18:1971–1975
Murali S, Swapna TR (2019) An empirical evaluation of temporal convolutional network for offensive text 
classification. Int J Innov Technol Explor Eng 8(8)
Naylor CD (2018) On the prospects for a (deep) learning health care system. J Am Med Assoc 
320:1099–1100
Ng A (2015) What data scientists should know about deep learning. www.​slide​share.​net/​Extra​ctCon​f44
Ngiam J, Chen Z, Wei Koh P, Ng AY (2011) Learning deep energy models. In: Proceedings of the 28th 
international conference on machine learning (ICML-11)  pp 1105–1112
Nguyen A, Yosinski J, Clune J (2015) Deep neural networks are easily fooled: high confidence predictions 
for unrecognizable images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition pp 427–436
Nguyen-Thanh VM, Zhuang X, Rabczuk T (2020) A deep energy method for finite deformation hyperelas-
ticity. Eur J Mech 80:103874. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eurom​echsol.​2019.​103874
Niklaus S, Mai L, Liu F (2017) Video frame interpolation via adaptive separable convolution. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCV.​2017.​37
Norton AP, Qi Y (2017) Adversarial-playground: a visualization suite showing how adversarial examples 
fool deep learning. In: 2017 IEEE symposium on visualization for cyber security (VizSec) pp 1–14
Nwankpa CE, Ijomah W, Gachagan A, Marshall S (2018) Activation functions: comparison of trends in 
practice and research for deep learning.   https://​arXiv.​org/​1811.​03378

13612
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Odena A, Olah C, Shlens J (2017) Conditional image synthesis with auxiliary classifier gans. In: 34th Inter-
national conference on machine learning, ICML 2017
Oka A, Ishimura N, Ishihara S (2021) A new dawn for the use of artificial intelligence in gastroenterology. 
Hepatol Pancreatol Diagn 11:1719
Oord VD, Dieleman S, Schrauwen B (2013) Deep content-based music recommendation. Neural Inform 
Process Syst 26:1–9
Orkphol K, Yang W (2019) Word sense disambiguation using cosine similarity collaborates with Word2vec 
and WordNet. Futur Internet 11:114
Ortiz A, Munilla J, Gorriz JM, Ramirez J (2016) Ensembles of deep learning architectures for the early 
diagnosis of the Alzheimer’s disease. Int J Neural Syst 26:1–23. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1142/​S0129​06571​
65002​58
Palanichamy K (2019) Integrative omic analysis of neuroblastoma. Computational epigenetics and diseases. 
Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 311–326
Pandey K, Shekhawat HS, Prasanna, SRM (2019) Deep learning techniques for speech emotion recogni-
tion : a review. 2019 29th international conference radioelektronika pp 1–6
Papernot N, Mcdaniel P, Jha S, Fredrikson M, Celik ZB, Swami A (2016) The limitations of deep learning 
in adversarial settings. In: 2016 IEEE European symposium on security and privacy (EuroS and P) pp 
372–387
Papineni K, Roukos S, Ward T, Zhu W-J (2001) BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine trans-
lation. Assoc Comput Linguist. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3115/​10730​83107​3135
Parikh AP, Täckström O, Das, D, Uszkoreit J (2016) A decomposable attention model for natural language 
inference. In: EMNLP 2016 - conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pro-
ceedings. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18653/​v1/​d16-​1244
Park T, Liu MY, Wang TC, Zhu JY (2019) Semantic image synthesis with spatially-adaptive normalization. 
In: Proceedings of the IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2019.​00244
Park DC (2010) A time series data prediction scheme using bilinear recurrent neural network. In: 2010 
International conference on information science and applications, ICISA 2010. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1109/​ICISA.​2010.​54803​83
Parkhi OM, Vedaldi A, Zisserman A (2015) Deep face recognition. British machine vision association
Pashaei M, Kamangir H (2020) Review and evaluation of deep learning architectures for efficient land cover 
mapping with uas hyper-spatial imagery: a case study over a wetland. Remote Sens 12:959. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​3390/​rs120​60959
Paula EL, Ladeira M, Carvalho RN, Marzag T (2016) Deep learning anomaly detection as support fraud 
investigation in Brazilian exports and anti-money laundering. In: 2016 15th IEEE International con-
ference on machine learning and applications (ICMLA) pp 954–960. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICMLA.​
2016.​73
Paulus R, Xiong C, Socher R (2018) A deep reinforced model for abstractive summarization. In: 6th inter-
national conference on learning representations, ICLR 2018 - conference track proceedings
Perozzi B, Al-Rfou R, Skiena S (2014) DeepWalk: online learning of social representations. In: Proceedings 
of the ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1145/​26233​30.​26237​32
Perraudin N, Defferrard M, Kacprzak T, Sgier R (2019) DeepSphere: efficient spherical convolutional 
neural network with HEALPix sampling for cosmological applications. Astron Comput 27:130–46. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​ascom.​2019.​03.​004
Pfau D (2017) Unrolled GAN 1–25
Poliak A, Belinkov Y, Glass J, Van Durme B (2018) On the evaluation of semantic phenomena in neural 
machine translation using natural language inference. In: NAACL HLT 2018 - 2018 conference of the 
North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technolo-
gies - proceedings of the conference. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18653/​v1/​n18-​2082
Popperli M, Gulagundi R, Yogamani S, Milz S (2019) Capsule neural network based height classification 
using low-cost automotive ultrasonic sensors. In: IEEE intelligent vehicles symposium, proceedings. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​IVS.​2019.​88138​79
Pouyanfar S, Saad S., Yilin Y, Haiman T, Tao Y, Reyes MP, Shyu M, Chen S-C, Iyengar SS (2018) A sur-
vey on deep learning: algorithms, techniques, and applications. ACM Comput Surv 51(5):1–36
Qasim Abualigah LM, Hanandeh ES (2015) Applying genetic algorithms to information retrieval using vec-
tor space model. Int J Comput Sci Eng Appl. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5121/​ijcsea.​2015.​5102
Qiu X, Huang X (2015) Convolutional neural tensor network architecture for community-based question 
answering. In: IJCAI International joint conference on artificial intelligence

13613
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Rao G, Huang W, Feng Z, Cong Q (2018a) LSTM with sentence representations for document-level senti-
ment classification. Neurocomputing 308:49–57. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neucom.​2018.​04.​045
Rao K, Sak H, Prabhavalkar R (2018b) Exploring architectures, data and units for streaming end-to-end 
speech recognition with RNN-transducer. In: 2017 IEEE automatic speech recognition and under-
standing workshop, ASRU 2017 - proceedings. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ASRU.​2017.​82689​35
Ravì D, Wong C, Deligianni F, Berthelot M, Andreu-perez J, Lo B (2017) Deep learning for health infor-
matics. IEEE J Biomed Heal Inform 21:4–21
Rengasamy D, Figueredo GP, Advanced T, Analysis D (2018) Deep learning approaches to aircraft mainte-
nance, repair and overhaul: a review. In: 2018 21st International conference on intelligent transporta-
tion systems (ITSC) pp 150–153
Roberto J, Solares A, Elisa F, Raimondi D, Zhu Y, Rahimian F, Canoy D, Tran J, Catarina A, Gomes P, Pay-
berah AH, Zottoli M, Nazarzadeh M, Conrad N (2020) Deep learning for electronic health records: a 
comparative review of multiple deep neural architectures. J Biomed Inform 101:103337. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​jbi.​2019.​103337
Russakovsky O, Deng J, Su H, Krause J, Satheesh S, Ma S, Huang Z, Karpathy A, Khosla A, Bernstein M, 
Berg AC, Fei-Fei L (2015) ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge. Int J Comput Vis 115: 
211–252. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11263-​015-​0816-y
Sabour S, Frosst N, Hinton GE (2017) Dynamic routing between capsules. Adv Neural Inform Processing 
Syst. https://​doi.​org/​10.​48550/​arXiv.​1710.​09829
Sahoo BB, Jha R, Singh A, Kumar D (2019) Long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network 
for low-flow hydrological time series forecasting. Acta Geophys 67(5):1471–1481. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​s11600-​019-​00330-1
Sainath TN, Mohamed A, Kingsbury, B, Ramabhadran B, Watson IBMTJ, Heights Y (2013) Deep con-
volutional neural networks for LVCSR. In: Proceedings  acoustics, speech and signal processing pp 
8614–8618
Samaniego E, Anitescu C, Goswami S, Nguyen-Thanh VM, Guo H, Hamdia K, Zhuang X, Rabczuk T 
(2020) An energy approach to the solution of partial differential equations in computational mechan-
ics via machine learning: concepts, implementation and applications. Comput Methods Appl Mech 
Eng 362:112790
Saremi S, Mehrjou A, Schölkopf B, Hyvärinen A (2018) Deep energy estimator networks. https://​arXiv.​
1805.​08306
Scellier B, Bengio Y (2017) Equilibrium propagation: bridging the gap between energy-based models and 
backpropagation. Front Comput Neurosci 11:24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fncom.​2017.​00024
Schmidhuber J (2015) Deep learning in neural networks: an overview. Neural Netw 61:85–117. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​neunet.​2014.​09.​003
Schmidt U (2014) Shrinkage fields for effective image restoration. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference 
on computer vision and pattern recognition https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2014.​349
Sengupta S, Basak S, Saikia P, Paul S, Tsalavoutis V, Atiah FD, Ravi V, Alan R, Ii P (2020) A review 
of deep learning with special emphasis on architectures applications and recent trends. Knowledge-
Based Syst 194:105596
Seo S, Kim C, Kim H, Mo K, Kang P (2020) Comparative study of deep learning-based sentiment classifi-
cation. IEEE Access 8:6861–6875. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2019.​29634​26
Shakya SR, Zhang C, Zhou Z (2018) Comparative study of machine learning and deep learning architecture 
for human activity recognition using accelerometer data. Int J Mach Learn Comput 8(6):577–582. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​18178/​ijmlc.​2018.8.​6.​748
Shen Y, He X, Gao J, Deng L, Mesnil G (2014) A latent semantic model with convolutional-pooling struc-
ture for information retrieval. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM international conference on confer-
ence on information and knowledge management. pp 101–110
Shi T, Kang K, Choo J, Reddy CK (2018) Short-text topic modeling via non-negative matrix factoriza-
tion enriched with local word-context correlations. In: The web conference 2018 - proceedings of the 
world wide web conference, WWW 2018. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​31788​76.​31860​09
Shoeibi A, Ghassemi N, Khodatars M, Jafari M, Hussain S, Alizadehsani R (2020) Application of deep 
learning techniques for automated detection of epileptic seizures: a Review.  https://​arXiv.​org/​2007.​
01276
Shrestha A (2019) Review of deep learning algorithms and architectures. IEEE Access 7:53040–53065. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2019.​29122​00
Si Y, Wang J, Xu H, Roberts K (2019) Enhancing clinical concept extraction with contextual embeddings. J 
Am Med Informatics Assoc. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​jamia/​ocz096

13614
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Siami-Namini S, Tavakoli N, Namin AS (2019) The performance of LSTM and BiLSTM in forecasting time 
series. In: Proceedings - 2019 IEEE International conference on big data, big data. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1109/​BigDa​ta470​90.​2019.​90059​97
Siegelmann HT (1995) Computation beyond the turing limit. Science 80:268. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scien​
ce.​268.​5210.​545
Signorelli CM (2018) Can computers become conscious and overcome humans? Front Robot AI 5:121
Socher R, Chen D, Manning CD, Ng AY (2013) Reasoning with neural tensor networks for knowledge base 
completion. Adv Neural Inf Proc Syst 1:e2
Sønderby CK, Caballero J, Theis L, Shi W, Huszár F (2017) Amortised map inference for image super-
resolution. In: 5th international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2017 - conference track 
proceedings
Srivastava N, Salakhutdinov R (2014) Multimodal learning with deep Boltzmann machines. J Mach Learn 
Res 15
Sugiyama S (2019) Human behavior and another kind in consciousness: emerging research and opportuni-
ties. IGI Global, Hershey
Sui J, Liu M, Lee J, Zhang J, Calhoun V (2020) Deep learning methods and applications in neuroimaging. J 
Neurosci Methods 339:108718. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jneum​eth.​2020.​108718
Sun P, Hui C, Bai N, Yang S, Wan L, Zhang Q, Zhao Y (2015) Revealing the characteristics of a novel 
bioflocculant and its flocculation performance in Microcystis aeruginosa removal. Sci Rep 5:17465. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​srep1​7465
Sun X, Nasrabadi NM, Tran TD (2017) Supervised deep sparse coding networks.  https://​arXiv.​org/​1701.​
08349
Sun B, Feng J, Saenko K (2016) Return of frustratingly easy domain adaptation. In: 30th AAAI conference 
on artificial intelligence, AAAI 2016
Sutskever I, Hinton G, Taylor G (2009) The recurrent temporal restricted boltzmann machine. In: Advances 
in neural information processing systems 21 - proceedings of the 2008 conference
Sutskever I, Vinyals O, Le QV (2014) Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In: Advances in 
neural information processing systems
Sutskever I, Hinton G (2007) Learning multilevel distributed representations for high-dimensional 
sequences. J Machine Learn Res. 2:548–555
Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P, Reed S, Anguelov D, Erhan D, Vanhoucke V, Rabinovich A (2015) 
Going deeper with convolutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-
tern recognition. pp 1–9
Taherkhani A, Cosma G, McGinnity TM (2018) Deep-FS: a feature selection algorithm for deep Boltz-
mann machines. Neurocomputing 322:22–37. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neucom.​2018.​09.​040
Tahmassebi A, Gandomi AH, Fong S, Meyer-Baese A, Foo SY (2018a) Multi-stage optimization of a 
deep model: a case study on ground motion modeling. PLoS ONE 13:e0203829
Tahmassebi A, Gandomi AH, McCann I, Schulte MHJ, Goudriaan AE, Meyer-Baese A (2018b) Deep 
learning in medical imaging: Fmri big data analysis via convolutional neural networks. In: Pro-
ceedings of the practice and experience on advanced research computing. pp 1–4
Tahmassebi A, Ehtemami A, Mohebali B, Gandomi AH, Pinker K, Meyer-Baese A (2019) Big data ana-
lytics in medical imaging using deep learning. In: Big data: learning, analytics, and applications. 
international society for optics and photonics, p 109890E
Tahmassebi A, Martin J, Meyer-Baese A, Gandomi AH (2020) An interpretable deep learning frame-
work for health monitoring systems: a case study of eye state detection using EEG Signals. In: 
2020 IEEE symposium series on computational intelligence (SSCI). IEEE pp 211–218
Taigman Y, Polyak A, Wolf L (2017) Unsupervised cross-domain image generation. In: 5th international 
conference on learning representations, ICLR 2017 - conference track proceedings
Tandiya N, Jauhar A, Marojevic V, Reed JH (2018) Deep predictive coding neural network for rf anom-
aly detection in wireless networks. arXiv:2018.8403654. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCW.​2018.​
84036​54
Tang Y (2013) Deep learning using linear support vector machines. https://​arXiv.​org/​1306.​0239
Tang Z, Yang J, Pei Z, Song X, Ge B (2019) Multi-process training gan for identity-preserving face syn-
thesis. IEEE Access 7:97641–97652. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ACCESS.​2019.​29302​03
Tavarone Raffaele,   Badino L (2018) Conditional-computation-based recurrent neural networks for 
computationally efficient acoustic modelling. Interspeech, pp 1274–1278
Telikani A, Gandomi AH, Choo K-KR, Shen J (2021) A cost-sensitive deep learning based approach 
for network traffic classification. IEEE Trans Netw Serv Manag 19(1):661–670. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1109/​TNSM.​2021.​31122​83

13615
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Tkachenko Y (2015) Autonomous CRM control via CLV approximation with deep reinforcement learn-
ing in discrete and continuous action space.  arXiv:1504.01840. https://​arXiv.​org/​1504.​01840
Tompson J, Jain A, Lecun Y, Bregler C (2014) Joint training of a convolutional network and a graphical 
model for human pose estimation. 27:1–9 https://​arXiv.​org/​1406.​2984
Trabelsi C, Bilaniuk O, Zhang Y, Serdyuk D, Subramanian S, Santos JF, Mehri S, Rostamzadeh N, 
Bengio, Y, Pal CJ (2018) Deep complex networks. In: 6th international conference on learning 
representations, ICLR 2018 - conference track proceedings
Tran SN, Garcez ADA, Weyde T, Yin J, Zhang Q, Karunanithi M (2020) Sequence classifica-
tion restricted boltzmann machines with gated units. IEEE Trans Neural Networks Learn Syst 
31:4806–4815. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TNNLS.​2019.​29581​03
Tzafestas SG (2014) Mobile robot control IV: fuzzy and neural methods. In: Tzafestas SG (ed) Introduc-
tion to mobile robot control. Elsevier, Oxford, pp 269–317
Uddin MZ, Hassan MM, Alsanad A, Savaglio C (2020) A body sensor data fusion and deep recurrent 
neural network-based behavior recognition approach for robust healthcare. Inf Fusion 55:105–115. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​inffus.​2019.​08.​004
Van Gysel C, De Rijke M, Kanoulas E (2018) Neural vector spaces for unsupervised information 
retrieval. ACM Trans Inf Syst 36(4):1–25. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​31968​26
Vargas R, Mosavi A, Ruiz R (2017) Deep learning: a review. Adv Intell Syst Comput
Vaswani A (2017) Attention is all you need . Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2017 pp 5999–6009 arXiv:​
1706.​03762​v5
Vazhayil A, Vinayakumar R, Soman K (2018) Comparative study of the detection of malicious URLs using 
shallow and deep networks. In: 2018 9th international conference on computing, communication and 
networking technologies, ICCCNT 2018. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCCNT.​2018.​84941​59
Vincent P (2011) A connection between scorematching and denoising autoencoders. Neural Comput 
23:1661–1674. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​NECO_a_​00142
Wang J Yu LC, Lai KR, Zhang X (2016a) Dimensional sentiment analysis using a regional CNN-LSTM 
model. In: 54th Annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, ACL 2016 - Short 
Papers. https://​doi.​org/​10.​18653/​v1/​p16-​2037
Wang J, Wang J, Fang W, Niu H (2016b) Financial time series prediction using elman recurrent random 
neural networks. Comput Intell Neurosci. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​2016/​47425​15
Wang X, Jiang, W, Luo Z (2016c) Combination of convolutional and recurrent neural network for sentiment 
analysis of short texts. In: COLING 2016 - 26th international conference on computational linguis-
tics, proceedings of COLING 2016: technical papers
Wang D, Liang Y, Xu D (2019) Capsule network for protein post-translational modification site predic-
tion. Bioinformatics 35(14):2386–2394. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bioin​forma​tics/​bty977
Wei Q, Kasabov N, Polycarpou M, Zeng Z (2019) Deep learning neural networks: methods, systems, and 
applications. Neurocomputing 396:130–132. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​neucom.​2019.​03.​073
Wieslander H, Forslid G, Bengtsson E, Wahlby C, Hirsch J-M, Stark CR, Sadanandan SK (2017) Deep con-
volutional neural networks for detecting cellular changes due to malignancy. In: Proceedings of the 
IEEE international conference on computer vision workshops pp 82–89
Wu Y, Guo Y (2020) Dual adversarial co-learning for multi-domain text classification. In: AAAI 2020 - 
34th AAAI Conference artificial intelligence, pp 6438–6445. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1609/​aaai.​v34i04.​
6115
Wu H, Soraghan J, Lowit A, Di Caterina G (2018) A deep learning method for pathological voice detection using 
convolutional deep belief network. In: Proceedings of the annual conference of the international speech 
communication association, INTERSPEECH. https://​doi.​org/​10.​21437/​Inter​speech.​2018-​1351
Xiang C, Zhang L, Tang Y, Zou W, Xu C (2018) MS-capsnet: a novel multi-scale capsule network. IEEE 
Signal Process Lett 25:1850–1854. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​LSP.​2018.​28738​92
Xiao C, Choi E, Sun J (2018) Review Opportunities and challenges in developing deep learning models 
using electronic health records data: a systematic review. J Am Med Informatics Assoc 25:1419–
1428. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​jamia/​ocy068
Xiong HY, Alipanahi B, Lee LJ, Bretschneider H, Yuen RKC, Hua Y, Gueroussov S, Hamed S, Hughes TR, 
Morris Q, Barash Y, Adrian R, Jojic N, Scherer SW, Blencowe BJ (2015) The human splicing code 
reveals new insights into the genetic determinants of disease. Science 347(6218):1254806. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​12548​06
Xu M (2020) Understanding graph embedding methods and their applications. SIAM Rev 63(4):825–853. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1137/​20M13​86062
Xu T, Zhang P, Huang Q, Zhang H, Gan Z, Huang X, He X (2018) AttnGAN: fine-grained text to image genera-
tion with attentional generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE computer society confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2018.​00143

13616
	
S. F. Ahmed et al.
1 3
Yan WY, Shaker A, El-Ashmawy N (2015) Urban land cover classification using airborne LiDAR data: a 
review. Remote Sens Environ. 158:295–310. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​rse.​2014.​11.​001
Yan Y, Guo Y (2020) Multi-level generative models for partial label learning with non-random label noise. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​24963/​ijcai.​2021/​449
Yang Z, Yu W, Liang P, Guo H, Xia L, Zhang F, Ma Y, Ma J (2019) Deep transfer learning for military 
object recognition under small training set condition. Neural Comput Appl 31:6469–6478. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s00521-​018-​3468-3
Yang B, Yih W tau, He X, Gao J, Deng L (2015) Embedding entities and relations for learning and infer-
ence in knowledge bases. In: 3rd international conference on learning representations, ICLR 2015 
- conference track proceedings
Yang D, Qu B, Yang J, Cudre-Mauroux P (2019) Revisiting user mobility and social relationships in 
LBSNs: a hypergraph embedding approach. In: The web conference 2019 - proceedings of the world 
wide web conference, WWW 2019. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​33085​58.​33136​35
Yao T, Pan Y, Li Y, Mei T (2017) Incorporating copying mechanism in image captioning for learning novel 
objects. In: Proceedings - 30th IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, CVPR 
2017. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2017.​559
Ye M, Peng X, Gan W, Wu W, Qiao Y (2019) AnoPCN: video anomaly detection via deep predictive coding 
network. In:  MM 2019 - Proceedings 27th ACM international conference multimedia 1805–1813. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​33430​31.​33508​99
Yu Y, Si X, Hu C, Zhang J (2019) A review of recurrent neural networks: LSTM cells and network architec-
tures. Neural Comput 31(7):1235–1270. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​neco_a_​01199
Zeiler MD, Fergus R (2014) Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. European conference 
on computer vision. Springer, Cham, pp 818–833
Zeng Z, Xiao S, Jia K, Chan TH, Gao S, Xu D, Ma Y (2013) Learning by associating ambiguously labeled 
images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​CVPR.​2013.​97
Zeroual A, Harrou F, Dairi A, Sun Y (2020) Deep learning methods for forecasting COVID-19 time-series data: a 
comparative study. Chaos, Solitons Fractals 140:110121. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​chaos.​2020.​110121
Zhang D, Xu H, Su Z, Xu Y (2015) Chinese comments sentiment classification based on word2vec and 
SVMperf. Expert Syst Appl 42(4):1857–1863. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eswa.​2014.​09.​011
Zhang C, Bengio S, Hardt M, Recht B, Vinyals O (2016a) Understanding deep learning requires rethinking 
generalization. Commun ACM 64:107–115. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​34467​76
Zhang L, Lin L, Liang X, He K (2016b) Is faster R-CNN doing well for pedestrian detection?. In: Lecture 
notes in computer science (including subseries lecture notes in artificial intelligence and lecture notes 
in bioinformatics). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​319-​46475-6_​28
Zhang B, Xiong D, Su J, Duan H (2017a) A context-aware recurrent encoder for neural machine translation. IEEE/
ACM Trans Audio Speech Lang Process 25(12):2424–2432. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TASLP.​2017.​27514​20
Zhang H, Xu T, Li H, Zhang S, Wang X, Huang X, Metaxas D (2017b) StackGAN: text to photo-realistic 
image synthesis with stacked generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE interna-
tional conference on computer vision. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICCV.​2017.​629
Zhang S, Wang J, Tao X, Gong Y, Zheng N (2017c) Constructing deep sparse coding network for image 
classification. Pattern Recognit 64:130–140. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​patcog.​2016.​10.​032
Zhang S, Yao L, Sun A, Tay Y (2019) Deep learning based recommender system: a survey and new per-
spectives. ACM Comput Surv 52(1):1–38. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​32850​29
Zhang J, Lei YK, Zhang Z, Chang J, Li M, Han X, Yang L, Yang YI, Gao YQ (2020) A perspective on deep 
learning for molecular modeling and simulations. J Phys Chem A 124(34):6745–6763. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1021/​acs.​jpca.​0c044​73
Zhao Y, Liu Z, Sun M (2015) Phrase type sensitive tensor indexing model for semantic composition. In: 
Proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence
Zhao Z, Jiao L, Zhao J, Gu J, Zhao J (2017) Discriminant deep belief network for high-resolution SAR 
image classification. Pattern Recognit 61:686–701. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​patcog.​2016.​05.​028
Zhao H, Chen Z, Jiang H, Jing W, Sun L, Feng M (2019) Evaluation of three deep learning models for early 
crop classification using Sentinel-1A imagery time series-a case study in Zhanjiang. China Remote 
Sens 11(22):2673. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​rs112​22673
Zhong Z, Li J, Luo Z, Chapman M (2018) Spectral-spatial residual network for hyperspectral image classifi-
cation: a 3-D deep learning framework. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 56(2):847–858. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1109/​TGRS.​2017.​27555​42
Zhou G, Xie Z, He T, Zhao J, Hu XT (2016) Learning the multilingual translation representations for ques-
tion retrieval in community question answering via non-negative matrix factorization. IEEE/ACM 
Trans Audio Speech Lang Process 5:5–6. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TASLP.​2016.​25446​61

13617
Deep learning modelling techniques: current progress,…
1 3
Zhu S, Mumford D (2006) A stochastic grammar of images a stochastic grammar of images. Found Trends 
Comput Graph Vis 2(4):2. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1561/​06000​00018
Zhu Z, Peng G, Chen Y, Gao H (2019) A convolutional neural network based on a capsule network with 
strong generalization for bearing fault diagnosis. Neurocomputing 323:62–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​neucom.​2018.​09.​050
Ziebart BD, Fox D (2010) Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal 
entropy. Carnegie Mellon University
Zulqarnain M, Ghazali R, Mazwin Y, Hassim M, Rehan M (2020) A comparative review on deep learning 
models for text classification. Indones J Electr Eng Comput Sci 19:325–335. https://​doi.​org/​10.​11591/​
ijeecs.​v19.​i1.​pp325-​335
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Authors and Affiliations
Shams Forruque Ahmed1 · Md. Sakib Bin Alam2 · Maruf Hassan1 · 
Mahtabin Rodela Rozbu3 · Taoseef Ishtiak4 · Nazifa Rafa5 · M. Mofijur6,7 · 
A. B. M. Shawkat Ali8,9 · Amir H. Gandomi10,11 
1	
Science and Math Program, Asian University for Women, Chattogram 4000, Bangladesh
2	
Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Asian Institute of Technology, Chang Wat 12120, 
Pathum Thani, Thailand
3	
Department of Computational Biology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
4	
School of Computer Science, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada
5	
Department of Geography, University of Cambridge, Downing Place, Cambridge CB2 3EN, 
United Kingdom
6	
Centre for Technology in Water and Wastewater, School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, 
University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, NSW 2007, Australia
7	
Mechanical Engineering Department, Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd University, Al Khobar 31952, 
Saudi Arabia
8	
School of Engineering and Technology, Central Queensland University, Melbourne, VIC 300, 
Australia
9	
School of Science and Technology, The University of Fiji, Lautoka, Fiji
10	
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW 2007, Australia
11	
University Research and Innovation Center (EKIK), Óbuda University, 1034 Budapest, Hungary