REVIEW
Data Augmentation techniques in time series domain: a survey
and taxonomy
Guillermo Iglesias1 • Edgar Talavera1
• A´ ngel Gonza´lez-Prieto2,3 • Alberto Mozo1 • Sandra Go´mez-Canaval1
Received: 6 August 2022 / Accepted: 3 March 2023 / Published online: 24 March 2023
 The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
With the latest advances in deep learning-based generative models, it has not taken long to take advantage of their
remarkable performance in the area of time series. Deep neural networks used to work with time series heavily depend on
the size and consistency of the datasets used in training. These features are not usually abundant in the real world, where
they are usually limited and often have constraints that must be guaranteed. Therefore, an effective way to increase the
amount of data is by using data augmentation techniques, either by adding noise or permutations and by generating new
synthetic data. This work systematically reviews the current state of the art in the area to provide an overview of all
available algorithms and proposes a taxonomy of the most relevant research. The efﬁciency of the different variants will be
evaluated as a central part of the process, as well as the different metrics to evaluate the performance and the main
problems concerning each model will be analysed. The ultimate aim of this study is to provide a summary of the evolution
and performance of areas that produce better results to guide future researchers in this ﬁeld.
Keywords Deep learning  Time series  Data augmentation  Generative models
1 Introduction
From the advent of deep learning (DL), a large part of
research and the efforts of the scientiﬁc community have
focused on solving and improving supervised training
tasks. Supervised learning requires larger datasets, with a
large number of different features, and these samples also
need to be labelled in order to be feasible. With the latest
models, it is becoming more difﬁcult to obtain a suit-
able dataset, as the models require larger amounts of data
to carry out the training. Usually, there exists a large
number of public repositories from which to obtain suit-
able datasets for training in most application areas.
However, in the time series domain, datasets are not that
easy to access, where there are usually a number of privacy
issues, and it is typically difﬁcult to obtain large enough or
balanced datasets. This often leads to a major problem
when attempting to train one of these models on an
incomplete, unbalanced or privacy-challenged dataset.
Typically, these problems are addressed by pre-processing
dataset techniques, such as subsampling, or in datasets that
are not large enough, by data augmentation (DA) tech-
niques [1, 2].
Nevertheless, as soon as problems arise, technology
evolves to address these boundaries. In recent years, arti-
ﬁcial neural network (ANN) and their application to the
ﬁeld of DL have experienced a period of great advances.
Although a multitude of models has contributed to this
expansion, one of the most revolutionary that has been
& Edgar Talavera
e.talavera@upm.es
Guillermo Iglesias
guillermo.iglesias@upm.es
A´ ngel Gonza´lez-Prieto
angelgonzalezprieto@ucm.es
Alberto Mozo
a.mozo@upm.es
Sandra Go´mez-Canaval
sm.gomez@upm.es
1
Departamento de Sistemas Informa´ticos, Universidad
Polite´cnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
2
Departamento de A´ lgebra, Geometrı´a y Topologı´a,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
3
Instituto de Ciencias Matema´ticas (CSIC-UAM-UCM-
UC3M), Madrid, Spain
123
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-023-08459-3
(0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789().
,- volV)

proposed appeared in 2014 by Ian Goodfellow [3], with
his generative adversarial network (GAN).
GAN is certainly not the earliest generative architecture
ever introduced; already in 1987 Yann Lecun [4] suggested
in his thesis the autoencoder (AE) architectures, which
were capable of generating data modiﬁcations received as
input. But it is not until the incorporation of directed
probabilistic models into AE architectures, also known as
variational autoencoder (VAE) [5], that the models begin to
be presented as capable of generating synthesised data.
Although these networks show impressive results, the
capabilities of GAN have been shown to be far ahead, with
impressive results applied to the ﬁeld of imaging. Fur-
thermore, this is not the unique area of application. Syn-
thetic data generation is a powerful boost for synthesis of
sensitive data, such as in the world of telecommunications.
There are many time series applications where these
algorithms have shown good results when improving the
capabilities of the models by enlarging the datasets [6, 7].
In this area, time series data are especially sensitive due to
aspects such as the low availability of high-quality datasets
or privacy of the data [8–11].
All these advances in the DL area allow us to synthet-
ically increase the size of the datasets used in machine
learning (ML) tasks. As mentioned above, the size of the
dataset is a sensible characteristic that can affect the per-
formance of the developed models.
Regarding time series data, the availability of these huge
datasets is even more complicated. There are other ﬁelds
such as image processing or natural language processing
(NLP) where data is much more available. But in the time
series domain, it is more difﬁcult to obtain these samples
[9–11]. In this sense, DA arises as a technique to counter
the scarcity of data.
Another important factor is that time series data have
particularities when it comes to processing them. Each
dataset of time series is very different and needs special
attention on how it is being augmented. Therefore, the
proposed techniques for time series data must be analysed
and discussed to better understand which technique can be
used in which data.
Thus, this paper aims to review all the existing tech-
nologies for DA, and to review the positive and negative
aspects of each of them. This review can help researchers
better understand how DA techniques can be applied to
time series data to obtain better results when training
machine learning (ML) models. We also expect that it will
be useful to highlight the main differences between time
series data and other domains.
1.1 Paper structure
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Sect. 2:
‘‘Problem Statement’’ presents the review in its context,
providing a view of the importance of this work in the
current context; Sect. 3: ‘‘Related Works’’ reviews previ-
ous similar works in this area, highlighting the differences
between the previous ones and the present manuscript;
Sect. 4: ‘‘Background’’ introduces a technical background
of the performance of the techniques used to augment time
series data; Sect. 5: ‘‘Evaluationmetrics’’ explains the
problematic associated with how to evaluate the results of
the new synthetic data; Sect. 6: ‘‘Data Augmentation
algorithms review’’ presents the most important and cur-
rent work in this area, reviewing the technical aspects of
each approximation; Sect. 7: ‘‘Discussion’’ discusses the
results and behaviour of each algorithm presented in the
previous section and ﬁnally Sect. 8: ‘‘Conclusion’’ sum-
marises the main conclusions of the research.
2 Problem statement
This study addresses the current context of generating new
data samples in temporal series datasets. The purpose of
this paper is to focus on the most relevant and cutting-edge
research in this area to provide an accurate and complete
view of this ﬁeld. This research tries to cover all the pos-
sible techniques used to enhance this type of data.
In contrast to previous works, the aim of this survey is to
provide a complete view of how different approaches to
this problem have been developed. One of the main
problems of reviewing a portion of the total techniques
used in this area is that it does not fully explain how the
current paradigm is structured. This is particularly critic
when comparing different techniques, where it is desirable
to have all the approximations in the area to fully under-
stand the particularities of each one.
In this sense, it is important to provide an updated and
comprehensive study of the state of the art in this area. This
manuscript is focused on the three most important pillars of
current data augmentation in time series: traditional algo-
rithms VAE and GAN.
3 Related works
In the latest times, several high-quality data augmentation
review papers have been published [12–14]. However,
most of them are focused on more popular areas such as
imaging, video or natural language processing (NLP).
Although
these
techniques
focus
on
correcting
the
10124
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

imbalance or incompleteness of the dataset, there are other
areas of application where these problems are more com-
mon. The scarcity of valid datasets is not as clear in all
areas of DL applications as in time series.
In a ﬁrst approach to the literature review, in [15] an
approximation of DA algorithms is made for use in neural
network algorithms for time series classiﬁcation. In the
survey, they evaluated 12 methods to enhance time series
data in 128 time series classiﬁcation datasets with six dif-
ferent types of neural networks. Other recent studies focus
more speciﬁcally on the use of GANs for data augmenta-
tion, as in [16], where they analyse the taxonomy of dis-
crete-variant GANs and continuous-variant GANs, in
which GANs deal with discrete time series and continuous
time series data. These surveys analyse DA in time series
using neural networks, but lack a comparison of these
algorithms with more traditional approaches.
However, improving data sources to feed artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) algorithms is not limited to DA exclu-
sively. Therefore, some studies have decided to take the
path of building synthetic trafﬁc generators to build their
datasets almost from scratch; some examples focusing on
this aspect are [17–19]. In this way, they are able to
abstract from the dataset itself, which is only necessary to
understand the distribution of the data. Furthermore, in [20]
they set out a further study of the repercussions of these
technologies, highlighting one of the major advantages of
generating synthesised data, the abstraction of privacy
issues and the ease of obtaining datasets.
Despite the possibilities presented by new technologies
to improve the quality of time series datasets, there are no
studies that compile all technologies, with a comprehensive
comparison of them. Furthermore, to the authors’ knowl-
edge, a survey that compiles all the different techniques is
missing in the literature. This work’s goal is precisely to
address this problem. It is crucial to develop a review that
studies and compares all novel techniques proposed in time
series domain. Previous works were centred on a speciﬁc
model or approximation, with works such as [16, 21, 22].
The objective of this survey is to have a wider view of the
ﬁeld, and to be able to further compare each technology
and different approximations. With respect to previous
work, a complete review is presented, extending the
explanation of each algorithm’s performance, results,
advantages and disadvantages.
In addition, this ﬁeld is in constant evolution, so it is
common for reviews to become outdated due to the pub-
lication of new articles. It is considered very important to
provide an updated study of the state of the art that follows
the latest trends in this area.
Therefore, the goal of this review is to contribute to
reducing the existing gap in the area by trying to bring
together all the time series DA algorithms that currently
exist, contrasting their possible virtues, approaches and
differences to help future researchers position themselves
in the area.
4 Background
4.1 Traditional algorithms
DA has been a crucial task when the available data are
unbalanced or insufﬁcient. Traditionally, in ﬁelds such as
image recognition, different transformations have been
applied to data such as cropping [23–26], scaling [24, 25],
mirroring [23, 26, 27], colour augmentation [23, 25, 28] or
translation [27].
These algorithms cannot be applied directly to time
series given the particularity of the time series data dis-
tribution [29]. For example, if one wants to apply rotation
to augment an image dataset, it is possible to rotate each
image to generate new ones. This cannot be directly done
in the time series domain, e.g., if a time series sample is
divided into several portions and these portions are reor-
ganised using linear interpolation between them, the result
would not be valid because the tendency of the data would
be destroyed. Due to the diversity of the time series data,
not all techniques can be applied to every dataset. Some of
the previous algorithms used in computer vision must
adapted to a time series domain, but, in other cases, new
speciﬁc algorithms must be designed to treat with time
series data.
Another important factor when applying DA to the time
series domain, especially in signal processing, is that
manipulation of the data could distort the signal too much,
leading to negative training.
Traditional algorithms are deﬁned as all the techniques
based on taking data input samples and synthesising new
samples by modifying these data and applying different
transformations. The main difference between this tech-
nique and those that are reviewed in Sects. 4.2 and 4.3 is
that, in the former algorithms, the transformations are
applied directly to the data, while in the latter the objective
is to learn the probability distribution of the data in order to
generate completely new samples trying to imitate the data
distribution.
4.2 Variational Autoencoder (VAE)
VAEs are neural generative models ﬁrst introduced by
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling [5]. This algorithm
is based on the AE architecture [4] proposed in 1987. AEs
allow changing typical artiﬁcial intelligence problems,
such as linear regression or classiﬁcation, to domain-
shifting problems. In order to perform this, AEs take an
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10125
123

input, usually an image, and infer as the output modiﬁca-
tions of that same input. This is known as self-supervised
training, where the objective is to obtain the input with
slight modiﬁcations as an output. One of the most popular
applications of this model is image denoising [30]. In this
case, the input is an image that contains noise and the
output should be the input image without the undesired
noise.
AE Network is composed of two components, an
encoder and a decoder. The encoder is in charge of
reducing the input dimensionality of the data to a latent
space, while the decoder reconstructs the input information
from this latent representation. This latent space is a lower-
dimensional manifold of the input data. Then, synthetic
data are generated, interpolating the values of the latent
space and decoding them. However, this interpolation of
the latent space does not generate completely new values;
it just mixes the features of the learned probability
distribution.
In order to avoid the overﬁtting produced in AE, VAE
regularises its training, generating more diverse samples.
The main difference between both architectures is that
VAE encodes the input information in a probability dis-
tribution rather than in a point. Then, from this distribution,
it samples a point that is then decoded to synthesise new
samples.
This intermediate step allows the network to map the
input distribution to a lower-dimensional distribution from
which new latent points can be generated. To do so, the
latent distribution is normally deﬁned by a normal distri-
bution with a mean
l! ¼ l1; . . .; ln
ð
Þ and a standard
deviation
r! ¼ r1; . . .; rn
ð
Þ. These mean and standard
deviation vectors deﬁne the latent distribution of the
model.
Leaving the network to learn a distribution, instead of a
set of points learned in AE, the decoder network associates
the features of the input data with the probability areas with
their respective mean and deviation. With this representa-
tion, the mean of the distribution deﬁnes the centre point
from which the synthetic samples will be generated and the
standard deviation deﬁnes the variability in the output, that
is, the diversity of the generated samples.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of a VAE network.
Regarding the training of a VAE network, there are two
different loss functions. The reconstruction term is in
charge of the reconstruction of the input data. It measures
the error of the network when it builds. This metric acts the
same as the error of a standard AE.
On the other hand, VAE include a regularisation term
that tries to organise how the latent distribution generates
new latent spaces. The function of this term is to measure
the distance of the sampled data points and a Gaussian
distribution. The distance used to measure this error is the
Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL divergence) [31]. So in
order to calculate the loss of the VAE both errors are
added, measuring at the same time the reconstruction error
of the output and the error of sampling points following a
normal distribution.
4.3 Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)
GAN is a generative neural model based on a competition
between two neural network (NN). They were ﬁrst intro-
duced by Ian Goodfellow [3] in 2014. The objective of the
architecture is to replicate a given data distribution in order
to synthesise new samples of the distribution. To achieve
this goal, the GAN architecture is composed of a generator
(G) model and a discriminator (D) model. The former is in
charge of generating the synthetic samples of the data
distribution, while the latter tries to distinguish the real
samples from the synthesised samples.
To accomplish such generation of completely new data
that are indistinguishable from the input data distribution,
both models interact with each other. The model generator
(G) generates samples trying to replicate, without copying,
the distribution, while the model discriminator (D) dis-
criminates the real samples from the fake samples. In this
way, when discriminator (D) differentiates both distribu-
tions, it feedbacks generator (G) negatively; on the other
hand, when discriminator (D) is not capable of differenti-
ating each distribution, its positively feedbacks generator
(G). In doing so, generator (G) evolves to fool discrimi-
nator (D). At the same time, discriminator (D) is positively
rewarded when discrimination is done correctly.
This competition encourages both networks to evolve
together. If discriminator (D) fails in its task, generator
(G) will not evolve because it will always succeed, despite
the quality of the synthesised samples. Even if discrimi-
nator (D) always perfectly distinguishes both distributions,
generator (G) will not be able to fool discriminator (D),
making it impossible to evolve. The standard GAN archi-
tecture is depicted in Fig. 2.
From a mathematical perspective, this competitive
behaviour is based on Game Theory, where two players
compete
in
a
zero-sum
game.
The
discriminator
Fig. 1 VAE architecture with the both latent space representations (p
and r)
10126
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

(D) estimates the a posteriori probability p(y|x) , where y is
the label (true or fake) of the given sample x. And gener-
ator (G) generates synthetic samples from a latent vector z,
which can be denoted as G(z).
From a formal point of view, this competition is deﬁned
as a minimax game where discriminator (D) tries to max-
imise its accuracy when discriminating between both dis-
tributions and generator (G) tries to minimise this accuracy.
The formulation of this process is denoted as follows:
min
G max
D LðD; GÞ ¼ min
G max
D Ex  pr log½DðxÞ
þEz  pz log½1  DðGðxÞÞ;
ð1Þ
where z is the latent vector, which is generated randomly
by a uniform or Gaussian distribution pz and x  pr is the
real distribution.
In the publication in which GAN was presented [3], it
was proved that the architecture can converge to a unique
solution. This point, known as Nash equilibrium, is char-
acterised by the fact that none of the networks can reduce
their respective losses. This optimal result is very difﬁcult
to achieve in reality due to the instability behaviour of
GAN. The Nash equilibrium is, in fact, most of the time not
achieved because of the constant competition between both
networks.
Respecting DA, GANs synthesise completely new
samples, using the dataset distribution as their base on
learning the underlying data distribution. Therefore, GANs
are able to produce more diverse samples respect with
respect to previous approximations. This is known as data
generation, where the main difference between data gen-
eration and DA is that the former generates new samples of
synthetic data while the latter use the original samples to
produce new ones using their information.
5 Evaluation metrics
Due to the particularities of the time series ﬁeld, there is no
unique metric to evaluate the reliability of algorithms in all
of their applications. Finding a measurement capable of
evaluating the quality and diversity of the synthesised data
is still an open issue.
For example, in GAN networks, there exists no con-
sensus between the different studies about the evaluation
metrics to use. In addition, most of the evaluation metrics
designed are centred on computer vision, since it is the
most popular ﬁeld for this kind of network.
Therefore, it will be described the most commonly used
metrics that have been used to evaluate the algorithms that
will be discussed in this article. However, it should be
noted that to choose a proper evaluation metric, one should
adapt the metric to the speciﬁc data augmentation algo-
rithm and the application ﬁeld.
5.1 External performance evaluation
When applying DA to a dataset, the most common objec-
tive is to generate new data samples to improve the per-
formance of certain models, reducing the imbalance of the
data or the lack of data. One of the most popular ways to
measure how the addition of new data changes the beha-
viour of the models is simply to compare these models
before and after DA. Then, it is possible to compare
whether each model has improved its performance after
applying DA to the input data.
This approximation is purely practical and relies on the
correlation between the performance of a deﬁned model
and not the quality of the synthetic samples themselves.
Most traditional algorithms base their performance on this
method because it is a straightforward method to evaluate
an algorithm.
In [32], the performance of the DA algorithms they
propose is achieved using symmetric Mean Absolute Per-
centage Error and Mean Absolute Scaled Error, which are
the two most common evaluation metrics used in fore-
casting. This research compares the values of these metrics
before and after applying DA to the dataset, then evaluates
how the models improve their performance due to the
addition of more data to the training set.
In [15], they used six different neural networks to
evaluate how each DA algorithm affects the classiﬁcation
Fig. 2 GAN architecture
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10127
123

of the data. In particular, they evaluated VGG [24],
residual network [25], multilayer perceptron [33], long
short-term memory [34], bidirectional long short-term
memory [35] and long short-term memory fully convolu-
tional network [36]. Then, the changes in the accuracy of
the models are compared, observing how certain DA
algorithms beneﬁt the performance of the models, while in
other cases it gets worse. The main drawback stated in the
article is that each architecture has its particularities, given
the different results for each algorithm and making it a
difﬁcult task to differentiate the best algorithm. Further-
more, because all of them are neural models, it is difﬁcult
to interpret some of the results.
The approach followed in [29] is to compare different
DA techniques by the increase in accuracy produced in
each case of study. It is worth mentioning how this
approximation adapts to each application without having to
change anything. The authors of the article are able to
compare very different techniques such as noise addition,
GAN, sliding window, Fourier transform and recombina-
tion of segmentation under the same criteria for a speciﬁc
domain purpose. This example shows how this approach
easily adapts to different DA techniques, making it possible
to compare the results for a certain task.
A similar strategy to measure the quality of the gener-
ated data is to compare different models using a deﬁned
loss function. This approach was followed in GAN archi-
tectures in works like [3, 37–40], where a comparison
between networks is possible using the same loss function
to evaluate their training. Then, they correlate the quality
of the synthetic data with this value. This strategy can be
applied naturally to the time series domain, allowing
comparison between different networks. However, the
main drawback of this method is that it compares the
performance of different neural models and cannot be
applied to other models. It should be noted that, as in
previous metrics, it correlates the quality of the generated
data not with the data itself but rather with the performance
of the model.
In [41], they compare the performance of different DA
techniques with mean per-class error (MPCE). This metric,
proposed in [42], measures the error per class in J datasets
taking into account the number of classes in each dataset.
The main particularity of mean per-class error (MPCE) is
that it allows us to quantify the performance of an algo-
rithm for different datasets. The mean per-class error
(MPCE) is calculated as follows:
MPCE ¼
X
j2½J
PCEj ¼ ej
cj
ð2Þ
where ej is the error rate and cj is the number of classes in
each dataset. This metric is capable of taking into account
the number of classes of each dataset, in order to normalise
the comparison between different sources of data.
5.2 GAN related metrics
Since the introduction of GAN, it has always been an open
issue to measure the quality of the synthesised samples
produced by the architecture [43]. One of the most
important difﬁculties when designing a metric for GAN is
the ability to capture both the quality and diversity of the
generated data.
In addition to being still an open issue, there is con-
sensus on some metrics and many papers measure their
results with the same metrics [44–49]. The main problem
in the time series domain is that it is not always possible to
adapt the metrics to the particularities of this ﬁeld because
most of the metrics are designed to be useful in computer
vision-related tasks.
Over the past few years, some works have suggested
applying DA to time series data and treating it as if it were
an image [50, 51]. These papers use GAN networks to
synthesise new time series data, but to convert the signal
data into an image. In these cases, traditional GAN metrics,
such as the Inception Score [52], Mode Score [53] or
Fre´chet Inception Distance [54] are used to evaluate the
results. These metrics are based on how the Inception v3
neural classiﬁer distinguishes the different samples. The
idea is to measure the entropy of the synthetic dataset using
an external classiﬁer.
In addition to the ﬁeld of computer vision, studies have
been developed that apply GAN directly to time series.
That is, in TimeGAN [55] two new metrics are proposed to
assess the quality of the generated samples. The Discrim-
inative Score is based on the use of an external pre-trained
model, as was done with the Inception Score, consisting of
a 2-layer LSTM. The Discriminative Score measures how
this model distinguishes between real and fake samples and
the classiﬁcation error corresponds to the Discriminative
Score. The Predictive Score measurement was introduced
in [56] with the name Train Synthetic, Test Real (TSTR)
which also uses a 2-layer LSTM, but in this case, this
model is trained with synthetic samples. The model is then
evaluated using the original dataset. The Predictive Score
corresponds to mean absolute error (MEA) of the model
trained with the synthetic samples evaluated with the real
samples. This metric is, at the moment, one of the most
effective and used evaluation metrics.
5.3 Similarity measurements
This set of metrics focuses on the comparison of two
probability distributions. The idea is to measure how far
from
the
original
distribution
the
synthetic
samples
10128
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

generated with DA. The main advantage of these metrics is
that they focus on directly studying the quality of the data,
in contrast the previously reviewed methods that measured
the quality indirectly. Another advantage of these types of
metrics is that they can be applied to synthetic data despite
the algorithm used to generate them.
An empirical and qualitative approach to measuring the
differences between two distributions is to reduce the
dimensionality of the data and perform a visual compari-
son. The objective is to reduce the dimensionality of the
data to plot the samples in a bidimensional space; an
empirical comparison is then made by visualising the data.
This approach was followed in [57] where they applied t-
distributed stochastic neighbour embedding (t-SNE) and
principal component analysis (PCA). Then, they compared
the distribution of the data in the two-dimensional space for
TimeGAN [55], recurrent conditional GAN (RCGAN)
[56], continuous recurrent GAN (C-RNN-GAN) [58],
T-Forcing [59], WaveNet [60] and WaveGAN [61]. This
approach was also followed in [15] where they used prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA) to compare different tra-
ditional algorithms for the GunPoint dataset from the 2018
UCR Time Series Archive [62].
Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL divergence) has been
used in work such as [63, 64] to measure similarities
between synthetic and real datasets. Recall that Kullback–
Leibler divergence (KL divergence) [31] is deﬁned as
DKLðP jj QÞ ¼
X
i
PðxiÞ log PðxiÞ
QðxiÞ


;
ð3Þ
where P and Q are the probability distributions whose
distance is calculated and i runs over the samples xi of the
distribution.
This
Kullback–Leibler
divergence
(KL
divergence) [31] is not a symmetric distance, so it can be
symmetrized to give rise to the so-called Jensen–Shannon
divergence (JSD), deﬁned as
JSDðP jj QÞ ¼ DKLðP jj ðP þ QÞ=2Þ þ DKLðQ jj ðP þ QÞ=2Þ:
In [65], a novel measurement is proposed to quantify the
distance between the time series distribution. It is based on
calculating the Wasserstein distance between time series
data. The metric is deﬁned by measuring the Wasserstein
distance of the energy between frequencies. The Wasser-
stein–Fourier distance between the probability distributions
is computed as follows:
WFð½x; ½yÞ ¼ W2 sx; sy


ð4Þ
where sx and sy are the normalised power spectral densities
of the distributions.
6 Data Augmentation algorithms review
During this section, different state-of-the-art algorithms
will be reviewed. This section will explain the particular-
ities, strengths and weaknesses of each algorithm. In
addition, the different approximations to apply DA will be
grouped and related between them. A taxonomy of the
different trends and lines of research will be proposed,
showing the different existing links between the works of
the last years.
It should be noted that not all the algorithms can be
applied to all types of time series data; in some cases, the
algorithms proposed will be heavily focused on a certain
application, while in others more general techniques will
be studied.
6.1 Basic DA Methods
The basic DA algorithms that will be reviewed in this
section are all techniques that use data manipulation to
generate new synthetic data samples using existing samples
and transform the original samples. All these techniques
have as their base the deformation, shortening, enlargement
or modiﬁcation of the data samples of the dataset. This
group of techniques has been traditionally used in ﬁelds
such as computer vision and, in some cases, the same
algorithms can be adapted to process time series data, but
in others, new algorithms must be designed speciﬁcally to
use time series data as input.
Therefore, the most important traditional algorithms that
have been applied to time series data will be reviewed and
discussed, outlining their particularities, advantages and
disadvantages. Figure 3 shows the taxonomy proposed for
the different algorithms reviewed.
6.1.1 Time slicing window
Slicing, in time series, consists of cutting a portion of each
data sample, to generate a different new sample. Normally,
slicing is applied to the last steps of the sample, but the
snippet of the original sample can be obtained from any
step. When the original data is cropped, a different sample
is produced, but unlike image processing, it is difﬁcult to
maintain all the features of the original data. The process of
slicing time series data provides new data given as:
x0ðWÞ ¼
xu; . . .; xt; . . .; xuþW


;
ð5Þ
where W is the slice window that deﬁnes the crop size and
u is the initial point from where the slicing is performed,
such as 1  u  T  W. One of the most important draw-
backs of slicing the signal is that it can lead to invalid
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10129
123

synthetic samples because it can cut off important features
of the data.
A variation of the slicing method is proposed in [66],
where the concatenating and resampling method is pre-
sented. This algorithm ﬁrst detects features in the data,
called characteristic points. This is made by using the Pan-
Tompkins QRS detector [67]. This algorithm detects the
characteristic points in a heartbeat signal, so in order to
apply the concatenating and resampling algorithm it must
be deﬁned and algorithm to detect these points. Then, after
detecting the characteristic points, it is deﬁned a subse-
quence that starts and ends in a characteristic point. This
sequence is replicated several times and sliced in a window
to perform DA.
This variation was applied to electrocardiogram (ECG)
data of variable length between 9 and 61 s sampled at 300
Hz.
The concatenating and resampling algorithm tries to
ensure the validity of the data, taking into account that the
signal maintains its features. But the main disadvantage of
this method is that it needs a detector of characteristic
points that ensure the data validity.
6.1.2 Jittering
Jittering consists of adding noise to time series to perform
DA. This technique, in addition to being one of the sim-
plest forms of DA, is one of the most popular in time series
[68, 69]. Jittering assumes that the data are noisy which, in
many cases, i.e., when dealing with sensor data, is true.
Jittering tries to take advantage of the noise of the data
and simulate it to generate new samples. Typically,
Gaussian noise is added to each time step; the mean and
standard deviation of this noise deﬁne the magnitude and
shape of the deformation, so it is different in each appli-
cation. The jittering process can be deﬁned as follows:
x0ðÞ ¼ x1 þ 1; . . .; xt þ t; . . .; xT þ T
f
g;
ð6Þ
where  stands for the noise addition at each step of the
signal.
As mentioned above, the jittering process must be
adapted to each case, because there are cases such as [70]
where the effects of jittering lead to negative learning. In
this research, it was used as time series data the informa-
tion received by a wearable sensor, capturing 58 s at 62.5
Hz that were later resampled to 120 Hz per sample.
Traditional
algorithms
Slicing
Jittering
Scaling
Rotation
Permutation
Channel permutation
Concatenating and
resampling
Time slicing window
Homogeneous scaling
Magnitude warping
Frequency warping
Time warping
Window warping
Fig. 3 Traditional DA
algorithms taxonomy
10130
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

6.1.3 Scaling
Scaling consists of changing the magnitude of a certain
step in the time series domain. The idea is to maintain the
overall shape of the signal while changing its values. With
scaling, the new generated data change the range of values,
but keep the shape of the changes. Homogeneous scaling is
given as:
x0ðaÞ ¼ ax1; . . .; axt; . . .; axT
f
g;
ð7Þ
where a [ 0 deﬁnes the scale of the change. This value can
be deﬁned by a Gaussian distribution with mean 1 and with
r as a hyperparameter [70], or it can be previously deﬁned
from a list of values [69].
Within scaling techniques, there are several different
approximations for a speciﬁc time series domain. They take
advantage of the speciﬁc properties of the signal data and
adapt to perform DA.
Magnitude warping is a technique used in [70] that
consists of an application of a variable scaling to different
points of the data curve. To deﬁne where to apply the
transformation, a set of knots u ¼ u1; . . .; ui is deﬁned;
these represent the step in which the scaling is performed
and their values are generated by using a normal distribu-
tion. Then, the magnitude of the scaling is deﬁned by a
cubic spline interpolation of the knots SðxÞ. Then, the
magnitude warping can be deﬁned as follows:
x0ðaÞ ¼ a1x1; . . .; atxt; . . .; aTxT
f
g;
ð8Þ
where a ¼ a1; . . .; ai ¼ SðxÞ. With magnitude warping, the
main particularity is that it applies a smoothened scaling to
each point of the curve, multiplying the possibilities of the
transformation while preserving the overall shape of the
data. However, it still assumes that the synthetic data
maintain validity after transformation.
This technique was used in [70] where the data was
captured from a wearable device to detect if a patient
suffers from Parkinson’s disease.
Frequency warping is a variation of magnitude warping,
mostly applied in speech processing [71–73]. The most
popular version in speech recognition is vocal tract length
perturbation, which can be applied in a deterministic way
[72] or stochastically within a range [74]. In particular, this
technique was used in [72] where a dataset of human
conversation sampled at 8 KHz was used.
Another scaling technique is time warping, the idea is
very similar to magnitude warping, but the main difference
between both algorithms is that time warping modiﬁes the
curve in the temporal dimension. That is, instead of ﬂuc-
tuating the magnitude of the signal in each step, it stretches
and shortens the time slices of the signal. To deﬁne how to
warp the signal, a smooth curve, as was done in magnitude
warping, is deﬁned by using a cubic spline for a set of
knots. The time-warping algorithm can be denoted as:
x0ðsÞ ¼
xsð1Þ; . . .; xsðtÞ; . . .; xsðTÞ


;
ð9Þ
where s deﬁnes the magnitude of the warp, this function is
generated by using a cubic spline S(u) between different
knots generated using a normal distribution. This algorithm
has been used in several works, such as [75, 76]. There is
yet another variation of this algorithm, known as window
warping, followed in [77] that deﬁnes a slice in the time
series data and speeds up or down the data by a factor of
1/2 or 2. In this case, the warping is applied to a deﬁned
slice of the whole sequence; the rest of the signal is not
changed.
6.1.4 Rotation
Rotation can be applied to multivariate time series data by
applying a rotation matrix with a deﬁned angle. In uni-
variate time series, rotation can be applied by ﬂipping the
data. Rotation is deﬁned as follows:
x0ðRÞ ¼
Rx1; . . .; Rxt; . . .; RxT
f
g;
ð10Þ
where R is the rotation matrix used to twist the data. This
algorithm is not very usual in time series due to the fact
that rotating a time series sample could make it lose the
class information, as it happened in [78], where it was used
the UCR archive [62] with various dataset from different
real-world applications were the composition of the sam-
ples of each dataset varies. On the other hand, there have
been articles [70] that demonstrate the beneﬁts of applying
rotation, especially combined with other data transforma-
tions, in this case, using wearable data samples at 120 Hz.
6.1.5 Permutation
Shufﬂing different time slices of data in order to perform
DA is a method that generates new data patterns. It was
proposed in [70], where a ﬁxed slice window was deﬁned
from which the data is rearranged, but it has also been
applied with variable windows, as it was done in [79] using
electrocardiogram (ECG) data at 300 Hz. The main prob-
lem of applying permutation is that it does not preserve
time dependencies; thus, it can lead to invalid samples. The
permutation algorithm can be denoted as follows:
x0ðwÞ ¼
xi; . . .; xiþw; . . .; xj; . . .; xjþw; . . .; xk; . . .; xkþw


ð11Þ
where i, j, k represents the ﬁrst index slice of each window,
so that each is selected exactly once, and w denotes the
window size if the slices are uniform w ¼ T=n where n is
the number of total slices.
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10131
123

6.1.6 Channel permutation
Changing the position of different channels in multidi-
mensional data is a common practice. In computer vision, it
is quite popular to swap the RGB channels to perform DA
[80]. With respect to time series, channel permutation can
be applied as long as each channel of the data is still valid.
The channel permutation algorithm, for multidimensional
data
such
as
x ¼
x11;    ; x1T
f
g;    ; xc1;    ; xcT
f
g
f
g
where c is the number of channels, is given by
x ¼
xrð1Þ1; . . .; xrð1ÞT


;    ; xrðcÞ1; . . .; xrðcÞT




;
ð12Þ
where r : f1; . . .; cg ! f1; . . .; cg is the used permutation
of the channels.
In the time series domain, this algorithm is not appli-
cable to the application of the data, because permutation
assumes that the channel information is independent of the
channel itself. In other words, the information about the
channels is not linked to the particular channel.
That is, in [63], they applied this algorithm by ﬂipping
the position of the sensors that recorded the data signals,
recording the data at 20 Hz using a window of 6 s. In the
article, the researchers used an exercise mat with eight
proximity sensors that they ﬂipped to generate new data.
That is, in practice, changing the position of the signal
channels.
6.1.7 Summary of the traditional algorithms
Figure 4 shows an example of each algorithm reviewed:
6.2 Data augmentation through VAE
The use of AE architectures is nothing more than the
evolution of data generation algorithms to produce more
and better data, which means that, better, they are varied
and therefore the standard deviation with respect to the
original data is perfect. To precisely control the deviation
of the data, VAE arises as the evolution of AE to generate
better synthetic data, as shown in [81] where VAE is used
to generate data for anomaly detection problems with
LSTM. Or this other work [82], in which they use a dataset
augmented with VAE to improve the recognition of human
activity with LSTM. Even more exhaustive studies [83, 84]
show the efﬁciency of these algorithms in increasing the
size of datasets.
But the use of VAEs for DA is not only intended for
neural network models, but can also improve results when
traditional machine learning algorithms are applied [85].
However, they can also be used in applications with
unsupervised training, that is, in [86], which applies them
to unsupervised domain adaptation for robust speech
recognition.
In [87], they point out that most data augmentation
methods for time series use feature space transformations
to artiﬁcially enlarge the training set; they propose a
composition of autoencoders ( AEs), variational autoen-
coders ( VAEs) and Wasserstein generative adversarial
networks with gradient penalty (WGAN-GPs) for time
series augmentation.
In the end, each VAE model and its hyperparameter
conﬁguration make them specialise in the area or format of
the dataset they want to work on; but above all to the type
of problem for which it will be used afterwards. That is to
say, what makes the difference between the models is what
the generated data will be used for, regarding problems
(a) Ground truth
(b)
Homogeneous
scaling
(c) Rotation
(d) Jittering
(e) Magnitude warp-
ing
(f) Time warping
(g) Permutation
(h) Window warping
(i) Time Slicing Win-
dow
(j) Concatenating resampling
(k) Channel permutation
Fig. 4 Summary of traditional algorithms
10132
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

such as: classiﬁcation, forecasting, value imputation or
prediction.
6.2.1 Taxonomy for the VAE algorithms reviewed
Figure 5 shows a scheme to group the different investiga-
tions reviewed in Sect. 6.2, this way all the VAE algo-
rithms for DA can be viewed schematically.
6.2.2 VAE for anomaly detection
As mentioned before, VAE are a DA architecture that has
been widely used in the ﬁeld of anomaly detection. The
main objective of using these models in anomaly detection
tasks is to be able to generate data in order to avoid the lack
of invalid data of the datasets. The most common scenario
is that there are not enough available anomalous samples in
order to train machine learning models with the dataset, so
the use of VAE is focused on generating new data.
The work presented in [81] is centred on the classiﬁ-
cation of electrocardiogram (ECG) signals, distinguishing
between the ones with cardiac dysfunction. The data used
consists of windows of 3600 samples downsampled to 905
sample points during a period of time of 10 s. In order to
augment the data available it is used a conditional VAE
(CVAE) [91] that is able to learn which samples are normal
and which are anomalous. This conditional VAE (CVAE)
architecture is composed of LSTM layers [92] which pro-
cess the temporal data of the electrocardiogram (ECG)
signals.
Another architecture based on the anomaly detection
problem
is the
smoothness-inducing sequential
VAE
(SISVAE) [88] which uses a VAE with recurrent layers to
maintain temporal dependencies. This work focuses on the
problem of abrupt changes between time steps, which led
to non-smooth reconstructions of the input data of the
model, and therefore temporal abrupt changes in the syn-
thesised samples. The mechanism to avoid this is to
introduce a corrective bias for each time step of the signal,
calculated using the Kullback–Leibler divergence (KL
divergence) [31] between one point and the next one in the
series. The results of the work are tested using two different
time series synthetic datasets.
6.2.3 VAE for data imputation
One ﬁeld where the VAE architecture has been widely used
is in data imputation tasks. This process consists of gen-
erating new data in a sample where there is missing
information. In the temporal series domain, this process is
VAE for classiﬁcation
Enhancing human activity regonition
using time series augmented data [82]
Intelligent random noise modeling by
improved VAE [83]
Improving classiﬁcation accuracy using
data DA on small datasets [84]
Using VAE to augment sparse time
series datasets [85]
Unsupervised domain adaptation for
robust speech regonition via VAE [86]
CVAE ECG anomaly detection [81]
SISVAE [88]
GlowImp [89]
VAE based on the shift correction for
imputation [90]
VAE for anomaly detection
VAE for data imputation
Fig. 5 Taxonomy of the
presented variational
autoencoder (VAE)
architectures
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10133
123

usually used to ﬁll gaps in temporal spaces where there are
no available data. In this sense, VAE generates synthetic
information on demand to ﬁll these gaps, generating new
information following the distribution of the original data.
The GlowImp architecture [89] was proposed as a
combination of the Wasserstein GAN (WGAN) [93]
architecture together with a VAE to impute missing data.
The architecture is composed of the so-called Glow VAE,
which incorporates a function that takes the latent distri-
bution of the traditional VAE encoder and interpolates the
missing values via the Glow Model. The other main part of
the architecture is the GAN model where the generator
corresponds with the decoder of the VAE and the dis-
criminator forces the system to produce realistic samples.
The results of the model are tested using two different
datasets, the KDD Cup Challenge 2018 dataset containing
air quality weather data and the PhysioNet Challenge 2012
which is a collection of multivariate clinical time series
data. The architecture of the GlowImp can be seen in
Fig. 6.
The work of Li et al. [90] presents a VAE architecture to
impute temporal values using meteorological datasets. In
order to ﬁll in the missing values of the data samples, shift
correction is used. This correction tries to counteract the
deviation caused by the missing values. This correction is
used in the Gaussian latent distribution, where a shift
hyperparameter k is applied which is manually set to centre
the latent distribution, thus correcting the possible bias
produced by missing values. The VAE architecture used in
this work to impute the missing values is b- VAE [94].
6.3 Data Augmentation through GAN
GANs are one of the most popular generative models of the
last decade, since its introduction in 2014 by Ian Good-
fellow [3] this generative architecture has positioned itself
as one of the main algorithms for DA. The main strength of
the GAN architecture is that it learns the distribution of the
data by extracting the main features of the samples, without
copying the distribution directly. This is known as data
generation and its main strength with respect to data aug-
mentation is that it synthesises completely new samples, in
contrast with other techniques where the original samples
where transformed to generate new instances. This fosters
the generalisation and creativity of the synthetic data
generated by the model. It is also an important factor that
the training of the networks is unsupervised, not neces-
sarily to have labelled data to learn the distribution.
6.3.1 Taxonomy for the GAN algorithms reviewed
Fig. 7 shows a scheme to group the different research
reviews in Sect. 4.3, this way all the GAN algorithms for
DA can be viewed schematically.
6.3.2 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) based GAN
One of the approaches to adapt the GAN architecture to
time series is to use recurrent networks as the base of
artiﬁcial neural network (ANN). These GANs substitute
the regular fully connected or convolutional layers with
recurrent layers, able to have memory that links temporal
features of the data. The main strength of this set of
architectures is that they are able to process this temporal
information that the input data have, similar to the spatial
information processing of a convolutional neural network.
Continuous recurrent GAN (C-RNN-GAN) [58] is one
of the ﬁrst GAN architectures proposed speciﬁcally for
time series data. In particular, using them to learn and
synthesise music tracks was proposed in this work. This
GAN uses LSTM blocks [92] as its main learning structure.
The learning algorithm is the same as standard training
GAN, where the network generator concatenates each input
with the output of the previous cells and the discriminator
is made up of a bidirectional recurrent network [35]. The
internal composition of the discriminator is based on the
work of Horchreiter [100] and Bengio et al. [101] that
avoids the gradient vanishing and strengths the temporal
dependencies. The results of the work are discussed using a
dataset of 3697 musical midi ﬁles from 160 different
composers of classical music with a tick resolution of 384
per quarter note.
The work presented by Haradal et al. [95] also proposes
a GAN architecture based on the implementation of LSTM
Fig. 6 GlowImp architecture.
Based on the ﬁgure of [89]
10134
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

cells in both the generator and discriminator networks to
adapt to time series data. The discriminator output is
generated by applying an average pooling to the outputs
generated by each layer, averaging the whole data sample
into a unique scalar output which corresponds to the
probability of the sample being generated by the generator
network. This architecture was used to generate electro-
cardiogram (ECG) [102] and electroencephalogram (EEG)
[103] data to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy of an
artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) classiﬁer.
The LSTM and GAN combination has also been used
for anomaly detection in the work of Zhu et al. [96] where
the LSTM layers are used in the discriminator to extract
temporal information from the data, while the GAN
architecture provides the system with the ability to extract
the most important features of the data. Training for
detecting anomalies in the data has two phases. The ﬁrst
phase, known as the training phase, is a standard GAN
training in which the discriminator learns how to distin-
guish between real and synthetic data. In the second phase,
the so-called testing phase, the training consists of a feature
extraction that generates and embedding of the dataset
samples, these features are then reconstructed by the gen-
erator and compared with the original data, the task of the
discriminator is to distinguish the real and the recon-
structed data, which is anomalous. This research tested its
results using two different datasets, electrocardiogram
(ECG) data with a window of 96 data values that is training
to detect anomalous cases and a dataset with the statistics
of taxi trafﬁc in New York City, with 48 points each data
sample.
GAN LSTM based
C-RNN-GAN [58]
Biosignal DA based on GAN [95]
LSTM-GAN Algorithm for Time Series
Anomaly Detection [96]
Intermittent Fault Data Generation
Method Based on LSTM and GAN [97]
GAN convolutional based
GANomaly for Imbalanced Industrial
Time Series [98]
SpecGAN [61]
TSDIGAN [99]
T-CGAN [99]
EmotionalGAN [99]
WaveGAN [99]
1D DCGAN for Fault Diagnosis of
Electrical Machines [98]
LSTMGAN [99]
TimeGAN [99]
GAN 1D convolution based
Conditional Sig-Wasserstein
GAN [99]
Fig. 7 Taxonomy of the
presented GAN architectures
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10135
123

The work presented by Shi et al. [97] uses the GAN
architecture to generate sequences of faulty data from two
different types. Different models are trained for each type.
The generator and discriminator of each GAN are made of
a many-to-many LSTM model that processes the voltage
signal data and the sampling length of each step of the
sequence. In this way, the generator output is composed of
two vectors, one for the voltage and the other for the
length, while the discriminator processes these data and its
output is generated by averaging the classiﬁcation of each
step and generating a unique binary output.
6.3.3 Convolutional GAN applied to the time series domain
In order to apply GAN to replicate time series, one of the
most popular techniques used is to treat the time data as an
image. Different approximations have been used in this
ﬁeld, where the focus is on how to transform the data into
an image format, rather than adapting the GAN architec-
ture to process time series information. One of the main
advantages of this technique is that it does not have to deal
with the design of GAN, which is a complex process due to
the particularities of the architecture. The adaptation of the
original data to an image is different in each case. Different
works published during the last years will be reviewed in
order
to
study
different
approximations
to
this
transformation.
An example of this use is the one proposed with Spec-
GAN [61] which tries to operate with sound spectrograms
that represent audio samples. This approach uses deep
convolutional GAN (DCGAN) [44] as the main algorithm
for DA, but prior to that, it processes the audio signal to
generate images for each audio track. The process of
transforming audio into image ‘‘can be approximately
inverted’’ in the author’s own words. First, the Fourier
transformation is applied to each audio to generate a matrix
of the frequencies of the data. Then, the scale of the data is
adapted logarithmically and normalised to a normal dis-
tribution for a better understanding. Finally, the images are
clipped to 3 standard deviations and rescaled within the
½1; 1 range. In particular, the 16384 points of each
sample are converted into a 128x128 pixel image. As
mentioned above, this process is reversible, so once the
new data are generated using deep convolutional GAN
(DCGAN) they can be transformed to audio data using the
reverse process. One advantage of using this process is that
it opens up the possibility of comparing different audio
generation algorithms treating the results as images; in the
original paper, the results of the SpecGAN are compared
with the WaveGAN, which is proposed in the same article.
The work presented by Jiang et al. [98] uses the
GANomaly architecture [104] to process different time
series data. The GANomaly is used for anomaly detection
in industrial tasks; it introduces a feature extraction into the
network, which pre-processes the input data of both the
generator and the generator. The generator is composed of
an encoder–decoder–encoder network, which makes it
possible to learn the latent representations generated by the
feature extraction part. Regarding the data used for train-
ing, rolling bearing data was used to detect anomalies,
collected at 12–48 kHz in two different datasets. The col-
lected data is converted from the time series domain into
images by generating a spectrogram, thus converting the
time series data into the image domain. In particular, they
used
Bearing
Data
from
Case
Western
Reserve
University.1
The Trafﬁc Sensor Data Imputation GAN (TSDIGAN)
[99] is an architecture proposed for missing data recon-
struction. In particular, trafﬁc data is used consisting on
104,544 trafﬁc records. In this work, GAN is in charge of
generating synthetic data that ﬁll in the missing data gaps
with realistic information. The approach used in the paper
to treat time series trafﬁc data is to transform them into an
image format using the proposed method called Gramian
Angular Summation Field (GASF). The Gramian Angular
Summation Field (GASF) algorithm is focused on main-
taining the time dependency of the trafﬁc data; this algo-
rithm is capable of transforming the data into a matrix by
representing each time data point to a polar coordinate
system within the range ½1; 1. Then, each point is
encoded by its angular cosine and radius. This generates a
matrix with the temporal correlation between each point,
which is then fed to the networks. Finally, the data are
processed using a convolutional-based GAN that uses its
generator to generate new data and reconstruct the missing
values.
6.3.4 1D convolutional GAN
Temporal cnn are cnn [105] where the convolutional
operation is calculated in 1D instead of traditional 2D
convolution. These networks adapt the geometric infor-
mation captured by the 2D cnn to a temporal domain,
lowering the dimensions of the learnt ﬁlters to 1D. These
networks have been used in works such as [15] to classify
data from temporal series.
In the recent years, different GAN architectures have
been proposed that use these 1D convolutional layers as a
base, replacing the traditional 2D convolutions of GAN
applied to computer vision tasks. In this approximation, it
is very straightforward to adapt traditional GAN architec-
tures to the time series domain, making it very plausible for
use in time series-related tasks.
1 https://engineering.case.edu/bearingdatacenter.
10136
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

The temporal-conditional GAN (T-CGAN) [106] is a
GAN architecture based on the idea of transforming the
Conditional GAN (CGAN) [107] architecture to time series
domain by replacing the 2D convolutional layers with the
1D convolutional layers. The performance of the model
was validated using one synthetic and three real-world
datasets. The synthetic data was constructed using sine
waves and sawtooth waves. The other datasets consisted of:
astronomical light curves of 1024 points per sample, a
power demand dataset of samples of 24 points, and an
electrocardiogram (ECG) dataset with 96 points for each
sample.
Emotional GAN [108] also applies these 1D convolu-
tional layers to create a GAN architecture to augment an
electrocardiogram (ECG) dataset improving the classiﬁca-
tion of support vector machine (SVM) and random forest
models when classifying the emotions of each subject. This
work used different datasets varying their frequency rate
between 256 and 2048 Hz.
The work published by Donahue et al. [61] presents the
WaveGAN architecture, which is based on the application
of 1D convolutional layers to sound data. This GAN uses
the deep convolutional GAN (DCGAN) architecture, but
changes the convolutions to 1D. As suggested, these 1D
convolutions should have a wider receptive ﬁeld respecting
the 2D convolutions of image processing; this is based on
the particularities of the audio data, in which each cycle of
a musical note sampled at 16 kHz may take 36 samples to
complete. Therefore, it is necessary to use wider ﬁlters to
capture the distanced temporal dependencies of the data.
This feature of the sound data was previously taken into
account with solutions such as the dilated convolutions
proposed in WaveNet [60]. This enlargement of the
receptive ﬁeld is compensated for by reducing one
dimension, changing from 5x5 convolutions to 25 1-di-
mensional convolutions and maintaining the number of
parameters of the network. The rest of the architecture
maintains the standard GAN architecture, allowing the
synthesis of audio tracks with unsupervised training GAN.
This approximation has also been followed by Sabir
et al. [109] for augmenting DC current signals, using
samples of current signal with a frequency of 100 Hz
during 16 s. The proposed work used the deep convolu-
tional GAN (DCGAN) architecture as a base and changes
the original convolutions to 1D convolutions. In particular,
this work has two different GANs, one that generates
healthy signals and the other is in charge of generating
faulty data.
There are also hybrid implementations that combine 1D
convolutions with other techniques, such as in [96] where
LSTM-GAN is proposed. This architecture combines the
LSTM cell in the discriminator network with the 1D con-
volutional layers used in the generator network.
6.3.5 Time series Generative Adversarial Networks
(TimeGAN)
The TimeGAN architecture [55] tries to implement a GAN
model to perform DA on time series data, but differentiates
itself from other previous alternatives by adding a new loss
function that tries to capture the stepwise dependencies of
the data. Previous implementations of GAN in data
sequences were based on the use of recurrent networks for
the generator and discriminator networks of GAN [56, 58],
but this approximation may not be sufﬁcient to accurately
replicate the temporal transitions of the original data.
This work divides the data features into two different
classes: static features and temporal features. Static fea-
tures S do not vary over time, e.g., gender, while temporal
features X change. In other words, the static features are
characteristics of the data that are not directly related to the
time series sample but capture important properties of it.
The TimeGAN is tested in four different datasets. First,
a synthetic dataset is generated using sinusoidal sequences
with an average length of 24 points. A stock prices time
series dataset from 2004 to 2019 is used with an average
length of 24 days. Third, a dataset of energy prediction
with samples of 24 h of length on average is used. Finally,
a medical lung cancer events dataset is used with an
average of 58 events per sample.
The proposed architecture adds, in addition to the gen-
erator and discriminator networks, two new networks: the
encoder and recovery networks. These networks are
responsible for embedding the input data in the latent
space, as an autoencoder [110] would traditionally do. This
system learns the so-called embedding and recovery
functions to take the static and temporal features into two
separate latent codes hs and ht and recover the input
information S and X.
The generator and discriminator parts of the network do
the same work as they would do in a traditional GAN,
using the discriminator to differentiate between real and
synthetic samples. But in this case, the generator generates
the data for the embedding space, while the discriminator
also takes this embedding as input for its classiﬁcation.
The main innovation of TimeGAN is implemented in
the generator, which, in addition to the normal generation
of synthetic samples, is also forced to learn the stepwise
dependencies of the data. To do so, the generator receives
as input the synthetic embedding hs; ht1 and computes the
next vector hs; ht. This new function is learned by a new
supervised loss function that compares the generator fore-
cast with the real data.
Therefore, the training objectives of the presented
architecture can be divided into 3 different loss functions.
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10137
123

•
Reconstruction loss (LR) This loss is used in the
reversible mapping part of the network, composed of
the encoder and recovery networks. The length T of
each sequence is also a random variable, the distribu-
tion of which, for notational convenience, it will be
absorbed into distribution p. It is given by:
LR ¼ Es;x1:T  p ks  ~sk2 þ
X
t
xt  ~xt
k
k2
"
#
;
ð13Þ
where the tilde denotes the reconstructed samples and
jj  jj stands for the standard (Euclidean) norm.
•
Unsupervised loss (LU) In TimeGAN, the generator has
two different types of input during training. First, the
generator receives synthetic embeddings
^hS; ^h1:t1,
which are autoregressive, to generate the next synthetic
vector ^ht. In this process, the gradients are computed
under unsupervised loss. This is as expected, that is, to
allow maximising D or minimising G the probability of
providing the correct classiﬁcations ^yS, ^y1:T for both
training data hs; h1:T and synthetic output ^hS; ^h1:T from
the generator. The unsupervised loss function is the
equivalent loss function of a normal GAN that attempts
to distinguish real and fake samples. It is given by:
LU ¼ Es;x1:T  p½log yS þ
X
t
log yt
þ Es;x1:T  ^p½log 1  ^yS
ð
Þ þ
X
t
log 1  ^yt
ð
Þ
ð14Þ
where ys and yt are the classiﬁcation of the discrimi-
nator for static and temporal features and the accent
denotes synthetic samples.
•
Supervised loss (LS) To encourage the generator to
learn the conditional transitions of the data, this
function is designed that measures the similarity
between the real and the synthetic samples created by
the generator when applying the forecasting. The loss
function is denoted as follows:
LS ¼ Es;x1:T  p
X
t
ht  gX hS; ht1; zt
ð
Þ
k
k2
"
#
ð15Þ
where gX denotes the sample synthesised by the gen-
erator, taking as input the embedded anterior sample
hS; ht1; zt. An overview of the learning scheme of
TimeGAN can be seen in Fig. 8.
6.3.6 Conditional Sig-Wasserstein GAN
The Conditional Signature Wasserstein GAN [111] was
proposed as a method of maintaining long temporal
dependencies in time series data. Regarding the previous
models, this architecture is able to outperform previous
models such as TimeGAN providing better synthetic data
for DA.
In this paper, it is proposed a new metric for evaluating
the properties of a data stream, providing a description of
the sample. This metric is used in the discriminator
(D) network to differentiate real and synthetic samples. The
Sig-Wasserstein metric measures the path space of the data
using the Wasserstein distance. In this case, the main
strength of this method is that it simpliﬁes the training by
replacing a neural network discriminator (D) for a linear
regression using the Sig-Wasserstein distance. This process
eliminates the cost of approximating a discriminator (D).
The results of the model are tested using different stock
market datasets to predict the close prices and the volatility
of different actives.
As a Generator (G) network, it is used an AR-FNN
generator, which is able of capturing temporal dependen-
cies of time series data.
Figure 9 shows a scheme of the training process of the
Conditional Sig-Wasserstein GAN. As it can be seen, the
real and fake samples can be distinguished by using the
Sig-Wasserstein metric.
6.4 Data Augmentation (DA) based on Dynamic
Time Warping (DTW)
6.4.1 Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) Barycenter Averaging
Dynamic time warping (DTW) [112] is a classical algo-
rithm that measures the similarity between two data
Fig. 8 TimeGAN architecture. Extracted from [55]
10138
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

sequences. This method was used as a base in [113], where
the effectiveness of the new generated synthetic time series
data was evaluated using augmented training sets for time
series classiﬁcation through the 1-NN classiﬁer in con-
junction with dynamic time warping (DTW). In particular,
85 datasets of the UCR archive [62] were used in the
experiments. The idea is to manipulate the distribution
manifold to generate inﬁnite new samples of data. They
achieve this by changing the weights of a set of time series,
such as the set D ¼
T1; w1
ð
Þ; . . .; TN; wn
ð
Þ
f
g is embedded
in a space E and the average of dynamic time warping
(DTW) is denoted as follows:
arg min T 2 E
X
N
i¼1
wi  DTW2 T; Ti
ð
Þ
ð16Þ
where w is the weight of each sample.
To calculate T, they use the expectation–maximisation
algorithm and to decide the weight values, three different
methods are proposed:
•
Average all This method generates the weight vector
values using a ﬂat Dirichlet distribution. The main
problem with this method is that it tends to ﬁll in data
spaces where it should not.
•
Average selected This method focusses on selecting a
subset of close samples. Thus, it prevents empty spaces
from being ﬁlled with information because the subsets
of samples are close together in the manifold.
•
Average selected with distance The difference between
this method and the previous one is that this method
calculates the relative distance between the near
samples of data.
6.4.2 Suboptimal element alignment averaging
SuboPtimAl Warped time series geNEratoR (SPAWNER)
[114] is a DA method based on the dynamic time warping
(DTW) algorithm [112]. The dynamic time warping
(DTW) algorithm is used in this DA method to align dif-
ferent multidimensional signals X1; X2, giving the so-called
warping path W which is a sequence of points that min-
imises the distance between these input signals. The results
of the model were tested using two different electrocar-
diogram (ECG) datasets.
SPAWNER algorithm takes the warping path calculated
with the dynamic time warping (DTW) algorithm and
introduces a new random element to the sequence, known
as wp. This new point is generated using a uniformly dis-
tributed random number within the range (0, 1). Then, the
new optimal path is forced to contain the new generated
element, obtaining the new warping paths W
1; W
2. Both
sequences are aligned using a parameter called n, which
reduces the ﬂexibility of the path. Finally, both warp paths
are concatenated, generating the path W
1;2 from which the
new time series signals x
1; x
2 are obtained.
It is observed that for some multivariate signals, this
variation of DA is not enough. Therefore, a random vari-
ance is also applied to each point of the signal using a
normal
distribution
such
as
x  Nðl; r2Þ; l ¼ 0:5ðx
1 þ x
2Þ; r ¼ 0:05jx
1  x
2j.
The use of different alignment methods for text or image
data is also proposed, instead of using dynamic time
warping (DTW) which is proposed when signals are used.
Therefore, the overall algorithm can be easily translated to
other domains, with the need for an alignment method
between two samples.
7 Discussion
Data augmentation algorithms in the time series domain are
really important for improving the available datasets,
whose creation is not always easy. In general terms, all the
methods presented in this work are algorithms speciﬁcally
designed for data augmentation (DA) in time series but, in
other cases, they are usually adaptations of architectures
that were originally designed for other domains, such as
image processing. However, the GAN-based algorithms
themselves have their beginnings in the ﬁeld of imaging
and have gradually been integrated into other areas.
Regarding the length of the data that each algorithm can
process, it should be noted the variety of sizes and dataset
types of the different reviewed researches. One of the main
strengths that artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms have is that,
due to the fact that their learning is based on the particular
Fig. 9 Conditional Sig-
Wasserstein GAN training.
Extracted from [111]
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10139
123

data of each application, they can operate with almost any
source of data. This leads to a great variation in the size of
the time series windows that most of the algorithms use. In
some cases, the data are even processed to treat it as an
image, which is symptomatic of the ﬂexibility of DL
algorithms. In the case of traditional algorithms, they can
also process any length of data if it is properly adapted.
In this section, it will be analysed the main advantages
and disadvantages of each type of algorithm.
7.1 Advantages
Traditional algorithms are widely developed and studied so
that their results can be fairly compared. In DA, they allow
you to work by modifying the examples already present,
which allows you to control variations. In addition, the
simplicity of the algorithms themselves by greatly reducing
the number of hyperparameters to be conﬁgured results in
less time to set them up and the need for less data to train
them.
Second, the VAE generative algorithms allow one to
control to a greater extent the variability of the generated
data by directly inﬂuencing the standard deviation of the
latent distribution of the original dataset. This feature
allows, among all algorithms, the greatest control of the
variability of the generated data. VAE is commonly used
for anomaly detection cases due to its better performance.
Finally, the most current generative models are a
breakthrough in the area due to their great results. GANs,
like VAEs, allow synthetic data to be generated and, at the
cost of losing some control over data generation, they are
algorithms capable of much better generalisation. All this
is due to the training scheme itself, which allows GANs
models to learn the distribution that follows the original
dataset and, through it, generate synthetic data according to
the distribution of the dataset.
Furthermore, since GANs are relatively recent algo-
rithms, they beneﬁt from greater attention from the scien-
tiﬁc community, which means that there is more recent
research focused on improving their results than other
algorithms.
7.2 Disadvantages
In terms of limitations, the use of traditional algorithms is
quite limited because they are based on making modiﬁca-
tions to elements of the real dataset. Therefore, they can
often produce invalid examples. In general, they are limited
to generate examples of lower quality and never to gen-
erating new elements. Normally, the reviewed algorithms
require a pre-processing phase to normalise the input data,
which can lead to more complex algorithms involving
previous steps. Otherwise, the learning of the artiﬁcial
neural network (ANN) would be inefﬁcient [115, 116]
Although VAEs are algorithms capable of generating
synthetic data, as opposed to traditional algorithms that
only modify the original data, new neural network (NN)
models such as GANs have mitigated their use in the ﬁeld
because by nature they are capable of generating fewer data
than the most current generative networks. Despite this,
because they can very precisely control the variability of
the generated data, there are ﬁelds of application that still
continue to use them.
Regarding GAN, it can be said that despite their great
results, there are certain difﬁculties that slow down their
progress. GANs are by far the most complex models cur-
rently available and, due to the particularities of the way
they are trained, they are extremely difﬁcult to train and
obtain results.
GAN are one of the most difﬁcult models to train. The
main problems that these networks suffer are mode col-
lapse [117, 118], instability [119], convergence evaluation
[120] and evaluation metrics.
Due to the GAN instability problems [119, 121, 122],
most of the time a great portion of the samples synthesised
by the Generator (G) network lack of quality in certain
aspects as the emergence of image artefacts [123]. In
addition, the lack of convergence evaluation of the net-
works makes it hard to detect when the generated data is of
high quality. Therefore, one of the main problems of GAN
is that their results are not fully reliable.
7.3 Open issues and challenges
Some authors [124] tend to differentiate between DA and
data generation due to the great advances made in neural
network (NN) models. Traditional algorithms are always
framed in the area of DA since the data they produce are
always based on existing data; as an open problem, they
generate less varied data but more control over what is
generated. Furthermore, data generation algorithms pro-
duce new data so aggressively that much of the generated
data is not possible, degenerating the quality of the aug-
mented dataset [125].
Unlike the limitation of the scarcity of data augmented
with traditional models, AEs and VAEs are born to cover
the deﬁciency of the generated data. In [126], they
demonstrate the capability of generative neural network
(NN) models to add more diversity to the dataset. In
addition, traditional algorithms tend not to be ﬂexible in
taking a trained model and applying it to another problem,
forcing a rethink of the algorithm. Neural networks, in this
aspect, tend to be more ﬂexible, and able to use the same
trained model in different problems. In [106], T-CGAN
(Sect. 6.3.4) where different datasets are exposed with the
10140
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

same architecture, or in [96], LSTM-GAN that uses as
inputs datasets as disparate as one made of electrocardio-
grams and another comprising taxi statistics.
However,
although
generative
models
offer
great
advantages, GANs have signiﬁcant additional problems,
especially in training. Typical problems such as modal
collapse, Nash equilibria, gradient vanishing or instability
are suffered in every training of these models, making their
optimisation a very complex process [127, 128].
In general, all generative models share the same open
problem that often complicates their validation process. As
shown in Sect. 5, despite the existence of some evaluation
metrics, there is no consensus in the community on which
should be used. For example, in [55] authors use empirical
evaluation for data generation, but for visualisation they
use PCA and a discriminative and a predictive model to see
how they have improved after adding the synthetic images.
In [61], authors propose the Inception Score, a measure of
Nearest Neighbour and empirical measurement by humans,
and in [99], traditional measures of deep learning (MAE,
RMSE and MRE) to compare the generation of future
values are used. If the focus is also put on GAN models, it
must be taken into account that, to this problem, there is no
method for these architectures to deﬁne what the stop
condition is in a training.
8 Conclusion
Due to the signiﬁcant evolution that DA has undergone in
recent years, more and more ﬁelds are emerging in which
to apply and improve the results. This article is focused on
giving a comprehensive overview of the main algorithms
used for data augmentation (DA) in the ﬁeld of time series.
The review is organised in a taxonomy, consisting of basic
and advanced approaches, where it is summarised repre-
sentative methods of each algorithm (traditional, VAEs and
GANs) comparing them empirically, disaggregate by
application areas and highlight advantages/disadvantages
for future research.
Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Comunidad de
Madrid under Convenio Plurianual with the Universidad Polite´cnica
de Madrid in the actuation line of Programa de Excelencia para el
Profesorado Universitario. The third-named author has been partially
supported by the Madrid Government (Comunidad de Madrid—
Spain) under the Multiannual Agreement with the Universidad
Complutense de Madrid in the line Research Incentive for Young
PhDs, in the context of the V PRICIT (Regional Programme of
Research and Technological Innovation) through the project PR27/
21-029 and by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacio´n Project
PID2021-124440NB-I00 (Spain).
Funding Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC
agreement with Springer Nature.
Data availability No datasets were generated or analysed during the
current study, and all ﬁgures are taken from the papers listed in the
references or are generated by us.
Declarations
Conflict of interest All authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest in this paper.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Duong H-T, Nguyen-Thi T-A (2021) A review: preprocessing
techniques and data augmentation for sentiment analysis.
Comput Soc Netw 8(1):1–16
2. Felix EA, Lee SP (2019) Systematic literature review of pre-
processing
techniques
for
imbalanced
data.
IET
Softw
13(6):479–496
3. Goodfellow IJ, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley
D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y (2014) Generative adver-
sarial networks
4. Lecun Y (1987) PhD Thesis: Modeles connexionnistes de
L’apprentissage (connectionist Learning Models). Universite P.
et M. Curie (Paris 6)
5. Kingma DP, Welling M (2014) Auto-encoding variational bayes
6. Navidan H, Moshiri PF, Nabati M, Shahbazian R, Ghorashi SA,
Shah-Mansouri V, Windridge D (2021) Generative adversarial
networks (gans) in networking: a comprehensive survey &
evaluation. Comput Netw 194:108149
7. Rigaki M, Garcia S (2018) Bringing a gan to a knife-ﬁght:
adapting malware communication to avoid detection. In: 2018
IEEE security and privacy workshops (SPW), pp 70–75. IEEE
8. Mozo A, Gonza´lez-Prieto A´ , Pastor A, Go´mez-Canaval S,
Talavera E (2022) Synthetic ﬂow-based cryptomining attack
generation through generative adversarial networks. Sci Rep
12(1):1–27
9. Wang Q, Farahat A, Gupta C, Zheng S (2021) Deep time series
models for scarce data. Neurocomputing 456:504–518
10. Cao L, Horn S, von Ehrenheim V, Anselmo Stahl R, Landgren
H (2022) Simulation-informed revenue extrapolation with con-
ﬁdence estimate for scaleup companies using scarce time-series
data. In: Proceedings of the 31st ACM international conference
on information & knowledge management, pp. 2954–2963
11. Bhowmik AK, Cabral P (2015) Spatially shifting temporal
points: estimating pooled within-time series variograms for
scarce hydrological data. Hydrol Earth Syst Sci Discuss
12(2):2243–2265
12. Chlap P, Min H, Vandenberg N, Dowling J, Holloway L,
Haworth
A
(2021)
A
review
of
medical
image
data
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10141
123

augmentation techniques for deep learning applications. J Med
Imaging Radiat Oncol 65(5):545–563
13. Naveed H (2021) Survey: image mixing and deleting for data
augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.07085
14. Feng SY, Gangal V, Wei J, Chandar S, Vosoughi S, Mitamura
T, Hovy E (2021) A survey of data augmentation approaches for
nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03075
15. Iwana BK, Uchida S (2021) An empirical survey of data aug-
mentation for time series classiﬁcation with neural networks.
PLoS ONE 16(7):0254841
16. Brophy E, Wang Z, She Q, Ward T (2021) Generative adver-
sarial networks in time series: a survey and taxonomy. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.11098
17. Patil AG, Surve A, Gupta AK, Sharma A, Anmulwar S (2016)
Survey of synthetic trafﬁc generators. In: 2016 international
conference on inventive computation technologies (ICICT), vol.
1, pp. 1–3. IEEE
18. Abufadda M, Mansour K (2021) A survey of synthetic data
generation for machine learning. In: 2021 22nd international
arab conference on information technology (ACIT), pp. 1–7.
IEEE
19. Gao N, Xue H, Shao W, Zhao S, Qin KK, Prabowo A, Rahaman
MS, Salim FD (2022) Generative adversarial networks for
spatio-temporal data: a survey. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol
(TIST) 13(2):1–25
20. Raghunathan TE (2021) Synthetic data. Annu Rev Stat Appl
8:129–140
21. Wen Q, Sun L, Yang F, Song X, Gao J, Wang X, Xu H (2020)
Time series data augmentation for deep learning: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12478
22. Lim B, Zohren S (2021) Time-series forecasting with deep
learning: a survey. Phil Trans R Soc A 379(2194):20200209
23. Krizhevsky A, Hinton G, et al (2009) Learning multiple layers
of features from tiny images
24. Simonyan K, Zisserman A (2014) Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556
25. He K, Zhang X, Ren S, Sun J (2016) Deep residual learning for
image recognition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778
26. Szegedy C, Liu W, Jia Y, Sermanet P, Reed S, Anguelov D,
Erhan D, Vanhoucke V, Rabinovich A (2015) Going deeper
with convolutions. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1–9
27. Huang G, Liu Z, Van Der Maaten L, Weinberger KQ (2017)
Densely connected convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pp. 4700–4708
28. Mikołajczyk A, Grochowski M (2018) Data augmentation for
improving deep learning in image classiﬁcation problem. In:
2018 international interdisciplinary PhD workshop (IIPhDW),
pp. 117–122. IEEE
29. Lashgari E, Liang D, Maoz U (2020) Data augmentation for
deep-learning-based electroencephalography. J Neurosci Meth-
ods 346:108885
30. Ashfahani A, Pratama M, Lughofer E, Ong Y-S (2020) Devdan:
deep
evolving
denoising
autoencoder.
Neurocomputing
390:297–314
31. Kullback S, Leibler RA (1951) On information and sufﬁciency.
Ann Math Stat 22(1):79–86
32. Bandara K, Hewamalage H, Liu Y-H, Kang Y, Bergmeir C
(2021) Improving the accuracy of global forecasting models
using
time
series
data
augmentation.
Pattern
Recogn
120:108148
33. Wang Z, Yan W, Oates T (2017) Time series classiﬁcation from
scratch with deep neural networks: a strong baseline. In: 2017
international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN),
pp. 1578–1585. IEEE
34. Reimers N, Gurevych I (2017) Optimal hyperparameters for
deep lstm-networks for sequence labeling tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06799
35. Schuster M, Paliwal KK (1997) Bidirectional recurrent neural
networks. IEEE Trans Signal Process 45(11):2673–2681
36. Karim F, Majumdar S, Darabi H, Chen S (2017) Lstm fully
convolutional networks for time series classiﬁcation. IEEE
Access 6:1662–1669
37. Isola P, Zhu J-Y, Zhou T, Efros AA (2017) Image-to-image
translation with conditional adversarial networks. In: Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp. 1125–1134
38. Yi Z, Zhang H, Tan P, Gong M (2017) Dualgan: Unsupervised
dual learning for image-to-image translation. In: Proceedings of
the
IEEE
international
conference
on
computer
vision,
pp. 2849–2857
39. Zhu J-Y, Park T, Isola P, Efros AA (2017) Unpaired image-to-
image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on com-
puter vision, pp. 2223–2232
40. Wang L, Sindagi V, Patel V (2018) High-quality facial photo-
sketch synthesis using multi-adversarial networks. In: 2018 13th
IEEE international conference on automatic face & gesture
recognition (FG 2018), pp. 83–90. IEEE
41. Yang C-HH, Tsai Y-Y, Chen P-Y (2021) Voice2series: Repro-
gramming acoustic models for time series classiﬁcation. In:
International conference on machine learning, pp. 11808–11819.
PMLR
42. Wang Z, Yan W, Oates T (2017) Time series classiﬁcation from
scratch with deep neural networks: a strong baseline. In: 2017
International joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN),
pp. 1578–1585. IEEE
43. Borji A (2019) Pros and cons of gan evaluation measures.
Comput Vis Image Underst 179:41–65
44. Radford A, Metz L, Chintala S (2015) Unsupervised represen-
tation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial
networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434
45. Karras T, Aila T, Laine S, Lehtinen J (2017) Progressive
growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10196
46. Karras T, Laine S, Aila T (2019) A style-based generator
architecture for generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pp. 4401–4410
47. Karras T, Aittala M, Laine S, Ha¨rko¨nen E, Hellsten J, Lehtinen
J, Aila T (2021) Alias-free generative adversarial networks. Adv
Neural Inf Process Syst 34:852–863
48. Zhu M, Pan P, Chen W, Yang Y (2019) Dm-gan: dynamic
memory generative adversarial networks for text-to-image syn-
thesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5802–5810
49. Gao L, Chen D, Zhao Z, Shao J, Shen HT (2021) Lightweight
dynamic conditional gan with pyramid attention for text-to-im-
age synthesis. Pattern Recognit 110:107384
50. Hartmann KG, Schirrmeister RT, Ball T (2018) Eeg-gan: Gen-
erative adversarial networks for electroencephalograhic (eeg)
brain signals. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01875
51. Wang S, Rudolph C, Nepal S, Grobler M, Chen S (2020) Part-
gan: privacy-preserving time-series sharing. In: International
conference on artiﬁcial neural networks, pp. 578–593. Springer
52. Salimans T, Goodfellow I, Zaremba W, Cheung V, Radford A,
Chen X (2016) Improved techniques for training GANs
53. Gurumurthy S, Sarvadevabhatla RK, Radhakrishnan VB (2017)
DeLiGAN : Generative Adversarial Networks for Diverse and
10142
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

Limited Data. In: 2017 IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. pp. 4941–4949
54. Heusel M, Ramsauer H, Unterthiner T, Nessler B, Hochreiter S
(2017) Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to
a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems. In: Neural information processing systems
(NIPS). 30
55. Yoon J, Jarrett D, Van der Schaar M (2019) Time-series gen-
erative adversarial networks. In: Advances in neural information
processing systems 32
56. Esteban C, Hyland SL, Ra¨tsch G (2017) Real-valued (medical)
time series generation with recurrent conditional gans. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.02633
57. Naaz F, Herle A, Channegowda J, Raj A, Lakshminarayanan M
(2021) A generative adversarial network-based synthetic data
augmentation technique for battery condition evaluation. Int J
Energy Res 45(13):19120–19135
58. Mogren O (2016) C-rnn-gan: Continuous recurrent neural net-
works with adversarial training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.
09904
59. Sutskever I, Martens J, Hinton GE (2011) Generating text with
recurrent neural networks. In: ICML
60. Van Den Oord A, Dieleman S, Zen H, Simonyan K, Vinyals O,
Graves A, Kalchbrenner N, Senior AW, Kavukcuoglu K (2016)
Wavenet: a generative model for raw audio. SSW 125:2
61. Donahue C, McAuley J, Puckette M (2018) Adversarial audio
synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04208
62. Dau HA, Keogh E, Kamgar K, Yeh C-CM, Zhu Y, Gharghabi S,
Ratanamahatana CA, Yanping Hu B, Begum N, Bagnall A,
Mueen A, Batista G, Hexagon-ML (2018) The UCR time series
classiﬁcation archive. https://www.cs.ucr.edu/*eamonn/time_
series_data_2018/
63. Fu B, Kirchbuchner F, Kuijper A (2020) Data augmentation for
time series: traditional vs generative models on capacitive
proximity time series. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM inter-
national conference on pervasive technologies related to assis-
tive environments, pp. 1–10
64. Debnath A, Waghmare G, Wadhwa H, Asthana S, Arora A
(2021) Exploring generative data augmentation in multivariate
time series forecasting: opportunities and challenges. Solar-
Energy 137:52–560
65. Cazelles E, Robert A, Tobar F (2020) The wasserstein-fourier
distance for stationary time series. IEEE Trans Signal Process
69:709–721
66. Cao P, Li X, Mao K, Lu F, Ning G, Fang L, Pan Q (2020) A
novel data augmentation method to enhance deep neural net-
works for detection of atrial ﬁbrillation. Biomed Signal Process
Control 56:101675
67. Pan J, Tompkins WJ (1985) A real-time qrs detection algorithm.
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 3:230–236
68. Flores A, Tito-Chura H, Apaza-Alanoca H (2021) Data aug-
mentation for short-term time series prediction with deep
learning, pp. 492–506
69. Rashid KM, Louis J (2019) Window-warping: a time series data
augmentation of imu data for construction equipment activity
identiﬁcation. In: ISARC. Proceedings of the international
symposium on automation and robotics in construction, vol. 36,
pp. 651–657. IAARC Publications
70. Um TT, Pﬁster FM, Pichler D, Endo S, Lang M, Hirche S,
Fietzek U, Kulic´ D (2017) Data augmentation of wearable
sensor data for parkinson’s disease monitoring using convolu-
tional neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM
international conference on multimodal interaction, pp. 216–220
71. Adachi S, Takemoto H, Kitamura T, Mokhtari P, Honda K
(2007) Vocal tract length perturbation and its application to
male-female vocal tract shape conversion. J Acoust Soc Am
121(6):3874–3885
72. Cui X, Goel V, Kingsbury B (2015) Data augmentation for deep
neural network acoustic modeling. IEEE/ACM Trans Audio,
Speech, Lang Process 23(9):1469–1477
73. Ko T, Peddinti V, Povey D, Khudanpur S (2015) Audio aug-
mentation for speech recognition. In: 16th annual conference of
the international speech communication association
74. Jaitly N, Hinton GE (2013) Vocal tract length perturbation (vtlp)
improves speech recognition. In: Proceedings of ICML work-
shop on deep learning for audio, speech and language, vol. 117
75. Park DS, Chan W, Zhang Y, Chiu C-C, Zoph B, Cubuk ED, Le
QV (2019) Specaugment: a simple data augmentation method
for automatic speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.
08779
76. Jeong CY, Shin HC, Kim M (2021) Sensor-data augmentation
for human activity recognition with time-warping and data
masking. Multimed Tools Appl 80(14):20991–21009
77. Le Guennec A, Malinowski S, Tavenard R (2016) Data aug-
mentation for time series classiﬁcation using convolutional
neural networks. In: ECML/PKDD workshop on advanced
analytics and learning on temporal data
78. Fawaz HI, Forestier G, Weber J, Idoumghar L, Muller P-A
(2018) Data augmentation using synthetic data for time series
classiﬁcation with deep residual networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1808.02455
79. Pan Q, Li X, Fang L (2020) Data augmentation for deep
learning-based ecg analysis, 91–111
80. Lee H, Hwang S, Shin J (2019) Rethinking data augmentation:
self-supervision and self-distillation. arxiv 2019. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.05872
81. Al Nazi Z, Biswas A, Rayhan MA, Abir TA (2019) Classiﬁca-
tion of ecg signals by dot residual lstm network with data
augmentation for anomaly detection. In: 2019 22nd international
conference on computer and information technology (ICCIT),
pp. 1–5. IEEE
82. Alawneh L, Alsarhan T, Al-Zinati M, Al-Ayyoub M, Jararweh
Y, Lu H (2021) Enhancing human activity recognition using
deep learning and time series augmented data. J Ambient Intell
Humaniz Comput 12(12):10565–10580
83. Feng Q, Li Y, Wang H (2021) Intelligent random noise mod-
eling by the improved variational autoencoding method and its
application to data augmentation. Geophysics 86(1):19–31
84. Moreno-Barea FJ, Jerez JM, Franco L (2020) Improving clas-
siﬁcation accuracy using data augmentation on small data sets.
Expert Syst Appl 161:113696
85. Goubeaud M, Joußen P, Gmyrek N, Ghorban F, Schelkes L,
Kummert A (2021) Using variational autoencoder to augment
sparse time series datasets. In: 2021 7th international conference
on optimization and applications (ICOA), pp. 1–6. IEEE
86. Hsu W-N, Zhang Y, Glass J (2017) Unsupervised domain
adaptation
for
robust
speech
recognition
via
variational
autoencoder-based data augmentation. In: 2017 IEEE automatic
speech
recognition
and
understanding workshop
(ASRU),
pp. 16–23. IEEE
87. Demir S, Mincev K, Kok K, Paterakis NG (2021) Data aug-
mentation for time series regression: applying transformations,
autoencoders and adversarial networks to electricity price fore-
casting. Appl Energy 304:117695. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ape
nergy.2021.117695
88. Li L, Yan J, Wang H, Jin Y (2020) Anomaly detection of time
series with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-
encoder. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn Syst 32(3):1177–1191
89. Liu C, Zhou H, Sun Z, Cui G (2021) Glowimp: combining glow
and gan for multivariate time series imputation. In: International
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10143
123

conference on algorithms and architectures for parallel pro-
cessing, pp. 50–64. Springer
90. Li J, Ren W, Han M (2021) Variational auto-encoders based on
the shift correction for imputation of speciﬁc missing in multi-
variate time series. Measurement 186:110055
91. Sohn K, Lee H, Yan X (2015) Learning structured output rep-
resentation using deep conditional generative models. Advances
in neural information processing systems 28
92. Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J (1997) Long short-term memory.
Neural Comput 9(8):1735–1780
93. Arjovsky M, Chintala S, Bottou L (2017) Wasserstein genera-
tive adversarial networks. In: International conference on
machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR
94. Higgins I, Matthey L, Pal A, Burgess C, Glorot X, Botvinick M,
Mohamed S, Lerchner A (2016) beta-vae: learning basic visual
concepts with a constrained variational framework. In Interna-
tional conference on learning representations.
95. Haradal S, Hayashi H, Uchida S (2018) Biosignal data aug-
mentation based on generative adversarial networks. In: 2018
40th annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in
medicine and biology society (EMBC), pp. 368–371. IEEE
96. Zhu G, Zhao H, Liu H, Sun H (2019) A novel lstm-gan algo-
rithm for time series anomaly detection. In: 2019 prognostics
and system health management conference (PHM-Qingdao),
pp. 1–6. IEEE
97. Shi J, Ding Y, Lv Z (2021) An intermittent fault data generation
method based on lstm and gan. In: 2021 global reliability and
prognostics and health management (PHM-Nanjing), pp. 1–4.
IEEE
98. Jiang W, Hong Y, Zhou B, He X, Cheng C (2019) A gan-based
anomaly detection approach for imbalanced industrial time
series. IEEE Access 7:143608–143619
99. Huang T, Chakraborty P, Sharma A (2021) Deep convolutional
generative adversarial networks for trafﬁc data imputation
encoding time series as images. Int J Transp Sci Technol. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijtst.2021.10.007
100. Hochreiter S (1998) The vanishing gradient problem during
learning recurrent neural nets and problem solutions. Intern.
J Uncertain Fuzziness Knowl-Based Syst 6(02):107–116
101. Bengio Y, Simard P, Frasconi P (1994) Learning long-term
dependencies with gradient descent is difﬁcult. IEEE Trans
Neural Netw 5(2):157–166
102. Olszewski RT (2001) Generalized feature extraction for struc-
tural pattern recognition in time -series data. PhD thesis
103. Andrzejak RG, Lehnertz K, Mormann F, Rieke C, David P,
Elger CE (2001) Indications of nonlinear deterministic and
ﬁnite-dimensional structures in time series of brain electrical
activity: dependence on recording region and brain state. Phys
Rev E 64(6):061907
104. Akcay S, Atapour-Abarghouei A, Breckon TP (2018) Gano-
maly: semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial train-
ing. In: Asian conference on computer vision, pp. 622–637.
Springer
105. LeCun Y, Bottou L, Bengio Y, Haffner P (1998) Gradient-based
learning
applied
to
document
recognition.
Proc
IEEE
86(11):2278–2324
106. Ramponi G, Protopapas P, Brambilla M, Janssen R (2018)
T-cgan: Conditional generative adversarial network for data
augmentation in noisy time series with irregular sampling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1811.08295
107. Mirza M, Osindero S (2014) Conditional generative adversarial
nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784
108. Chen G, Zhu Y, Hong Z, Yang Z (2019) Emotionalgan: gen-
erating ecg to enhance emotion state classiﬁcation. In: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 International conference on artiﬁcial
intelligence and computer science, pp. 309–313
109. Sabir R, Rosato D, Hartmann S, Gu¨hmann C (2021) Signal
generation using 1d deep convolutional generative adversarial
networks for fault diagnosis of electrical machines. In: 2020
25th international conference on pattern recognition (ICPR),
pp. 3907–3914. IEEE
110. Kramer MA (1991) Nonlinear principal component analysis
using autoassociative neural networks. AIChE J 37(2):233–243
111. Ni H, Szpruch L, Wiese M, Liao S, Xiao B (2020) Conditional
sig-wasserstein gans for time series generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.05421
112. Sakoe H, Chiba S (1978) Dynamic programming algorithm
optimization for spoken word recognition. IEEE Trans Acoust
Speech Signal Process 26(1):43–49
113. Forestier G, Petitjean F, Dau HA, Webb GI, Keogh E (2017)
Generating synthetic time series to augment sparse datasets. In:
2017 IEEE International conference on data mining (ICDM),
pp. 865–870. IEEE
114. Kamycki K, Kapuscinski T, Oszust M (2019) Data augmenta-
tion with suboptimal warping for time-series classiﬁcation.
Sensors 20(1):98
115. Shao J, Hu K, Wang C, Xue X, Raj B (2020) Is normalization
indispensable for training deep neural network? Adv Neural Inf
Process Syst 33:13434–13444
116. Sola J, Sevilla J (1997) Importance of input data normalization
for the application of neural networks to complex industrial
problems. IEEE Trans Nucl Sci 44(3):1464–1468
117. Zhang K (2021) On mode collapse in generative adversarial
networks. In: International conference on artiﬁcial neural net-
works, pp. 563–574. Springer
118. Adiga S, Attia MA, Chang W-T, Tandon R (2018) On the
tradeoff between mode collapse and sample quality in genera-
tive adversarial networks. In: 2018 IEEE global conference on
signal and information processing (GlobalSIP), pp. 1184–1188.
IEEE
119. Goodfellow I, Pouget-Abadie J, Mirza M, Xu B, Warde-Farley
D, Ozair S, Courville A, Bengio Y (2020) Generative adver-
sarial networks. Commun ACM 63(11):139–144
120. Barnett SA (2018) Convergence problems with generative
adversarial networks (gans). arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.11382
121. Arjovsky M, Bottou L (2017) Towards principled methods for
training generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:
1701.04862
122. Gonog L, Zhou Y (2019) A review: generative adversarial
networks. In: 2019 14th IEEE conference on industrial elec-
tronics and applications (ICIEA), pp. 505–510. IEEE
123. Lee O-Y, Shin Y-H, Kim J-O (2019) Multi-perspective dis-
criminators-based generative adversarial network for image
super resolution. IEEE Access 7:136496–136510
124. Wang X, Wang K, Lian S (2020) A survey on face data aug-
mentation for the training of deep neural networks. Neural
Comput Appl 32(19):15503–15531
125. Nalepa J, Marcinkiewicz M, Kawulok M (2019) Data augmen-
tation for brain-tumor segmentation: a review. Front Comput
Neurosci 13:83
126. Fu B, Kirchbuchner F, Kuijper A (2020) Data augmentation for
time series: Traditional vs generative models on capacitive
proximity time series. In: Proceedings of the 13th ACM inter-
national conference on pervasive technologies related to assis-
tive environments. PETRA ’20. Association for computing
machinery, New York, NY (2020). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3389189.3392606
127. Iglesias G, Talavera E, Dı´az-A´ lvarez A (2022) A survey on
GANs for computer vision: recent research, analysis and tax-
onomy.
arXiv.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2203.11242.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11242
10144
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
123

128. Gonza´lez-Prieto A´ , Mozo A, Go´mez-Canaval S, Talavera E
(2022) Improving the quality of generative models through
smirnov transformation. Inf Sci 609:1539–1566
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Neural Computing and Applications (2023) 35:10123–10145
10145
123