Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-023-00233-6
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Multiscale Feature Extraction and Fusion of Image and Text in VQA
Siyu Lu1 · Yueming Ding1 · Mingzhe Liu2 · Zhengtong Yin3 · Lirong Yin4 · Wenfeng Zheng1 
Received: 1 November 2022 / Accepted: 31 March 2023 
© The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
The Visual Question Answering (VQA) system is the process of finding useful information from images related to the ques-
tion to answer the question correctly. It can be widely used in the fields of visual assistance, automated security surveillance, 
and intelligent interaction between robots and humans. However, the accuracy of VQA has not been ideal, and the main 
difficulty in its research is that the image features cannot well represent the scene and object information, and the text infor-
mation cannot be fully represented. This paper used multi-scale feature extraction and fusion methods in the image feature 
characterization and text information representation sections of the VQA system, respectively to improve its accuracy. Firstly, 
aiming at the image feature representation problem, multi-scale feature extraction and fusion method were adopted, and 
the image features output of different network layers were extracted by a pre-trained deep neural network, and the optimal 
scheme of feature fusion method was found through experiments. Secondly, for the representation of sentences, a multi-scale 
feature method was introduced to characterize and fuse the word-level, phrase-level, and sentence-level features of sentences. 
Finally, the VQA model was improved using the multi-scale feature extraction and fusion method. The results show that the 
addition of multi-scale feature extraction and fusion improves the accuracy of the VQA model.
Keywords  Multi-scale · Image features · Text information · Feature extraction and fusion · VQA
1  Introduction
VQA is a research task that links computer vision (CV) to 
natural language processing (NLP). As a high-level com-
plex task, VQA not only includes the task of identifying and 
detecting the content of the picture, but also includes the 
task of understanding the problem and the research of com-
bining the question with the picture, and the task of using the 
question and the picture content to reason about the answer. 
Therefore, a complete VQA model mainly includes three 
steps: single-mode feature extraction, image feature and text 
information fusion, and answer reasoning [1–5]. Most of 
the early work applied the model of image caption genera-
tion [6–9] to the Visual Question Answering (VQA) task 
[10–12] and realized the ability of VQA by combining the 
modules of convolutional neural network and cyclic neural 
network. At present, there are several mainstream meth-
ods of VQA, such as the end-to-end neural network, the 
multi-module neural network, and the neural network with 
external database. The combination model is to decompose 
VQA tasks into independent models to solve different types 
of tasks, among which neural module networks (NMN) 
[13] and dynamic memory networks (DMN) [14] are typi-
cal representatives. Furthermore, scholars put forward the 
introduction of an external knowledge base [8, 15], among 
which the common external knowledge base includes the 
DBpedia [16], the Freebase [17], the YAGO [18], and the 
OpenIE [19].
The core task of the VQA model is the extraction and 
fusion of features [20, 21], which is also related to the accu-
racy of the model [22]. Because the features extracted by the 
deep neural network and then extracted by the shallow neu-
ral network have different meanings, the multiscale feature 
 *	 Mingzhe Liu 
	
liumz@cdut.edu.cn
 *	 Wenfeng Zheng 
	
winfirms@uestc.edu.cn
1	
School of Automation, University of Electronic Science 
and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China
2	
School of Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, Wenzhou 
University of Technology, Wenzhou 325000, China
3	
College of Resource and Environment Engineering, Guizhou 
University, Guiyang 550025, China
4	
Department of Geography and Anthropology, Louisiana 
State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA

	
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 
1 3
   54  
Page 2 of 11
fusion method was applied to the extracted feature of the 
image and the text in the VQA system, and the joint com-
plementation of the two can make the feature expression 
more perfect and more conducive to recognizing the object 
in the image.
1.1  Image Feature Extraction
There are two typical methods used in the task of image 
feature extraction. One of the typical deep learning methods 
for image feature extraction is region selection, which was 
proposed by Girshick [23] in the target detection task, and 
then widely used in image target detection and segmentation 
task. This method can get the object boundary and its key 
characteristics well, but the problem is that it will ignore 
some information, such as walls in the background, grass, 
etc. The second method uses the classical neural network, 
which has been pre-trained to extract features, such as the 
VGG model and the ResNet model trained in big data such 
as ImageNet. The advantage of this method is that it can 
use the existing classical model, which has been pre-trained 
by many data. On the other hand, the disadvantage of this 
method is that it requires that the new task data needs to be 
not much different from the data used in the pre-training. 
Otherwise, it will not achieve the desired effect.
The Convolutional neural network has made outstand-
ing achievements in image classification [24, 25], but this 
method still has significant limitations. The most typical is 
that although the convolutional neural network is adaptive 
to the object’s position change in the image, it is sensitive 
to the size change of the object. Therefore, if the object's 
size exceeds the convolutional kernel receptive field or the 
object's size is too small, the network cannot correctly iden-
tify the object from the image. Given this situation, scholars 
have proposed many solutions, such as image pyramid [26] 
or feature pyramid [6].
(1)	 Image Pyramid
The most intuitive method is to change the resolution of 
the image. In the earliest method [26], some scholars pro-
posed to zoom the original image to different sizes to get an 
image pyramid structure, as shown in Fig. 1. After that, the 
neural network used for classification is applied to images of 
various sizes. To some extent, this method solves the prob-
lem that the neural network is sensitive to the size of the 
target, but the cost is vast. Moreover, it needs to consume 
several times more storage space and computing resources 
than the general network [27], so this method is less used.
(2)	 Feature Pyramid
In the later improved methods, some scholars focus on the 
information representation of image features. The research 
shows that the shallow image feature has a small receptive 
field, high resolution, and rich location information, which 
is beneficial for detecting small objects. While the high-
level feature has a large receptive field and a low resolution, 
strong semantic information representation complements 
shallow network information. So scholars put forward the 
SSD (single shot multi-box detector) [6] method (Fig. 2). In 
this way, the shallow network can detect some objects that 
the original deep network features cannot detect. However, 
the effect is still limited because of the lack of semantic 
information of the shallow network features.
(3)	 Feature Pyramid Network
In order to combine the high-resolution features of shal-
low networks with the high-level semantic information of 
high-level network features, the feature pyramid network 
(FPN) method is proposed (Fig. 3). It extracts the features 
from the deep-layer network and gets the same features as 
the shallow layer features through the up-sampling. Then, 
the fusion of the two features is used as the input of the 
classification network and achieves good results in the clas-
sification task.
1.2  Text Information Extraction
The text information in the VQA database is unstructured 
information that is difficult for computers. To make the 
computer be able to deal with the text information, it needs 
to transformed. Word embedding was used to map text to 
feature space. There are two models of word embedding: 
skip-gram model and continuous word bag mode (CBOW) 
Fig. 1   Pattern diagram of image 
pyramid

International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 	
1 3
Page 3 of 11 
   54 
[28]. In the skip-gram model, the model trains the neural 
network to derive the probability distribution of the context 
vector of the input word based on the given input word and 
the pre-sized window. CBOW, on the other hand, is given 
context and trained on input words, and the context under 
the window size given by the input predicts the probability 
distribution of words.
For the feature extraction of the question sentence, 
because the convolution neural network cannot process the 
sequence information well, the cyclic convolution neural 
network is used to get the sentence feature after iterating the 
word feature in the sentence. However, gradients in cyclic 
convolutional networks disappear as iterations increase. 
The long short-term memory (LSTM) network and the Gate 
Recurrent Unit (GRU) network [29] are proposed for this 
issue. LSTM uses gate control to control the time length of 
the self-accumulating information cycle. The sigmoid acti-
vation function limits the value to a limited range, which 
keeps the memory of the past gradient within a particular 
time and guarantees that the gradient will not explode due to 
accumulation. On the other hand, GRU simplifies the thresh-
old and only uses the update gate and reset gate to achieve a 
similar effect with LSTM.
The realization of multiscale text feature extraction is 
based on the processing of language feature sequences. After 
embedding words into natural language, the obtained word 
vectors are the features at the word scale. To get the feature 
in phrase scale, a one-dimensional convolution neural net-
work proposed by Lu [30] is used to extract the feature of 
word vector space. Some scholars [31] propose using convo-
lution kernels of three different scale windows to convolute 
with word vectors, respectively to get text features of differ-
ent scales, cascade the output under all windows, and use 
the maximum pooling processing to get the “phrase” feature.
1.3  Multiscale Feature Fusion
In the VQA task, the typical multimodal features are image 
features and text features [32–34]. The fusion of image 
features and text features in the VQA system plays a vital 
role in model performance [35]. The selection of methods 
directly affects the results. In the early stage of the VQA 
model, the joint representation method is used to process 
multimodal features. Researchers map image features into 
text feature space, add features, measure similarity or join 
features in-depth at the element level [36, 37]. The fusion 
of semantic and image features adopts the direct connec-
tion method, which has an unclear termination position. 
Malinowski [10] proposed a recursive neural network imple-
mentation using long-term and short-term memory cells. 
The research of fine-grained classification tasks inspires the 
application of collaborative representation in multimodal 
Fig. 2   Pattern diagram of fea-
ture pyramid
Fig. 3   Pattern diagram of fea-
ture pyramid network

	
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 
1 3
   54  
Page 4 of 11
feature fusion. Lin first proposed the bilinear network [38], 
mainly used for fine-grained image classification tasks, such 
as distinguishing bird species and aircraft species and other 
extremely subtle images.
Because the feature dimension of the bilinear model is 
too high and there are many parameters, many scholars have 
proposed to compress and reduce the dimension of the fused 
feature. Gao [11] proposed compressing the bilinear pooling 
network, which reduced the feature dimension to a certain 
extent. Fukui [39] introduced a bilinear pooling network into 
a VQA task (MCB). In the VQA task, two independent con-
volutional neural networks of the original bilinear network 
are replaced by a convolutional neural network to extract 
image features and a cyclic neural network to extract text 
features. Both image and text features are mapped to the 
same feature space, and the subsequent feature fusion is still 
the same as Gao’s processing. Although the method of MCB 
can compress the vector to a lower dimension, in order to 
ensure the classification result, the output feature is still a 
feature in a higher dimension space. Next, Yu [40] put for-
ward the multi-modular factorized bilinear pooling (MFB) 
structure based on the MLB pooling method to reduce the 
dimension. The author mainly decomposes the feature map-
ping matrix into two low-rank matrices, making the feature 
mapping complete under relatively low features. Kim [41] 
introduced Hadamard product and matrix decomposition to 
compress the features. Ben [42] introduced Tucker decom-
position of a tensor into a bilinear pooling network, further 
compressed data. Bilinear pooling text keyword features 
extracted by cyclic convolution neural network and feature 
output of convolution neural network and used text features 
and visual features to predict attention weighting in feature 
space.
This paper introduces the multiscale feature technology 
into the VQA system, and the improved image multiscale 
feature extraction method is introduced. Firstly, the develop-
ment and research significance of multiscale feature fusion 
technology were introduced. After that, this paper introduces 
the multiscale image feature extraction method and the text 
multiscale feature extraction method. Finally, the experi-
ments on the improved image multiscale feature method and 
the introduced text multiscale feature method are carried out 
and analyze its influence and role in the VQA task.
The main contributions and innovations are: apply multi-
scale feature fusion method to feature extraction of image 
and text in visual question answering system, and improve 
the multi-scale image feature representation method of 
image. Because the features extracted by the deep network 
and the shallow network in the neural network have different 
meanings, the combination of the two can make the feature 
expression more perfect and more conducive to the recog-
nition of objects in the image. This paper introduces the 
multi-scale feature extraction based on the depth residual 
network. Due to the existence of multimodal feature fusion 
based on bilinear network in the VQA model, the param-
eters of neural network are complex and huge. In this paper, 
the image multi-scale feature technology is improved, and 
the feature expression is simplified on the basis of ensuring 
performance improvement.
2  Materials and Methods
2.1  Materials
2.1.1  Dataset
VQA dataset is one of the earliest and most widely used 
data sets. It contains VQA data set composed of real natu-
ral scene photos and VQA abstract data set composed of 
cartoon pictures. VQA data contains 123287 photos as the 
training set and 81,434 photos as the test set. The source of 
the photos is the coco data set provided by Microsoft for the 
image classification competition. The data of questions and 
answers are put forward and answered manually. The forms 
of questions include yes or no questions, multiple choices 
questions, and open answer questions. VQA consists of 
614163 Q & A pairs. The provider gives a detailed analysis 
of the characteristics of the dataset. This paper mainly ana-
lyzes the open problems.
2.1.2  Experimental Environment
The hardware environment is as follows: processor, CPU 
Intel i7-4790; graphics card, NVIDIA GTX 1070; memory, 
16G. The Software environment is as follows: general com-
puting architecture, CUDA 9.0; GPU acceleration library, 
CUDNN 7.0; deep learning framework, python.
2.2  Method
2.2.1  Multiscale Image Feature Extraction and Fusion
In our experiment, the pre-trained residual network is used 
for image feature extraction. Since the visual question 
and answer database adopted in this paper is based on the 
COCO image data set, the pre-trained Resnet-152 model 
in the standard model library can be used as the image fea-
ture extraction network. Thus, this paper extracted the final 
output of conv3, conv4, conv5 residual modules. Regarding 
the fusion of multiscale features, we used the method of the 
FPN model to fuse the combination of features of different 
layers in a top-down way.

International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 	
1 3
Page 5 of 11 
   54 
1.	 Image Feature Extraction Network
Image feature extraction adopts the feature extraction 
method based on deep learning. First, this paper removes 
the fully connected layer, which is highly related to the 
classification task. Then, the output of the final convolu-
tion layer is adopted as the image feature. Finally, the 152-
layer residual network, pre-trained in ImageNet, is adopted 
for the image feature extraction model.
2.	 Feature Extraction Network Fine-Tuning
After considering the difference in training data distribu-
tion from the original model, the network is fine-tuned. He 
Keming [43] studied the parameter initialization method of 
ImageNet pre-training. The research shows that the advan-
tage of this method is that it can improve the convergence 
speed but is not sensitive enough to local targets. Unlike 
ImageNet, which was originally only used for classifica-
tion tasks, the COCO data set contains more multi-objects 
data and more abundant local targets. Therefore, this paper 
fine-tuned the network on the COCO data set.
3.	 Multiscale Feature Extraction and Fusion
The bilinear feature fusion networks generate a large number 
of parameters with high dimensions. Therefore, considering 
the computational cost, instead of generating answers to all 
scale features, the experiment explores the best fusion mode 
among the features of different scales and finally obtained a 
single fusion feature, as shown in Fig. 4.
First, we unify the size of the images in the COCO data 
set to 448 × 448 as the model input. The output feature size 
of conv3 is 28 × 28, and the channel dimension is 512. The 
output feature size of conv4 is 14 × 14, and the channel 
dimension is 1024. The output feature size of conv5 is 7 × 7, 
and the channel dimension is 2048, shown in Fig. 5.
We refer to the FPN fusion method and fuse different 
scale features in top-down order for feature fusion. For 
example, for the merge of conv5 with conv4, we first deal 
with features extracted by conv5. Then, this paper adopts 
Fig. 4   Multi-scale feature 
fusion in visual question 
answering system
Fig. 5   Multi-scale feature extraction model for images in VQA system

	
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 
1 3
   54  
Page 6 of 11
the 1024 times deconvolution, in which step length is 2 and 
dimension is 2048, expand the feature to the same feature 
size and channel number as conv4. Then we add the features 
by elements, and the new features are stored as conv4 & 5. 
The conv5 and conv3 fusion are similar approaches.
Then, for the integration of three layers of features, we 
further deconvolution conv4&5. With 512 deconvolution 
and step of 2, the size of features is expanded to 28 × 28, and 
the number of channels is reduced to 512, which is the same 
as the feature size and channel number of conv3. After the 
expansion, conv4&5 and conv3 are also processed by adding 
elements to get the high-resolution features of conv3&4&5. 
As the experimental control, we retain the direct output of 
conv5 as the final feature directly outputted by the model.
4.	 Feature Fusion Networks Applied to Different Mul-
timodal
The proposed multiscale feature extraction and fusion 
method are applied to different multi-mode feature fusion 
networks. The experiment adopts the MLB [2] network and 
the MUTAN [44] network and compares the results after 
experiments.
5.	 Generate the Answer
A multilayer perceptron is employed to classify the fusion 
features, and the probability distribution of the final answer 
is obtained. Finally, the features are decoded into natural 
language by the circular convolutional neural network.
2.2.2  Multiscale Text Feature Extraction
In the VQA model, we first embed words into the text and 
mapped it to the continuous numerical feature space to get 
the continuous word vector. Then the phrase features are 
obtained by one-dimensional convolution with three differ-
ent scales. Moreover, the skip-thought model is adopted for 
feature extraction of sentences. Combined with the expres-
sion of GRU, the word embedding feature of a single step 
went through convolution in the unit of window scale and 
then output as word feature. Sentences with the length of 
N are filled to the set input length and output as sentence 
features by skip-thought. For phrase features, maximum 
pooling output after features is convoluted with a different 
scale one-dimensional convolution network. The output is 
phrase features. The overall text feature extraction is shown 
in Fig. 6.
As the skip-thought loop network is an encoder, we need 
to set the length of the hidden layer first and set the target 
cycle times as length N. Sentences with insufficient length 
are filled with 0. The word features and phrase features are 
obtained after embedding with the one-dimensional convo-
lution of different scales. For phrase feature extraction, the 
experiment adopts a convolution kernel of various sizes and 
a maximum pooling layer to extract the feature of word vec-
tor as phrase feature.
2.2.3  Overall Model
The model is divided into two parts, as shown in Fig. 7. 
Firstly, the image multiscale feature extraction and text 
multiscale feature extraction modules described extract the 
Fig. 6   Multiscale text feature 
extraction

International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 	
1 3
Page 7 of 11 
   54 
features of VQA data. Then, the extracted features are con-
verted into binary data and stored on the hard disk. This 
section sets up the VQA system model, the ResNet152 
network, which has been pre-trained in the ImageNet data 
set, is employed to feature image extraction. The feature 
extraction model of the problem employs skip—thought 
cyclic convolution neural network based on the structure 
of the GRU helped threshold. The later part is to com-
plete feature fusion, interaction, and the formation of the 
answer.
The fusion method needs to be combined with the ten-
sor compression method mentioned above. This paper uses 
the bilinear network to realize the fusion of the final output 
of multiscale text and image features. After feature fusion, 
we use MLB and tucker decomposition to compress the 
feature. The compressed features are input into the answer 
to generate multiple classifiers, and the probability distri-
bution of each answer is obtained. Finally, the final answer 
is obtained by fusing and normalizing it with the softmax 
layer.
After the model features are extracted, we store the fea-
tures as binaries for subsequent question-and-answer sys-
tem training. In the question-answering system, the fused 
multiscale image features and text features are used as the 
input of the question-answering system, and the value of 
state distribution is firstly used for parameter initialization. 
After a few times of training, the parameters and results of 
each training are stored. After each training, the parameters 
with the best results were selected for initialization. In this 
paper, the Adam optimization algorithm was used for the 
training optimizer. The Alpha value was set to 0.01, the first-
order moment was estimated to be 0.9, and the second-order 
moment was estimated to be 0.99.
3  Results
Firstly, the comparison of several different fusion modes is 
given. Then, the fusion mode with better performance is 
selected as the basis of the subsequent work to be applied 
in the model. Next, multiscale feature fusion is applied to 
the model, and the method is analyzed after the experiment.
3.1  Comparison of Fusion Methods
The experiment tests several visual question-and-answer 
models at the current forefront, among which Baseline is 
the original image feature and text feature cascade model, 
as shown in Table 1. 
In this experiment, MLB fusion and the MUTAN fusion 
are used as the control group to compare the prediction 
results of MLB fusion and the MUTAN fusion on the open 
problem data set in the VQA data set. The loss function and 
the accuracy under top1 and top5 indexes are analyzed and 
compared, as shown in Table 2. Top1 refers to the model 
as successful learning only when the answer with the high-
est score is correct in the probability distribution obtained 
Fig. 7   Overall model

	
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 
1 3
   54  
Page 8 of 11
through training. Top5 refers to the obtained probability dis-
tribution. Therefore, the model learning is considered suc-
cessful when the highest five results contain correct answers. 
According to the convergence rate of the model’s loss 
function in Fig. 8, the model's loss function based on MLB 
fusion converges significantly faster in the training pro-
cess. The model's loss function based on the MUTANMLB 
tensor dimension-reducing model converges to 1.98, and 
the final loss function of the MUTAN method converges 
to 2.27.
As shown in Fig. 9, under the evaluation of top1 accuracy, 
the highest accuracy of the MLB model on the training set 
was nearly 60%, which was higher than the 54% accuracy 
of the MUTAN method. The test results of the two were 
very similar under the analysis of the generalization effect 
of the test set.
As shown in Fig. 10, under the top5 evaluation method, 
the training set results still showed that the accuracy of the 
MLB model is higher than that of the MUTAN model, with 
a difference of nearly 4%. On the test set, the result of the 
MLB model is 0.4% higher than that of the MUTAN model, 
but the MLB model converges in the 10th epoch, while the 
MUTAN model converges in the 60th epoch.
3.2  Comparison of Multiscale Feature Fusion 
Methods
We selected MLB and MUTAN models as the multimodal 
feature fusion method of the VQA model by comparing and 
testing various models before, and firstly added text multi-
scale features to conduct the experiment.
As shown in Table 3, the accuracy of the MLB model and 
MUTAN model was improved to some extent after adding 
multiscale text features, among which MLB improved by 
0.43 percentage points.
Based on multiscale text feature extraction, we experi-
ment with the multiscale image feature method. Multi-
scale feature extraction is based on the image FPN network 
Table 2   Comparison of MLB model and MUTAN model
MLB_train (%)
MLB_test (%)
MUTAN_
train (%)
MUTAN_test 
(%)
Top1
59.28
47.28
54.47
47.67
Top5
82.97
74.29
79.20
73.89
Fig. 8   Loss function
Fig. 9   Accuracy of Top1 in test set and training set
Fig. 10   Top 5 accuracy of MLB and MUTAN in test set and training 
set
Table 3   Multi-scale text feature experiment
Method
MLB (%)
MUTAN (%)
Multi-scale text feature
74.82
74.05
Original model
74.39
73.89
Table 1   Experimental results of various VQA models
Model
Accuracy (%)
Validation set
Test set
Baseline
67.92
70.73
MCB
70.74
73.18
MLB
71.53
74.29
MUTAN
71.72
73.89

International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 	
1 3
Page 9 of 11 
   54 
method. In the calculation, the FPN network synthesis con-
sumes more computation resources and time. In our experi-
ment, each characteristics layer is in different combinations, 
and we analyzed the result of the combination to get a better 
solution.
Firstly, based on the above experiment, the directly 
extracted feature layer includes conv3, conv4, and conv5. 
The obtained accuracy when the input is the feature of conv5 
is taken as the benchmark. Combined conv3 and conv5, 
conv4 and conv5 are taken as the input, respectively to cal-
culate the accuracy, and then the combined three features are 
taken for the experiment. It can be seen from Table 4 that 
when using three layers of features with different scales at 
the same time, the results decreased. After combining conv4 
and conv5 features, the experimental results did not signifi-
cantly improve. After combining conv3 and conv5 features, 
the experimental results improved significantly, and MLB 
and MUTAN both increased by about two percent under the 
condition of top5 evaluation on the test set.
4  Discussion
Table 1 show that using dual linear network test results of 
multiple modal characteristics of fusion is superior to the 
traditional method (Baseline) test results. Furthermore, the 
MLB model and MUTAN model are better than the original 
bilinear model of MCB. Although these two models are pro-
cessed reduction of dimensionality, the parameter number is 
less than MCB mode.
Table 2 (Comparison of MLB model and MUTAN model) 
shows the maximum accuracy of training 100 epochs. The 
average results under the training set show that the training 
accuracy of the MLB fusion in the training data set is signifi-
cantly higher than that of the MUTAN model Tucker decom-
position method. However, there is little difference between 
the two in the test set. There is only a 0.39% difference in 
the top1 accuracy rate in the test set and only a 0.4% differ-
ence in the top5 accuracy rate. The difference under top1 
evaluation in training test is nearly 5%, and the difference 
under top5 evaluation is 3.77%. Thus, the MUTAN tensor 
compression model has a relatively similar effect compared 
with the MLB model. However, the MUTAN model reduces 
more parameters and feature dimensions and is better than 
the MLB model in memory consumption.
From Fig. 10 (Top5 accuracy), it can be seen from the 
analysis that the MLB model converged faster, and the effect 
was slightly better than the MUTAN model. However, the 
overfitting of the MLB model is more severe than that of the 
MUTAN model. The reason may be that the MLB model is 
more complex and has more parameters. Therefore, MUTAN 
is better at solving the overfitting problem than the MLB 
model, but the training effect of the model is not improved. 
Therefore, considering that there is little difference between 
the two methods in the performance of final results, we can 
adopt the two methods in the follow-up research and further 
compare them in the follow-up work.
From experimental results analysis, we find that when 
the feature fusion of the three layers of different scales 
is used simultaneously, the results did not improve but 
declined. After combining the feature of conv4 and conv5, 
the improvement is not obvious. However, after combin-
ing the feature of conv3 and conv5, experimental results 
show evident improvement. On the test set based on the top5 
evaluation, the improvement under the MLB and MUTAN 
model are both about two percent.
From the extracted features, we can see that the image 
features under different scales have obvious differences, rep-
resenting different aspects of the image information. There-
fore, this information can be combined with the problem 
features under different scales in future work.
5  Conclusions
This paper improves the image feature extraction method 
in the VQA model. The concept and method of multiscale 
features are proposed in the research of feature engineering. 
The application of multiscale features in image classifica-
tion tasks has achieved good results. Refer to the semantic 
research of different scale features in feature engineering 
and the semantic information of different languages repre-
sented by different scale features of image features. This 
paper applies multiscale feature extraction and fusion in 
the VQA system. It also adopts a simplified multiscale fea-
ture method to integrate information of different scales and 
reduce the parameter number. The 152-layer ResNet network 
pre-trained on the ImageNet dataset is used for image feature 
extraction. The final output of the different residual convo-
lution modules of the network is used as image features of 
different scales. In this paper, the characteristics of different 
scales are combined through experiments, and the best com-
bination method is applied to the VQA system.
Although the work of this paper has made improvements 
to the VQA model in terms of visual feature extraction and 
text information extraction, the results still have not achieved 
Table 4   Image feature combination experiment
Combination
MLB (%)
MUTAN (%)
Conv5
74.82
74.05
Conv5 + conv4 + conv3
73.34
72.03
Conv5 + conv4
74.50
74.93
Conv5 + conv3
75.97
75.88

	
International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 
1 3
   54  
Page 10 of 11
the ideal effect, and there is room for improvement and 
optimization.
First of all, when the model recognizes objects in the 
problem, it cannot accurately recognize and give answers 
in the image. Many scholars have discussed the causes and 
solutions to this problem. The underlying cause may be that 
there are many types of objects in the image. For example, 
objects occlude each other or objects are too small. At pre-
sent, the possible solutions can refer to the fine-grained clas-
sification problem to perform separate target detection and 
classification of image features. However, the existing prob-
lem is the same as the dilemma faced by the fine-grained 
classification problem. Moreover, it will take up a lot of 
computing resources and storage space. Therefore, the solu-
tion to this problem requires further research on optimizing 
feature compression and dimensionality reduction.
Acknowledgements  A thanks to all the authors for their great contribu-
tions to this paper.
Author Contributions  Conceptualization, WZ and ML; methodology, 
ZY; software, YD and SL; formal analysis, LY and ML; data curation, 
YD; writing—original draft preparation, SL and LY; writing review 
and editing, WZ, LY and SL; visualization, YD; supervision, ZY and 
ML; funding acquisition, WZ. All authors have read and agreed to the 
published version of the manuscript.
Funding  This work was jointly supported by the Sichuan Science and 
Technology Program (2021YFQ0003).
Data Availability  Not applicable.
Declarations 
Conflict of Interest  The authors have no competing interests to declare 
that are relevant to the content of this article.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
	 1.	 Zhang, D., Cao, R., Wu, S.: Information fusion in visual question 
answering: a survey. Inform. Fusion 52, 268–280 (2019). https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​inffus.​2019.​03.​005
	 2.	 Kim, J.H., et al., Hadamard Product for Low-rank Bilinear Pool-
ing. (2016)
	 3.	 Chen, C., Han, D., Chang, C.C.: CAAN: context-aware attention 
network for visual question answering. Pattern Recogn. (2022). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​patcog.​2022.​108980
	 4.	 Chen, Y.-S, Jiang, I.H.-R.: Many-layer hotspot detection by layer-
attentioned visual question answering. In 25th design, automation 
and test in europe conference and exhibition (DATE). Electr Net-
work. (2022)
	 5.	 Guo, Z., Han, D.: Multi-modal co-attention relation networks for 
visual question answering. Visual Computer (2022). https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s00371-​022-​02695-9
	 6.	 Wu, Q., et al. What value do explicit high level concepts have in 
vision to language problems? in Proceedings of the IEEE confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition. (2016)
	 7.	 Yao, T., et al. Boosting image captioning with attributes. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 
(2017)
	 8.	 Donahue, J., et al., Long-term recurrent convolutional networks 
for visual recognition and description. in Proceedings of the IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. (2015)
	 9.	 Vinyals, O., et al. Show and tell: A neural image caption generator. 
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and 
pattern recognition. (2015)
	10.	 Malinowski, M., M. Rohrbach, M. Fritz.: Ask your neurons: A 
neural-based approach to answering questions about images. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer 
vision. (2015)
	11.	 Gao, H., et al.: Are you talking to a machine? Dataset and methods 
for multilingual image question. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 
28, 2296–2304 (2015)
	12.	 Ren, M., Kiros, R., Zemel, R.: Exploring models and data for 
image question answering. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 28, 
2953–2961 (2015)
	13.	 Andreas, J., et al. Neural module networks. in Proceedings of 
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 
(2016)
	14.	 Kumar, A., et al., Ask me anything: Dynamic memory networks 
for natural language processing. In International conference on 
machine learning. PMLR. (2016)
	15.	 Xiao, F.Y., Pedrycz, W.: Negation of the quantum mass function 
for multisource quantum information fusion with its application 
to pattern classification. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 
45(2), 2054–2070 (2023). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​tpami.​2022.​
31670​45
	16.	 Auer, S., et al. DBpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. in 
6th International Semantic Web Conference/2nd Asian Semantic 
Web Conference (ISWC 2007/ASWC 2007). Busan, South Korea: 
Springer-Verlag Berlin. (2007)
	17.	 Bollacker, K., et al. Freebase: a collaboratively created graph data-
base for structuring human knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2008 
ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data. 
(2008)
	18.	 Hoffart, J., et al.: YAGO2: a spatially and temporally enhanced 
knowledge base from Wikipedia. Artif. Intell. 194, 28–61 (2013)
	19.	 Etzioni, O., et al. Open information extraction: The second genera-
tion. In Twenty-Second International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence. (2011)
	20.	 Zhang, M., et al.: Multimodal feature fusion and exploitation with 
dual learning and reinforcement learning for recipe generation. 
Appl. Soft Comput. (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​asoc.​2022.​
109281
	21.	 Huang, W.-C., et al.: Attentive gated graph sequence neural net-
work-based time-series information fusion for financial trading. 
Inform Fusion 91, 261–276 (2023). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​inf-
fus.​2022.​10.​006

International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems           (2023) 16:54 	
1 3
Page 11 of 11 
   54 
	22.	 Xiao, F.: GEJS: a generalized evidential divergence measure for 
multisource information fusion. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern: 
Syst. (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TSMC.​2022.​32114​98
	23.	 Girshick, R., et al., Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object 
detection and semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. (2014)
	24.	 Xiao, F., Wen, J., Pedrycz, W.: Generalized divergence-based 
decision making method with an application to pattern classifica-
tion. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​
TKDE.​2022.​31778​96
	25.	 Xiao, F., Cao, Z., Lin, C.T.: A complex weighted discounting 
multisource information fusion with its application in pattern clas-
sification. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1109/​TKDE.​2022.​32068​71
	26.	 Adelson, E.H., et al.: Pyramid methods in image processing. RCA 
Eng 29(6), 33–41 (1984)
	27.	 Ni, X., et al.: Semantic representation for visual reasoning. 
MATEC Web Conf. 277, 02006 (2019)
	28.	 Carrasco, R.S.M., Sicilia, M.-A.: Sicilia, and security unsuper-
vised intrusion detection through skip-gram models of network 
behavior. Comput. Secur. 78, 187–197 (2018)
	29.	 Chung, J., et al. Gated feedback recurrent neural networks. In 
international conference on machine learning. PMLR. (2015)
	30.	 Lu, J., et al.: Hierarchical question-image co-attention for visual 
question answering. Adv. Neural. Inf. Process. Syst. 29, 289–297 
(2016)
	31.	 Nie, X., et al.: Deep multiscale fusion hashing for cross-modal 
retrieval. 31(1), 401–410 (2020)
	32.	 Miao, Y., et al.: Research on visual question answering based on 
GAT relational reasoning. Neural Process. Lett. 54(2), 1435–1448 
(2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11063-​021-​10689-2
	33.	 Peng, L., et al.: Answer again: improving VQA with cascaded-
answering model. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 34(4), 1644–
1655 (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​tkde.​2020.​29988​05
	34.	 Xia, Q., et al.: Multi-modal alignment of visual question answer-
ing based on multi-hop attention mechanism. Electronics (2022). 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​elect​ronic​s1111​1778
	35.	 Wu, Q., et al.: Visual question answering: a survey of methods 
and datasets. Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 163, 21–40 (2017)
	36.	 Miao, Y., et  al.: Research on visual question answering 
based on dynamic memory network model of multiple atten-
tion mechanisms. Sci Rep (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​
s41598-​022-​21149-9
	37.	 Yan, F., et al.: SPCA-Net: a based on spatial position relation-
ship co-attention network for visual question answering. Vis 
Comput 38(9–10), 3097–3108 (2022). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s00371-​022-​02524-z
	38.	 Lin, T-Y., RoyChowdhury A., Maji S.: Bilinear cnn models for 
fine-grained visual recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE inter-
national conference on computer vision. (2015)
	39.	 Fukui, A., et al. Multimodal compact bilinear pooling for visual 
question answering and visual grounding. In conference on empir-
ical methods in natural language processing. ACL. (2016)
	40.	 Yu, Z., et al. Multi-modal factorized bilinear pooling with co-
attention learning for visual question answering. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. (2017)
	41.	 Kim, J.-H., et al. Multimodal residual learning for visual qa. In 
Advances in neural information processing systems. (2016)
	42.	 Ben-Younes, H., et al. Mutan: Multimodal tucker fusion for visual 
question answering. In Proceedings of the IEEE international con-
ference on computer vision. (2017)
	43.	 He, K., R. Girshick, P. Dollár. Rethinking imagenet pre-training. 
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on 
Computer Vision. (2019)
	44.	 Ben-younes, H., et al. MUTAN: Multimodal Tucker Fusion for 
Visual Question Answering. In 16th IEEE International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision (ICCV). Venice, ITALY: Ieee. (2017)
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.