UCSF
UC San Francisco Previously Published Works
Title
Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8st2d5mx
Journal
Nature, 618(7965)
ISSN
0028-0836
Authors
Theodoris, Christina V
Xiao, Ling
Chopra, Anant
et al.
Publication Date
2023-06-15
DOI
10.1038/s41586-023-06139-9
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Transfer learning enables predictions in network biology
Christina V. Theodoris*,1,2,3,4, Ling Xiao2,5, Anant Chopra6, Mark D. Chaffin2, Zeina R. Al 
Sayed2, Matthew C. Hill2,5, Helene Mantineo2,5, Elizabeth M. Brydon6, Zexian Zeng1,7, X. 
Shirley Liu1,7,8, Patrick T. Ellinor*,2,5
1Department of Data Science, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston MA, USA.
2Cardiovascular Disease Initiative and Precision Cardiology Laboratory, Broad Institute of MIT 
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
3Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston MA, USA.
4Harvard Medical School Genetics Training Program, Boston, USA.
5Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
6Precision Cardiology Laboratory, Bayer US LLC, Cambridge, MA, USA.
7Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
8Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
Abstract
Mapping gene networks requires large amounts of transcriptomic data to learn the connections 
between genes, which impedes discoveries in settings with limited data, including rare diseases 
and diseases affecting clinically inaccessible tissues. Recently, transfer learning has revolutionized 
fields such as natural language understanding1,2 and computer vision3 by leveraging deep learning 
models pretrained on large-scale general datasets that can then be fine-tuned towards a vast 
array of downstream tasks with limited task-specific data. Here, we developed a context-aware, 
attention-based deep learning model, Geneformer, pretrained on a large-scale corpus of ~30 
million single cell transcriptomes to enable context-specific predictions in settings with limited 
data in network biology. During pretraining, Geneformer gained a fundamental understanding of 
network dynamics, encoding network hierarchy in the model’s attention weights in a completely 
*Correspondence to: christina.theodoris@gladstone.ucsf.edu, ellinor@mgh.harvard.edu.
Author Contributions
CVT conceived of the work, developed Geneformer, assembled Genecorpus-30M, and designed/performed computational analyses. 
LX, AC, ZRAS, MCH, HM, and EMB performed experimental validation in engineered cardiac microtissues. MDC performed 
pre-processing, cell annotation, and differential expression analysis of the cardiomyopathy dataset. ZZ provided data from the TISCH 
database for inclusion in Genecorpus-30M. XSL and PTE designed analyses and supervised the work. CVT, XSL, and PTE wrote the 
manuscript. All authors edited the manuscript.
Competing Interests
XSL conducted this work while on faculty at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and is currently a board member and CEO of GV20 
Oncotherapy. PTE has received sponsored research support from Bayer AG, IBM Research, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Pfizer. PTE 
has also served on advisory boards or consulted for Bayer AG, MyoKardia, and Novartis. AC is an employee of Bayer US LLC (a 
subsidiary of Bayer AG) and may own stock in Bayer AG. EMB was a full-time employee of Bayer when this work was performed.
Code Availability
The pretrained Geneformer model, transcriptome tokenizer, and code for pretraining and fine-tuning the model are available on the 
Huggingface Model Hub at https://huggingface.co/ctheodoris/Geneformer. All other code used in this study is available upon request 
from the corresponding authors.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2023 June ; 618(7965): 616–624. doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06139-9.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

self-supervised manner. Fine-tuning towards a diverse panel of downstream tasks relevant to 
chromatin and network dynamics using limited task-specific data demonstrated that Geneformer 
consistently boosted predictive accuracy. Applied to disease modeling with limited patient data, 
Geneformer identified candidate therapeutic targets for cardiomyopathy. Overall, Geneformer 
represents a pretrained deep learning model from which fine-tuning towards a broad range of 
downstream applications can be pursued to accelerate discovery of key network regulators and 
candidate therapeutic targets.
Mapping the gene regulatory networks that drive disease progression enables screening for 
molecules that correct the network by normalizing core regulatory elements, rather than 
targeting peripheral downstream effectors that may not be disease modifying4,5. However, 
mapping the gene network architecture requires large amounts of transcriptomic data to 
learn the connections between genes, which impedes network-correcting drug discovery 
in settings with limited data, including rare diseases and diseases affecting clinically 
inaccessible tissues. Although data remains limited in these settings, recent advances in 
sequencing technologies have driven a rapid expansion in the amount of transcriptomic 
data available from human tissues more broadly. Furthermore, single cell technologies have 
facilitated the observation of transcriptomic states without averaging genes’ expression 
across multiple cells, potentially providing more precise data for inference of network 
interactions, especially in diseases driven by dysregulation of multiple cell types.
Recently, the concept of transfer learning has revolutionized fields such as natural 
language understanding1,2 (NLU) and computer vision3 by leveraging deep learning models 
pretrained on large-scale general datasets that can then be fine-tuned towards a vast array 
of downstream tasks with limited task-specific data that would be insufficient to yield 
meaningful predictions when used in isolation. Unlike modeling approaches that necessitate 
retraining a new model from scratch for each task6,7, this approach democratizes the 
fundamental knowledge learned during the large-scale pretraining phase to a multitude 
of downstream applications distinct from the pretraining learning objective, transferring 
knowledge to new tasks (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 1a–b). The advent of the self-attention 
mechanism1,2 has further transformed the deep learning field by generating context-aware 
models that are able to pay attention to large input spaces and learn which elements are 
most important to focus on in each context, boosting predictions in a wide realm of 
applications2,8. Gene regulatory network architectures are highly context-dependent; and 
attention-based models, known as transformers, may be exceptionally suited to context-
specific modeling of network dynamics.
Here, we developed a context-aware, attention-based deep learning model, Geneformer, 
pretrained on large-scale transcriptomic data to enable predictions in settings with limited 
data. We assembled a large-scale pretraining corpus, Genecorpus-30M, comprised of 29.9 
million human single cell transcriptomes from a broad range of tissues from publicly 
available data. We then pretrained Geneformer on this corpus using a self-supervised 
masked learning objective to gain a fundamental understanding of network dynamics. 
The pretrained Geneformer accurately predicted dosage-sensitive disease genes and their 
downstream targets through a context-aware in silico deletion approach. Furthermore, fine-
Theodoris et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

tuning Geneformer towards a diverse panel of downstream tasks relevant to chromatin and 
network dynamics using just a limited set of task-specific training examples demonstrated 
that Geneformer consistently boosted predictive accuracy. Applied to disease modeling of 
cardiomyopathy, Geneformer predicted candidate therapeutic targets whose experimental 
inhibition significantly improved cardiomyocyte contraction in an induced pluripotent stem 
cell (iPSC)-based model of the disease. Overall, Geneformer represents a pretrained deep 
learning model from which fine-tuning towards a broad range of downstream applications 
can be pursued to accelerate discovery of key network regulators and candidate therapeutic 
targets.
Geneformer architecture and pretraining
Geneformer is a context-aware, attention-based deep learning model pretrained on large-
scale transcriptomic data to enable predictions in network biology with limited data through 
transfer learning (Fig. 1a). Geneformer harnesses the recent advent of self-attention1,2 
to maintain attention over the large input space of genes expressed in each single 
cell’s transcriptome and learn which genes are most important to focus on to optimize 
predictive accuracy within the given learning objective. Importantly, network dynamics may 
vary across cell types, developmental timepoints, or disease states. Accordingly, context-
awareness is a unique strength of Geneformer’s model architecture that allows predictions 
specific to each cell context.
First, we assembled a large-scale pretraining corpus, Genecorpus-30M, comprised of 29.9 
million human single cell transcriptomes from a broad range of tissues from publicly 
available data (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Table 1). We excluded cells with high mutational 
burdens (e.g. malignant cells and immortalized cell lines) that could lead to substantial 
network rewiring without companion genome sequencing to facilitate interpretation, and we 
established metrics for scalable filtering to exclude possible doublets and/or damaged cells.
Each single cell’s transcriptome is then presented to the model as a novel rank 
value encoding where genes are ranked by their expression in that cell normalized by 
their expression across the entire Genecorpus-30M (Fig. 1c). Although the rank-based 
representation has limitations including not fully taking advantage of the precise gene 
expression measurements provided in transcript counts, the rank value encoding provides 
a nonparametric representation of each cell’s transcriptome and takes advantage of the 
many observations of each gene’s expression across Genecorpus-30M to prioritize genes 
that distinguish cell state. Specifically, this method will deprioritize ubiquitously highly 
expressed housekeeping genes by normalizing them to a lower rank. Conversely, genes such 
as transcription factors that may be lowly expressed when they are expressed but highly 
distinguish cell state will move to a higher rank within the encoding (Extended Data Fig. 
1c). Furthermore, this rank-based approach may be more robust against technical artifacts 
that may systematically bias the absolute transcript counts value while the overall relative 
ranking of genes within each cell remains more stable.
The rank value encoding of each single cell’s transcriptome then proceeds through six 
transformer encoder units1,2, each composed of a self-attention layer and feed forward 
Theodoris et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

neural network layer (Fig. 1c). Pretraining was accomplished using a masked learning 
objective, which has been shown in other informational fields1,2 to improve generalizability 
of the foundational knowledge learned during pretraining for a wide range of downstream 
fine-tuning objectives. During pretraining, 15% of the genes within each transcriptome 
were masked, and the model was trained to predict which gene should be within each 
masked position in that specific cell state using the context of the remaining unmasked 
genes (Extended Data Fig. 1d–f). A major strength of this approach is that it is entirely 
self-supervised and can be accomplished on completely unlabeled data, which allows 
the inclusion of large amounts of training data without being restricted to samples with 
accompanying labels. We implemented recent advances in distributed GPU training9,10 to 
allow efficient pretraining on the large-scale dataset.
Context-awareness and batch integration
For each single cell transcriptome presented to Geneformer, the model embeds each gene 
into a 256-dimensional space that encodes the gene’s characteristics specific to the context 
of that cell. We first tested whether the pretrained Geneformer’s embedding of genes 
was impacted by common batch-dependent technical artifacts. We found that the gene 
embeddings were robust to sequencing platform11, preservation method12,13, and individual 
patient variability14 (Extended Data Fig. 2a). However, gene embeddings were dependent 
on the context of other genes expressed in the cell, highlighting Geneformer’s context 
awareness. When we in silico reprogrammed fibroblasts15 by artificially adding OCT4, 
SOX2, KLF4, and MYC to the front of their rank value encodings, the remaining genes 
in the transcriptome significantly shifted their embedding towards the iPSC state (Extended 
Data Fig. 2b–c). Embeddings of genes in iPSC-derived myogenic cells16 showed similar 
context awareness with in silico differentiation via MYOD (Extended Data Fig. 2d–e). 
Furthermore, genes known to be highly context-dependent, such as NOTCH receptors, 
showed more variability in their embeddings across variable cell types14 compared to the 
known housekeeping gene GAPDH (Extended Data Fig. 3).
Next, we integrated the embeddings of genes expressed in each cell to generate cell-level 
embeddings, which encode characteristics of that single cell’s state. Using a publicly 
available aortic aneurysm dataset14 as a test case, we found that while the original data 
was impacted by inter-patient variability, Geneformer cell embeddings clustered primarily 
by cell type and phenotype as opposed to individual patient (Extended Data Fig. 4a). Given 
that the pretrained Geneformer’s cell embeddings were robust to these technical artifacts, 
we next tested whether fine-tuning would impact generalizability. Using a publicly available 
dataset11 of iPSC differentiation to cardiomyocytes assayed in parallel on the Drop-seq 
(single-cell) or DroNc-seq (single-nucleus) platform, we tested whether fine-tuning the 
model to distinguish cell types using data from one platform would reduce generalizability 
to cells assayed on the other platform. Interestingly, the fine-tuned Geneformer’s cell 
embeddings primarily clustered by cell types and showed improved integration of platforms 
compared to the original data even after batch effect removal using the ComBat17 or 
Harmony18 methods (Extended Data Fig. 4b–f).
Theodoris et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Although Geneformer is most focused on understanding network dynamics rather than 
cell-level annotations, we further investigated Geneformer’s performance in cell type 
annotation given it is a common application for previously published models. We compared 
Geneformer to alternative XGBoost7 and deep neural network-based6 models. These 
methods train a new model from scratch for each separate tissue using the same supervised 
learning objective as is used for the final cell type predictions in that specific tissue. 
Therefore, these approaches do not take advantage of the large amounts of data available 
more broadly that are not specifically labeled for that task. In contrast, Geneformer learns 
from large-scale unlabeled data during the self-supervised pretraining using a generalizable 
learning objective to gain fundamental knowledge that can then be transferred to a multitude 
of new and diverse fine-tuning tasks. Compared to these alternative methods, Geneformer 
boosted cell type predictions in a variety of tissues, with the gap in performance by accuracy 
and macro F1 score increasing as the number of cell type classes increased, indicating 
that Geneformer was robust in even increasingly complex multiclass prediction applications 
(Extended Data Fig. 5–6).
Gene dosage sensitivity predictions
We next tested whether Geneformer could boost predictions with limited data in a diverse 
set of downstream fine-tuning applications (Supplementary Table 2). A major challenge of 
interpreting copy number variants (CNVs) in genetic diagnosis is determining which genes 
are sensitive to changes in their dosage. Although conservation and allele frequency are 
commonly used to predict dosage sensitivity, these features do not vary across cell states 
and do not capture transcriptional dynamics that may inform contextual dosage sensitivity 
indicating which specific tissues would be affected by changes in the gene’s dosage. Using 
gene sets previously reported19–21 to be dosage-sensitive versus -insensitive, we fine-tuned 
Geneformer using only 10,000 random single cell transcriptomes to distinguish dosage-
sensitive versus -insensitive transcription factors. The fine-tuned Geneformer significantly 
boosted the ability to predict dosage sensitivity compared to alternative methods (area 
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) 0.91) (Fig. 2a, Extended Data 
Fig. 7a). Notably, pretraining with larger and more diverse corpuses consistently improved 
the predictive power in the downstream task despite using the same amount of limited 
task-specific data for fine-tuning (Fig. 2b).
We then asked whether, without any further training, the fine-tuned model could predict 
the dosage sensitivity of a recently reported set of disease genes (Fig. 2c). Collins et al. 
analyzed CNVs from 753,994 individuals to define genes whose deletion was associated 
with primarily neurodevelopmental disease with either high or moderate confidence22. 
The fine-tuned Geneformer model correctly predicted the high confidence genes to be 
dosage-sensitive in the specific context of fetal cerebral cells with 96% concordance 
with the original study. The moderate confidence genes reported by the authors were a 
much more permissive set (0.15–0.85 score vs. high confidence score cutoff >0.85). The 
fine-tuned Geneformer predicted moderate confidence genes to be dosage-sensitive in fetal 
cerebral cells with 84% concordance with the original study. Interestingly, although the high 
confidence genes, which may have a stronger effect, were predicted by Geneformer to be 
dosage-sensitive at similar rates in fetal cerebral (96%) and other cells (95%), the predicted 
Theodoris et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

dosage sensitivity of the moderate confidence genes appeared to be more context-specific. 
The moderate confidence genes were predicted to be dosage-sensitive at a higher rate in fetal 
cerebral cells compared to neurons across any adult or developmental timepoint, consistent 
with these genes’ association with predominantly neurodevelopmental phenotypes where 
adult neurons may be less relevant. They were predicted to be dosage-sensitive at an even 
lower rate in random cells from any tissue, highlighting Geneformer’s context awareness.
We then designed an in silico deletion approach to identify genes whose deletion is predicted 
to have a deleterious effect in that particular cell context. We model gene deletion by 
removing the gene from the cell’s rank value encoding and quantifying the impact on the 
embeddings of the remaining genes in the encoding. To test this approach, we performed 
in silico deletion in fetal cardiomyocytes23 using the pretrained Geneformer without any 
fine-tuning. In silico deletion of known cardiomyopathy and structural heart disease genes 
had a significantly larger effect than the control set of known hyperlipidemia genes, which 
are expressed in cardiomyocytes and related to heart disease but whose phenotype affects 
cell types other than cardiomyocytes (Fig. 2d). In silico deletion of genes linked by a 
prior genome-wide association study24 (GWAS) to cardiac magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) traits relevant to cardiac disease also had a larger effect compared to the control set 
(Extended Data Fig. 7b).
Overall, genes whose deletion was predicted to have the most deleterious effect 
on cardiomyocytes were significantly enriched for human phenotypes including 
cardiomyopathy and abnormal myocardial morphology (Supplementary Table 3–4). Among 
the top 25 deleted genes with the most significant effect were transcription factors 
known to regulate myocardial development (e.g. FOXM125,26) and entirely novel dosage-
sensitive gene candidates such as TEAD4 (Supplementary Table 3). Experimental validation 
demonstrated that CRISPR-mediated knockout of novel candidate TEAD4 in iPSC-derived 
cardiac microtissues caused a significant reduction in their ability to generate contractile 
stress (force per unit area) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 7c). TEAD4 is a transcription factor 
involved in the Hippo signaling pathway27, and future work is warranted to further examine 
its role in cardiac development.
Chromatin dynamics predictions
Bivalent chromatin structure is known to mark key developmental genes in embryonic stem 
cells (ESCs), maintaining their promoters poised for activation28. Bivalent domains consist 
of large regions of H3K27me3 harboring smaller regions of H3K4me3. We fine-tuned 
Geneformer to distinguish bivalently marked genes from those whose promoters were 
unmethylated or marked solely by H3K4me3 using transcriptomes from ~15,000 ESCs29. 
The labeled gene set used for this fine-tuning included only genes found in 56 conserved 
regions of the genome, as previously reported28. Geneformer significantly boosted the 
ability to predict bivalently marked genes compared to alternative methods (AUC 0.93 and 
0.88; bivalent versus unmethylated or H3K4me3-only, respectively) (Fig. 3a–b, Extended 
Data Fig. 7d–e). Furthermore, predictions were generalizable to the remainder of the 
genome that was excluded from fine-tuning (Fig. 3c, Extended Data Fig. 8a–c). Thus, 
by fine-tuning Geneformer using solely transcriptional data with only 56 labeled loci in 
Theodoris et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

~15,000 ESCs, the model could predict the results of more recent studies30 that included 
genome-wide profiling of bivalent domains.
Determining the genomic distances over which transcription factor binding influences 
downstream expression is valuable for interpreting regulatory variants and inferring 
target genes from transcription factor genome occupancy data. Chen et al. previously 
systematically integrated thousands of transcription factor binding and histone modification 
profiles assayed by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) with thousands 
of gene expression profiles to identify two classes of transcription factors with distinct 
ranges of regulatory influence31. We fine-tuned Geneformer to distinguish these long- 
versus short-range transcription factors using only single cell transcriptomes from ~34,000 
cells undergoing iPSC to cardiomyocyte differentiation11 with no associated ChIP-seq or 
genomic distance data. Again, Geneformer significantly boosted the ability to predict the 
regulatory range of transcription factors compared to alternative methods, whose predictions 
were near random (Fig. 3e, Extended Data Fig. 8d). Thus, fine-tuning the pretrained 
Geneformer model was able to improve predictions even for this higher-order transcription 
factor property of regulatory range, a particularly challenging characteristic to infer from 
transcriptional data alone.
Network dynamics predictions
Determining the hierarchy in gene networks enables the design of therapies targeting 
normalization of core regulatory elements that drive the disease process, rather than 
correction of peripheral downstream effectors that may not be disease modifying. We 
previously mapped the NOTCH1 (N1)-dependent gene network governing cardiac valve 
disease and identified central regulatory nodes whose correction had broad restorative 
impact on the network at large4,5. Mapping the network hierarchy required large amounts 
of transcriptional perturbation data from patient-specific cells with isogenic controls to learn 
the connections between genes.
We tested whether Geneformer could be fine-tuned to distinguish central versus peripheral 
factors within the N1-dependent gene network using only single cell transcriptional 
data from ~30,000 normal endothelial cells (ECs) from the Heart Atlas32 without any 
perturbation data. Again, Geneformer significantly boosted the ability to predict central 
versus peripheral factors compared to alternative methods (AUC 0.81) (Fig. 4a, Extended 
Data Fig. 8e). Additionally, fine-tuning the pretrained Geneformer on the Heart Atlas ECs32 
was able to distinguish N1 downstream targets from non-targets without any perturbation 
data, further demonstrating the model’s ability to encode key features of gene network 
dynamics and again significantly boosting predictions compared to alternative methods (Fig. 
4b, Extended Data Fig. 9a).
To investigate the threshold for minimal data needed for fine-tuning, we fine-tuned the 
pretrained Geneformer with progressively smaller numbers of normal ECs from the Heart 
Atlas32 to distinguish central versus peripheral factors within the N1-dependent gene 
network. We found that nearly equivalent predictive potential was retained even when 
reducing the fine-tuning data to only 5,000 ECs (Fig. 4c). Then, to determine whether 
Theodoris et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Geneformer could generate meaningful predictions using an even more miniscule number of 
fine-tuning training examples when the task-specific data was more relevant to the learning 
objective, we fine-tuned the pretrained Geneformer using only 884 ECs from healthy versus 
dilated aortas14. Interestingly, Geneformer was able to distinguish central versus peripheral 
factors in the N1-dependent network with fine-tuning on this very minimal data to a better 
degree than the alternative methods’ predictions trained on the larger dataset of ~30,000 
ECs32, demonstrating the strength of pretraining in enabling predictions from increasingly 
limited data (Fig. 4d, Extended Data Fig. 9b). More than twice as many general cardiac ECs 
were needed to gain similar predictive potential as was possible from fine-tuning with the 
more relevant data from healthy versus dilated aortas, suggesting that the minimum amount 
of fine-tuning data needed is dependent on both the specific application and relevance of the 
data to that task.
Pretraining encoded network hierarchy
To investigate how the model was learning network dynamics during the pretraining stage, 
we examined the pretrained Geneformer attention weights. The trained attention weights of 
the model for each gene reflect 1) which genes that gene pays attention to and 2) which 
genes pay attention to that gene. These attention weights are iteratively optimized during 
training to generate gene embeddings that best inform the correct answer for the given 
learning objective. Each of Geneformer’s six layers has four attention heads that are meant 
to learn in an unsupervised manner to pay attention to distinct classes of genes to jointly 
improve predictions without prior knowledge of any gene’s biological function.
When examining the attention weights in aortic ECs14, we found that 20% of attention heads 
significantly attended transcription factors more than other genes, indicating that specific 
attention heads learned, in an entirely self-supervised manner, the relative importance of 
transcription factors in distinguishing cell states (Fig. 4e). Furthermore, specific attention 
heads significantly attended central regulatory nodes to a greater degree than peripheral 
genes within N1-dependent network in ECs (Extended Data Fig. 9c). Concordantly, these 
centrality-driven attention heads consistently attended to a significantly greater degree the 
highest ranked genes in each cell’s unique rank value encoding in aortic ECs, smooth 
muscle cells, T cells, and macrophage/monocyte/dendritic cells (which each have different 
sets of highest ranked genes based on cell type context) (Extended Data Fig. 9d).
Interestingly, attention heads in the earliest layers were consistently the most diverse in 
terms of gene ranks they attended, suggesting the model initially orients to the observed 
cell state through a joint survey of distinct portions of the input space. The middle layers 
were most broad in terms of gene ranks they attended, and the final layers were dominated 
by centrality-driven attention heads that focused on the highest ranked genes that uniquely 
define each cell state (Extended Data Fig. 9c–d).
In silico gene network analysis
Given the gene embeddings reflect the joint output of the attention weights of the network, 
we tested whether the pretrained Geneformer already encoded network connections between 
Theodoris et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

transcription factors and their targets prior to fine-tuning. We determined the genes whose 
embeddings in fetal cardiomyocytes23 were most impacted by in silico deletion of GATA4, 
a known congenital heart disease gene. In silico deletion of GATA4 had a significantly 
higher effect on genes known to be most significantly dysregulated by GATA4 variants 
in a previously reported iPSC disease model of GATA4-related heart defects33 (Extended 
Data Fig. 9e). Notably, direct GATA4 targets (as defined by ChIP-seq33) were significantly 
more impacted by in silico deletion of GATA4 in fetal cardiomyocytes compared to indirect 
targets (Fig. 5a). Analogously, in silico deletion of TBX5, another known congenital heart 
disease gene, in fetal cardiomyocytes23 more significantly impacted its direct targets (as 
defined by ChIP-seq34) compared to indirect targets and housekeeping genes (Extended 
Data Fig. 9f). These data suggest that in silico perturbation can be applied to model gene 
network connections.
Interestingly, the GATA4 variant studied in the iPSC disease model disrupts the interaction 
of GATA4 with its binding partner, transcription factor TBX533. We tested whether our in 
silico deletion approach could model the effect of deleting these two genes in combination 
(Fig. 5b). Indeed, in silico deletion of GATA4 or TBX5 alone had a significantly more 
deleterious effect on their known co-bound targets33 compared to housekeeping genes. 
Furthermore, in silico deletion of both GATA4 and TBX5 in combination had an even 
greater impact on their known co-bound targets than the sum of their individual in silico 
deletion, suggesting Geneformer recognized their cooperative action at these co-bound 
targets.
In silico treatment analysis
We next tested whether our in silico perturbation strategy could be applied to model 
human disease and reveal candidate therapeutic targets (Fig. 6a). First, we fine-tuned 
Geneformer to distinguish cardiomyocytes35 from non-failing hearts (n=9) or hearts 
affected by hypertrophic (n=11) or dilated (n=9) cardiomyopathy with an overall out-of-
sample accuracy of 90% (Fig. 6b, Extended Data Fig. 10a). We then determined the 
genes whose in silico deletion or activation in cardiomyocytes from non-failing hearts 
significantly shifted the fine-tuned Geneformer cell embeddings towards the hypertrophic 
or dilated cardiomyopathy states (Fig. 6c–d; Extended Data Fig. 10b–c, Supplementary 
Table 5–11). Overall, the model identified 447 genes whose loss was predicted to shift 
cardiomyocytes towards the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy state, which were enriched 
for pathways including Titin binding36 and sarcomere organization37 known to impact 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy pathogenesis. The model identified 478 genes whose loss was 
predicted to shift cardiomyocytes towards dilated cardiomyopathy, which were enriched for 
pathways involved in muscle contraction38 and mitochondrial39 function.
Then, we performed in silico treatment analysis in cardiomyocytes from hypertrophic or 
dilated cardiomyopathy patients to determine whether inhibition or activation of specific 
pathways would shift the cell embeddings back towards the non-failing heart state 
(Fig. 6e, Extended Data Fig. 10d, Supplementary Table 12–15). Top enriched pathways 
for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy pointed to candidate cardiomyocyte-specific therapeutic 
targets including ADCY5, disruption of which is associated with longevity and protection 
Theodoris et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

against cardiomyopathy in mouse models40, as well as druggable targets41 including 
SRPK3, a downstream effector of MEF242 which is known to play a critical role in 
myocardial cell hypertrophy43.
We then performed experimental validation to determine whether inhibition of Geneformer-
predicted therapeutic candidates for dilated cardiomyopathy could improve cardiomyocyte 
function in an experimental model of the disease. Titin (TTN) truncating mutations are the 
leading cause of dilated cardiomyopathy in humans and are found in ~20% of affected 
patients36. iPSC-derived cardiac microtissues harboring a truncating variant (TTN+/−) in 
the A-band are known to exhibit reduced contractile stress compared to isogenic TTN+/+ 
controls36. Strikingly, CRISPR-mediated knockout of both Geneformer-predicted targets 
GSN and PLN in the TTN+/− cells significantly improved the contractile stress of the TTN+/
− cardiac microtissues, validating these genes as promising candidate therapeutic targets 
for this disease (Fig. 6f–g, Extended Data Fig. 10e). These findings provide experimental 
validation in support of the utility of Geneformer as a tool for discovery of candidate 
therapeutic targets in human disease.
Discussion
In sum, we developed a context-aware deep learning model, Geneformer, pretrained on 
large-scale transcriptomic data to enable predictions in settings with limited data. Through 
the observation of a vast number of cell states during the pretraining process, Geneformer 
gained a fundamental understanding of network dynamics, encoding network hierarchy 
in the model’s attention weights in a completely self-supervised manner. Geneformer’s 
ability to predict dosage-sensitive disease genes through the context-aware in silico deletion 
approach represents a valuable asset for interpretation of genetic variants, including 
prioritization of GWAS hits driving complex traits, and the specific tissues they are 
expected to affect. Experimental validation of a novel dosage-sensitive gene candidate 
in fetal cardiomyocytes, TEAD4, supports the utility of Geneformer for driving novel 
biological insights in human development. Applied to disease modeling of cardiomyopathy 
using a limited number of patient samples, Geneformer predicted candidate therapeutic 
targets whose experimental targeting in an iPSC disease model led to significant functional 
improvement. In silico treatment analysis using limited data may thus enable therapeutic 
discovery in innumerable diseases that have been previously impeded by limited data due to 
being rare or affecting clinically inaccessible tissue.
Furthermore, we found that pretraining with larger and more diverse corpuses consistently 
improved Geneformer’s predictive power, consistent with observations that large-scale 
pretraining allows training of deeper models that ultimately have greater predictive 
potential in fields including NLU, computer vision, and mathematical problem-solving44. 
Additionally, exposure to hundreds of experimental datasets during pretraining also 
appeared to promote robustness to batch-dependent technical artifacts and individual 
variability that commonly impact single cell analyses in biology. These findings suggest that 
as the amount of publicly available transcriptomic data continues to expand, future models 
pretrained on even larger-scale corpuses may open opportunities to achieve meaningful 
predictions in even more elusive tasks with increasingly limited task-specific data. Overall, 
Theodoris et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Geneformer represents a pretrained deep learning model whose fundamental understanding 
of network dynamics can now be democratized to a broad range of downstream applications 
to accelerate discovery of key network regulators and candidate therapeutic targets in 
settings with limited data.
Methods
Assembly and rank value encoding of transcriptomes in Genecorpus-30M
Assembly and uniform processing of single cell transcriptomes—We assembled 
a large-scale pretraining corpus, Genecorpus-30M, comprised of 29.9 million (29,900,531) 
human single cell transcriptomes from a broad range of tissues from publicly available data 
(Fig. 1b, Supplementary Table 1). We excluded cells with high mutational burdens (e.g. 
malignant cells and immortalized cell lines) that could lead to substantial network rewiring 
without companion genome sequencing to facilitate interpretation. We only included 
droplet-based sequencing platforms to assure expression value unit comparability. Overall, 
561 datasets were included and stored as uniform files in the .loom HDF5 format including 
metadata from the original studies as row (feature) and column (cell) attributes described 
below.
Publicly available datasets containing raw counts were collected from National Center for 
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), NCBI Sequence 
Read Archive (SRA), Human Cell Atlas, European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European 
Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI) Single Cell Expression Atlas, Broad Institute Single 
Cell Portal, Brotman Baty Institute (BBI)-Allen Single Cell Atlases, Tumor Immune Single-
cell Hub (TISCH) (excluding malignant cells), Panglao Database, 10x Genomics, University 
of California, Santa Cruz Cell Browser, European Genome-phenome Archive, Synapse, 
Riken, Zenodo, National Institutes of Health (NIH) Figshare Archive, NCBI dbGap, 
Refine.bio, China National GeneBank Sequence Archive, Mendeley Data, and individual 
communication with authors of the original studies11,23,29,32,45,47–153. Additional resources 
for collecting information about suitable studies included Entrez Direct tools and the dataset 
summary from Svensson et al., Database 2020154. Tools utilized in conversion of data 
to uniform .loom HDF5 files included loompy, scanpy155, anndata, scipy, numpy, pandas, 
Cellranger, and LoomExperiment.
Row feature attributes included Ensembl annotations for the gene ID, ID version (if 
provided by original study), name, and type (e.g. protein coding, miRNA, mitochondrial, 
etc). Annotation data was retrieved from Ensembl and MyGene156. Column cell attributes 
included a unique Genecorpus-30M cell ID comprised of the dataset name, sample name, 
and cell barcode from that dataset. The dataset and sample names were also included as 
separate individual attributes such that the cell barcode can be derived by subtracting these 
from the unique Genecorpus-30M cell ID if needed. Column cell attributes also included the 
major organ included in the dataset, which we annotated as one of the following categories: 
adipose, adrenal, airway, bladder, bone, bone_marrow, brain, breast, cord_blood, decidua, 
ear, embryo, endothelial, esophagus, eye, heart, immune, intestine_unspecified, kidney, 
large_intestine, liver, lung, lymph_node, lymphatic, muscle, nasal, pancreas, placenta, 
pluripotent_stem_cell, prostate, skin, small_intestine, spleen, stomach, testis, thymus, tonsil, 
Theodoris et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

various, yolk_sac. Column cell attributes also included the specific organ(s) included in the 
dataset based on metadata provided by the original study. If the original study included cell 
type annotations, we included these as a cell type column attribute for each cell as well. We 
also included the sequencing platform used.
Column cell attributes also included several calculated measurements for each cell: the 
total number of read counts, the percentage of mitochondrial reads, the number of genes 
Ensembl-annotated as protein-coding or miRNA genes, and whether the cell passed the 
quality control metrics we established for scalable filtering of the cells to exclude possible 
doublets and/or damaged cells. Only cells that passed these filtering metrics were used 
for downstream analyses in this work. Specifically, datasets were filtered to retain cells 
with total read counts within three standard deviations of the mean within that dataset 
and mitochondrial reads within three standard deviations of the mean within that dataset. 
Ensembl-annotated protein-coding and miRNA genes were used for downstream analysis. 
Cells with less than seven detected Ensembl-annotated protein-coding or miRNA genes were 
excluded as the 15% masking used for the pretraining learning objective would not reliably 
mask a gene in cells with fewer detected genes. Ultimately, 27.4 million (27,406,217) cells 
passed the defined quality filters.
Rank value encoding of single cell transcriptomes—We developed a novel rank 
value encoding method that provides a nonparametric representation of each single cell’s 
transcriptome, ranking genes by their expression within that cell normalized by their 
expression across the entire Genecorpus-30M (Fig. 1c). This method takes advantage of 
the many observations of each gene’s expression across Genecorpus-30M to prioritize 
genes that distinguish cell state. Specifically, this method will deprioritize ubiquitously 
highly-expressed housekeeping genes by normalizing them to a lower rank. Conversely, 
genes such as transcription factors that may be lowly expressed when they are expressed 
but highly distinguish cell state will move to a higher rank within the encoding (Extended 
Data Fig. 1c). Furthermore, this rank-based approach may be more robust against technical 
artifacts that may systematically bias the absolute transcript counts value while the overall 
relative ranking of genes within each cell remains more stable.
To accomplish this, we first calculated the nonzero median value of expression of each 
detected gene across all cells passing quality filtering from the entire Genecorpus-30M. We 
aggregated the transcript count distribution for each gene in a memory-efficient manner by 
scanning through chunks of .loom data using loompy, normalizing the gene transcript counts 
in each cell by the total transcript count of that cell to account for varying sequencing depth, 
and updating the gene’s normalized count distribution within the t-digest157 data structure 
developed for accurate online accumulation of rank-based statistics. We then normalized the 
genes in each single cell transcriptome by that gene’s nonzero median value of expression 
across Genecorpus-30M and ordered the genes by the rank of their normalized expression 
in that specific cell. Of note, we opted to use the nonzero median value of expression rather 
than include zeros in the distribution so as not to weight the value by tissue representation 
within Genecorpus-30M, assuming that a representative range of transcript values would 
be observed within the cells in which each gene was detected. This normalization factor 
for each gene is calculated once from the pretraining corpus and is used for all future 
Theodoris et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

datasets presented to the model. The provided tokenizer code includes this normalization 
procedure and should be used for tokenizing new datasets presented to Geneformer to ensure 
consistency of the normalization factor used for each gene.
The rank value encodings for each single cell transcriptome were then tokenized based 
on a total vocabulary of 25,424 protein-coding or miRNA genes detected in a median of 
173,152 cells within Genecorpus-30M. The vocabulary also included two additional special 
tokens for padding and masking. The tokenized data was stored within the Huggingface 
Datasets158 structure, which is based on the Apache Arrow format that allows processing of 
large datasets with zero-copy reads without memory constraints. Of note, this strategy is also 
space-efficient as the genes are stored as ranked tokens as opposed to the exact transcript 
values, and we only store genes detected within each cell rather than the full sparse dataset 
that includes all of the undetected genes.
Geneformer architecture and pretraining
Geneformer architecture—Geneformer is composed of six transformer encoder units1,2, 
each composed of a self-attention layer and feed forward neural network layer with the 
following parameters: input size of 2048 (fully represents 93% of rank value encodings 
in Genecorpus-30M), 256 embedding dimensions, 4 attention heads per layer, and feed 
forward size of 512 (Fig. 1c). Geneformer employs full dense self-attention across the 
input size of 2048. Depth was chosen based on the maximum depth for which there was 
sufficient data to pretrain as it has been established that this approach yields the greatest 
predictive potential in other informational fields including NLU, computer vision, and 
mathematical problem-solving44. Additionally, we maximized the amount of context (input 
size) considered by the model with full attention based on the number of genes standardly 
detected in each cell within the pretraining corpus. Additional parameters were as follows: 
non-linear activation function: rectified linear unit (ReLU); dropout probability for all fully 
connected layers: 0.02; dropout ratio for attention probabilities: 0.02; standard deviation 
of the initializer for weight matrices: 0.02; epsilon for layer normalization layers: 1e-12. 
Modeling was implemented in pytorch and using the Huggingface Transformers library159 
for model configuration, data loading, and training.
Geneformer pretraining and performance optimization—Pretraining was 
accomplished using a masked learning objective, which has been shown in other 
informational fields1,2 to improve generalizability of the foundational knowledge learned 
during pretraining for a wide range of downstream fine-tuning objectives. During 
pretraining, 15% of the genes within each transcriptome were masked, and the model was 
trained to predict which gene should be within each masked position in that specific cell 
state using the context of the remaining unmasked genes. A major strength of this approach 
is that it is entirely self-supervised and can be accomplished on completely unlabeled 
data, which allows the inclusion of large amounts of training data without being restricted 
to samples with accompanying labels. Pretraining hyperparameters were optimized to the 
following final values: max learning rate: 1e-3; learning scheduler: linear with warmup; 
optimizer: Adam with weight decay fix160; warmup steps: 10,000; weight decay: 0.001; 
Theodoris et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

batch size: 12. Tensorboard was used for experimentation tracking, and the model was 
pretrained for 3 epochs.
As the input size of 2048 is considerably large for a full dense self-attention model 
(for example, BERT1,2 input size is 512) and transformers have a quadratic memory and 
time complexity O(L2) with respect to input size, we implemented measures to optimize 
efficiency of large-scale pretraining. The trainer from the Huggingface Transformers 
library159 was used for pretraining with the substitution of a custom tokenizer to implement 
dynamic, length-grouped padding, which minimized computation on padding and achieved 
a 29.4x speedup in pretraining. This process takes a randomly sampled megabatch and 
then orders minibatches by their length in descending order (to ensure that any memory 
constraints are encountered earlier). Minibatches are then dynamically padded, minimizing 
the computation wasted on padding due to being length-grouped. We also implemented 
recent advances in distributed GPU training9,10 to allow efficient pretraining on the large-
scale dataset using Deepspeed, which partitions parameters, gradients, and optimizer states 
across available GPUs, offloads processing/memory as possible to CPU to allow more 
to fit on GPU, and reduces memory fragmentation by ensuring long and short term 
memory allocations do not mix. Overall, pretraining was achieved in approximately 3 days 
distributed across 3 nodes each with 4 Nvidia V100 32GB GPUs (total 12 GPUs).
Geneformer fine-tuning
Fine-tuning of Geneformer was accomplished by initializing the model with the pretrained 
Geneformer weights and adding a final task-specific transformer layer. The fine-tuning 
objective was either gene classification or cell classification as indicated in Supplementary 
Table 2. The trainer from the Huggingface Transformers library159 was used for pretraining 
with the substitution of a custom tokenizer as described above and a custom data 
collator for dynamically labeling gene or cell classes as indicated in Supplementary 
Table 2. To demonstrate the efficacy of the pretrained Geneformer in boosting predictive 
potential of downstream fine-tuning applications, we intentionally used the same fine-tuning 
hyperparameters for all applications. It should be noted that hyperparameter tuning for 
deep learning applications generally significantly enhances learning and so it is likely 
that the maximum predictive potential of Geneformer in these downstream applications is 
significantly underestimated. Hyperparameters utilized for fine-tuning were as follows: max 
learning rate: 5e-5; learning scheduler: linear with warmup; optimizer: Adam with weight 
decay fix160; warmup steps: 500; weight decay: 0.001; batch size: 12. All fine-tuning in 
Supplementary Table 2 was performed with a single training epoch to avoid overfitting.
The number of layers frozen from fine-tuning are indicated in Supplementary Table 2. 
Generally, in our experience, applications that are more relevant to the pretraining objective 
benefit from more layers being frozen to prevent overfitting to the limited task-specific 
data, whereas applications that are more distant from the pretraining objective benefit from 
fine-tuning of more layers to optimize performance on the new task. Fine-tuning results for 
gene classification applications were reported as AUCs +/− standard deviation and F1 score 
calculated based on a 5-fold cross-validation strategy where training was performed on 80% 
of the gene training labels and performance was tested on the 20% held-out gene training 
Theodoris et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

labels, repeating for 5 folds. Of note, because the fine-tuning applications are trained on 
classification objectives that are completely separate from the masked learning objective, 
whether or not task-specific data was included in the pretraining corpus is not relevant to the 
classification predictions, as demonstrated in Extended Data Fig. 1f.
We then fully fine-tuned the dosage sensitivity and bivalency classification models using 
all gene training labels in order to test their ability to generalize to out-of-sample data. 
We tested whether, without any further training, the model fine-tuned to distinguish dosage 
sensitive versus insensitive genes could predict dosage sensitivity of a recently reported 
set of disease genes from Collins et al., which analyzed CNVs from 753,994 individuals 
to define genes whose deletion was associated with primarily neurodevelopmental disease 
with either high (>0.85 score) or moderate (0.15–0.85 score) confidence22. Predicted dosage 
sensitivity of these gene sets was tested in the context of 10,000 randomly sampled cells 
from Genecorpus-30M, neurons across any adult or developmental timepoint defined as 
TUBB3-marked cells from Genecorpus-30M, or fetal cerebral cells from the Fetal Cell 
Atlas23. We also tested whether, without any further training, the model fine-tuned to 
distinguish bivalent versus single Lys4-marked genes by training on the 56 highly-conserved 
loci would generalize to the genome-wide setting30.
Geneformer gene embeddings, cell embeddings, and attention weights
Gene embeddings—For each single cell transcriptome presented to Geneformer, 
the model embeds each gene into a 256-dimensional space that encodes the gene’s 
characteristics specific to the context of that cell. Contextual Geneformer gene embeddings 
are extracted as the hidden state weights for the 256 embedding dimensions for each gene 
within the given single cell transcriptome evaluated by forward pass through the Geneformer 
model. Gene embeddings analyzed in this study were extracted from the second to last 
layer of the models as the final layer is known to encompass features more directly related 
to the learning objective prediction while the second to last layer is a more generalizable 
representation.
Cell embeddings—Geneformer cell embeddings, which encode characteristics of that 
single cell’s state, are generated by averaging the embeddings of each gene detected in 
that cell, resulting in a 256-dimensional embedding. We utilized the second to last layer 
embeddings as discussed above (except for the disease modeling application as discussed in 
the Supplementary Information Methods).
Attention weights—Each of Geneformer’s six layers has four attention heads that are 
meant to learn in an unsupervised manner to pay attention to distinct classes of genes 
to jointly improve predictions without prior knowledge of any gene’s biological function. 
Contextual Geneformer attention weights are extracted for each attention head within each 
self-attention layer for each gene within the given single cell transcriptome evaluated by 
forward pass through the Geneformer model.
Theodoris et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In silico perturbation
We designed an in silico perturbation approach where the rank of given genes is perturbed 
to model their inhibition or activation. The effects of the in silico perturbation are measured 
at the cell and gene embedding level, modeling how the perturbation affects the cell’s state 
and the regulation of downstream genes within the gene network, respectively. In silico 
deletion was modeled by removing the given gene from the rank value encoding of the 
given single cell transcriptome and quantifying the cosine similarity between the original 
and perturbed 1) cell embeddings to determine the predicted deleterious impact of deleting 
that gene in that cell context, or 2) gene embeddings of the remaining genes in the single 
cell transcriptome to determine which genes were predicted to be most sensitive to in silico 
deletion of the given gene. In silico deletion can be performed with a single gene or multiple 
genes being deleted. In silico activation was modeled by moving a given gene(s) to the front 
of the rank value encoding (similarly to the in silico reprogramming strategy discussed in 
the Supplementary Information Methods where genes were artificially added to the front of 
the rank value encoding to model cellular reprogramming by these factors). In theory, more 
subtle downregulation and activation could be modeled by shifting genes up or down within 
the rank value encoding to a subtler degree.
Please refer to the Supplementary Information Methods for complete methods including 
analysis of context dependence and robustness to batch-dependent technical artifacts, 
attention weight analysis, in silico perturbation analysis, alternative modeling approaches, 
cell type annotation fine-tuning application, disease modeling approach, scRNA-seq sample 
collection and preprocessing, and experimental testing of Geneformer-predicted targets in 
engineered cardiac microtissues.
Theodoris et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1 |. Geneformer transfer learning strategy.
a, Schematic of standard modelling approach, which necessitates retraining a new model 
from scratch for each new task. b, Schematic of transfer learning strategy. Through a 
single initial self-supervised large-scale pretraining on a generalizable learning objective, 
the model gains fundamental knowledge of the learning domain that is then democratized 
to a multitude of downstream applications distinct from the pretraining learning objective, 
Theodoris et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

transferring knowledge to new tasks. c, Transcription factors are normalized by a statistically 
significantly lower factor (resulting in higher prioritization in the rank value encoding) 
compared to all genes. Housekeeping genes on average show a trend of a higher 
normalization factor (resulting in deprioritization in the rank value encoding) compared 
to all genes (*p<0.05 by Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected; all genes n=17,903, housekeeping 
genes n=11, transcription factors n=1,384; error bars=standard deviation). d, Pretraining was 
performed with a randomly subsampled corpus of 100,000 cells, holding out 10,000 cells 
for evaluation, with 3 different random seeds. Evaluation loss was essentially equivalent 
in the 3 trials, indicating robustness to the set of genes randomly masked for each cell 
during the pretraining. e, Pretraining was performed with a randomly subsampled corpus of 
100,000 cells, holding out 10,000 cells for evaluation, with 3 different masking percentages. 
15% masking had marginally lower evaluation loss compared to 5% or 30% masking. 
f, Pretraining was performed with a randomly subsampled corpus of 90,000 cells and 
the model was then fine-tuned to distinguish dosage-sensitive vs. -insensitive transcription 
factors using 10,000 cells that were either included in or excluded from the 90,000 cell 
pretraining corpus. Predictive potential on the downstream fine-tuning task was measured by 
5-fold cross-validation with these 10,000 cells, demonstrating essentially equivalent results 
by AUC, confusion matrices, and F1 score. Because the fine-tuning applications are trained 
on classification objectives that are completely separate from the masked learning objective, 
whether or not task-specific data was included in the pretraining corpus is not relevant to the 
downstream classification predictions.
Theodoris et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 2 |. Geneformer was context-aware and robust to batch-dependent technical 
artifacts.
a, Effect of gene versus the indicated batch-dependent technical artifact on pretrained 
Geneformer gene embeddings (*p<0.05 by Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected; NS: non-significant). 
We found that the gene embeddings were robust to sequencing platformM11, preservation 
method13,12, and individual patient variability14. b, UMAP of pretrained Geneformer cell 
embeddings of cells undergoing iPSC reprogramming appropriately captured temporal 
trajectory of reprogramming (cell types as annotated by original study15; iPSC negative 
or positive refers to expression of marker TRA-1–60). Cell embeddings suggested that 
cells which do not progress to the iPSC state bifurcate into an alternative fate compared 
to cells that progress to the iPSC state after the day 12 stage. c, Compared to in silico 
reprogramming with random genes, in silico reprogramming of fibroblasts by artificially 
adding OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and MYC (OSKM) to the front of their rank value encodings 
significantly shifted the gene embeddings from their initial fibroblast state to the embedding 
of that gene in the iPSC state (*p<0.05 by Wilcoxon). d, UMAP of pretrained Geneformer 
cell embeddings of cells undergoing iPSC to myoblast differentiation at the earlier S1 
(PAX3+) and later S2B (PAX3+/MYOD+) stages (cell types as annotated by original 
study16). e, Compared to in silico differentiation with random genes, in silico differentiation 
Theodoris et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

of the early-stage myogenic cells by artificially adding MYOD to the front of their rank 
value encodings significantly shifted the gene embeddings from their earlier state to the 
embedding of that gene in the later MYOD+ myogenic state (*p<0.05 by Wilcoxon).
Extended Data Fig. 3 |. Geneformer encoded context-specificity of key NOTCH pathway genes.
Known context-dependent NOTCH genes showed higher variance in their contextual 
embeddings across variable aortic cell types compared to housekeeping gene GAPDH.
Theodoris et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 4 |. Geneformer pretrained and fine-tuned cell embeddings were robust to 
batch-dependent technical artifacts.
a, While original data (left) was highly affected by patient batch effect, cell embeddings 
generated by pretrained Geneformer (right) (without fine-tuning) clustered primarily by cell 
type and phenotype. Of note, affected individuals 1, 2, and 4 had the phenotype of ascending 
only aortic aneurysm, which is a different phenotype than aortic aneurysm that includes the 
root. b, Imbalance in the number of genes detected in each of the two platforms (single-
cell Drop-seq versus single-nucleus DroNc-seq), which may result in batch-dependent 
technical artifacts. c, Cell embeddings from each layer of the Geneformer model fine-tuned 
to distinguish the indicated cell types (as annotated by original study11) using only the 
Theodoris et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Drop-seq data. As the cells pass through each layer, the model successively extrudes them 
from each other to derive separable embeddings that distinguish the cell types. d, Cell 
type predictions on the DroNc-seq data by the model fine-tuned only on the Drop-seq 
data (out of sample accuracy 84%). Of note, inaccurate predictions were predominantly in 
predicting that cardiomyocyte type 2 was type 1, as expected given the minimal examples 
of cardiomyocyte type 2 in the Drop-seq data. e, The imbalance of cardiomyocyte type 1 
and 2 between the platforms also suggests that these cellular subtypes may be an artifact 
of variable gene detection between the two platforms. f, Geneformer fine-tuned with only 
Drop-seq data automatically integrated DroNc-seq data such that the fine-tuned Geneformer 
cell embeddings primarily clustered by cell types and showed improved integration of 
platforms compared to the original data even after batch effect removal using the ComBat17 
or Harmony18 methods.
Theodoris et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 5 |. Geneformer boosted predictions in multiclass cell type annotation.
a, Predictive potential (as measured by accuracy and macro F1 score) of Geneformer fine-
tuned for cell type annotation in the indicated human tissues as compared to XGBoost 
(CaSTLe) and deep neural network-based (scDeepSort) methods. The top bar graph 
indicates the number of cell type classes for each tissue; the gap in performance of 
Geneformer compared to alternatives increased as the number of cell type classes increased, 
indicating that Geneformer was robust in even increasingly complex multiclass prediction 
applications. b, Lung, c, large intestine, or d, pancreas out of sample predictions by 
Theodoris et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish cell types in each tissue (training on 80% of cells, 
predictions on held-out 20% of cells).
Extended Data Fig. 6 |. Embedding dimension activations distinguish cell types in fine-tuned 
Geneformer model.
a, Kidney, b, liver, c, blood, d, spleen, e, brain, or f, placenta out of sample predictions 
by Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish cell types in each tissue (training on 80% of 
cells, predictions on held-out 20% of cells). g, Specific embedding dimension activations 
distinguish each lung cell type in the fine-tuned model.
Theodoris et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 7 |. Geneformer boosted predictions in a diverse panel of downstream tasks.
a, Confusion matrices and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods 
(as described in Fig. 2a) for downstream task of distinguishing dosage-sensitive vs. 
insensitive transcription factors. b, Effect on cardiomyocyte embeddings from in silico 
deletion of genes linked by prior transcriptome-wide association study (TWAS)-prioritized 
GWAS24 to cardiac MRI traits relevant to cardiac pathology (left ventricular (LV) end 
diastolic volume (EDV), LV end systolic volume (LVESV), LV ejection fraction (LVEF), 
and stroke volume (SV)) compared to in silico deletion of control cardiac disease genes 
Theodoris et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

expressed in cardiomyocytes but whose pathology occurs in non-cardiomyocyte cell 
types (hyperlipidemia). (*p<0.05 by Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected; center line=median, box 
limits=upper and lower quartiles, whiskers=1.5x interquartile range, points=outliers). c, 
Quantitative PCR (QPCR) data of CRISPR-mediated knockout of TEAD4 in iPSC-derived 
cardiomyocytes (n=3, *p<0.05 by t-test; center line=median, box limits=upper and lower 
quartiles, whiskers=1.5x interquartile range, points=experimental replicates). d, Confusion 
matrices and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods for downstream 
task of distinguishing bivalent vs. non-methylated genes (56 highly conserved loci28). e, 
Confusion matrices and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods for 
downstream task of distinguishing bivalent vs. Lys4-only methylated genes (56 highly 
conserved loci28).
Theodoris et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 8 |. Geneformer boosted predictions in a diverse panel of downstream tasks.
a, Confusion matrix and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods (as 
described in Fig. 2a) for downstream task of distinguishing genome-wide30 bivalent vs. 
Lys4-only methylated genes with model fine-tuned only on 56 highly conserved loci28. 
b, ROC curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish genome-wide bivalent vs. Lys4-only-
methylated genes using limited data (~15K ESCs), compared to alternative methods. c, 
Confusion matrices and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods for 
downstream task of distinguishing genome-wide bivalent vs. non-methylated genes with 
Theodoris et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

model fine-tuned on 80% of genome-wide loci and predicting on 20% of out of sample loci. 
d, Confusion matrices and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods for 
downstream task of distinguishing long- vs. short-range transcription factors. e, Confusion 
matrices and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods for downstream 
task of distinguishing central vs. peripheral genes within the N1-dependent network in 
endothelial cells.
Extended Data Fig. 9 |. In silico deletion strategy revealed network connectivity.
Theodoris et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

a, Confusion matrices and F1 score for Geneformer predictions vs. alternative methods (as 
described in Fig. 2a) for downstream task of distinguishing N1-activated vs. non-targets. 
b, Confusion matrix and F1 score of Geneformer predictions of central vs. peripheral 
genes within the N1-dependent network in endothelial cells (ECs) with model fine-tuned 
only on 884 ECs from healthy or dilated aortas14. c, Pretrained Geneformer attention 
weights in aortic ECs demonstrated that specific attention heads learned in a completely 
self-supervised way the relative centrality of the top most central versus most peripheral 
genes in the N1-dependent gene network (higher valence=more central) (*p<0.05 Wilcoxon, 
FDR-corrected). d, Pretrained Geneformer contextual attention versus gene rank in rank 
value encoding in the indicated aortic cell types, which each have different sets of highest 
ranked genes based on cell type context (higher rank is leftward on x axis) (*p<0.05 
by Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected, * position = side with higher attention). All cells used for 
analysis had the same number of genes so that the rank values would be comparable. e, 
In silico deletion of GATA4 was significantly more deleterious to the previously reported 
highest confidence GATA4 targets33 than to housekeeping genes. f, In silico deletion of 
TBX5 was significantly more deleterious to previously reported TBX5 direct targets34 
than to housekeeping genes or TBX5 indirect targets. In (d-e): *p<0.05 by Wilcoxon, 
FDR-corrected; center line=median, box limits=upper and lower quartiles, whiskers=1.5x 
interquartile range, points=outliers.
Theodoris et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Extended Data Fig. 10 |. Geneformer fine-tuned cardiomyocyte embeddings clustered by 
phenotype.
a, While original data (left) was highly affected by patient batch effect, cell embeddings 
generated by pretrained Geneformer (right) (without fine-tuning) clustered primarily 
by cell type. b, UMAP of cardiomyocyte embeddings from the model fine-tuned 
to distinguish cardiomyocytes in non-failing hearts from cardiomyocytes in patients 
with hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy. c, Gene sets significantly associated with 
hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy states by Geneformer in silico deletion disease 
Theodoris et al.
Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

modeling significantly overlapped with genes differentially expressed in those respective 
disease states (differentially expressed vs. non-failing) compared to the overlap of those 
differentially expressed genes with background genes (the remainder of the genes detected 
in cardiomyocytes that were not significantly associated with hypertrophic or dilated 
cardiomyopathy by Geneformer disease modeling) (*p<0.05 by X2 test, FDR-corrected). d, 
Pathway enrichment for genes whose in silico deletion in cardiomyocytes from hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy patients significantly shifted embeddings towards the non-failing state and 
away from the dilated cardiomyopathy state, suggesting candidate therapeutic targets. e, 
QPCR data of CRISPR-mediated knockout of indicated genes in TTN+/− iPSC-derived 
cardiomyocytes (n=3, *p<0.05 by t-test). Center line=median, box limits=upper and lower 
quartiles, whiskers=1.5x interquartile range, points=experimental replicates.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jack Rae for helpful scientific discussions and Google Research for providing TPU resources 
for experimentation. PTE was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (1R01HL092577, 
1R01HL157635, 5R01HL139731), American Heart Association Strategically Focused Research Networks 
(18SFRN34110082), and European Union (MAESTRIA 965286). CVT was supported by NIH T32GM007748 and 
the Helen Hay Whitney Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship. LX was supported by the American Heart Association 
(20CDA35260081).
Data Availability
Genecorpus-30M is available on the Huggingface Dataset Hub at https://huggingface.co/
datasets/ctheodoris/Genecorpus-30M.
References
1. Vaswani A Attention Is All You Need arXiv:1706.03762v5. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2017-
Decem, (2017).
2. Devlin J, Chang MW, Lee K & Toutanova K BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers 
for language understanding. in NAACL HLT 2019 – 2019 Conference of the North American 
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies - 
Proceedings of the Conference vol. 1 4174–4186 (2019).
3. He K, Zhang X, Ren S & Sun J Deep residual learning for image recognition. in Proceedings 
of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition vols 
2016-December 770–778 (2016).
4. Theodoris CV et al. Human disease modeling reveals integrated transcriptional and epigenetic 
mechanisms of NOTCH1 haploinsufficiency. Cell 160, 1072–1086 (2015). [PubMed: 25768904] 
5. Theodoris CV et al. Network-based screen in iPSC-derived cells reveals therapeutic candidate for 
heart valve disease. Science (1979) 371, (2021).
6. Shao X et al. ScDeepSort: A pre-trained cell-type annotation method for single-cell transcriptomics 
using deep learning with a weighted graph neural network. Nucleic Acids Res 49, e122 (2021). 
[PubMed: 34500471] 
7. Lieberman Y, Rokach L & Shay T CaSTLe - Classification of single cells by transfer learning: 
Harnessing the power of publicly available single cell RNA sequencing experiments to annotate new 
experiments. PLoS One 13, (2018).
8. Lin T, Wang Y, Liu X & Qiu X A Survey of Transformers. ArXiv (2021).
Theodoris et al.
Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

9. Ren J et al. ZeRO-offload: Democratizing billion-scale model training. in 2021 USENIX Annual 
Technical Conference (2021).
10. Rajbhandari S, Rasley J, Ruwase O & He Y Zero: Memory optimizations toward training trillion 
parameter models. in International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, 
Storage and Analysis, SC vols 2020-November (2020).
11. Selewa A et al. Systematic Comparison of High-throughput Single-Cell and Single-Nucleus 
Transcriptomes during Cardiomyocyte Differentiation. Sci Rep 10, 1535 (2020). [PubMed: 
32001747] 
12. 10x Genomics Datasets. https://www.10xgenomics.com/resources/datasets/frozen-pbm-cs-donor-
a-1-standard-1-1-0.
13. 10X Genomics Datasets. https://www.10xgenomics.com/resources/datasets/fresh-68-k-pbm-cs-
donor-a-1-standard-1-1-0.
14. Li Y et al. Single-Cell Transcriptome Analysis Reveals Dynamic Cell Populations and Differential 
Gene Expression Patterns in Control and Aneurysmal Human Aortic Tissue. Circulation 142, 
1374–1388 (2020). [PubMed: 33017217] 
15. Xing QR et al. Diversification of reprogramming trajectories revealed by parallel single-cell 
transcriptome and chromatin accessibility sequencing. Sci Adv 6, 463–474 (2020).
16. Guo D et al. iMyoblasts for ex vivo and in vivo investigations of human myogenesis and disease 
modeling. Elife 11, e70341 (2022). [PubMed: 35076017] 
17. Zhang Y, Parmigiani G & Johnson WE ComBat-seq: Batch effect adjustment for RNA-seq count 
data. NAR Genom Bioinform 2, (2020).
18. Korsunsky I et al. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with Harmony. Nat 
Methods 16, 1289–1296 (2019). [PubMed: 31740819] 
19. Lek M et al. Analysis of protein-coding genetic variation in 60,706 humans. Nature 536, 285–291 
(2016). [PubMed: 27535533] 
20. Shihab HA, Rogers MF, Campbell C & Gaunt TR HIPred: An integrative approach to predicting 
haploinsufficient genes. Bioinformatics 33, 1751–1757 (2017). [PubMed: 28137713] 
21. Ni Z, Zhou XY, Aslam S & Niu DK Characterization of Human Dosage-Sensitive Transcription 
Factor Genes. Front Genet 10, 1208 (2019). [PubMed: 31867040] 
22. Collins RL et al. A cross-disorder dosage sensitivity map of the human genome. Cell 185, 3041–
3055.e25 (2022). [PubMed: 35917817] 
23. Cao J et al. A human cell atlas of fetal gene expression. Science (1979) 370, 808 (2020).
24. Pirruccello JP et al. Analysis of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging in 36,000 individuals yields 
genetic insights into dilated cardiomyopathy. Nat Commun 11, 2254 (2020). [PubMed: 32382064] 
25. Bolte C et al. Expression of Foxm1 transcription factor in cardiomyocytes is required for 
myocardial development. PLoS One 6, e22217 (2011). [PubMed: 21779394] 
26. Bolte C et al. Postnatal Ablation of Foxm1 from Cardiomyocytes Causes Late Onset Cardiac 
Hypertrophy and Fibrosis without Exacerbating Pressure Overload-Induced Cardiac Remodeling. 
PLoS One 7, e48713 (2012). [PubMed: 23144938] 
27. Currey L, Thor S & Piper M TEAD family transcription factors in development and disease. 
Development (Cambridge) 148, (2021).
28. Bernstein BE et al. A Bivalent Chromatin Structure Marks Key Developmental Genes in 
Embryonic Stem Cells. Cell 125, 315–356 (2006). [PubMed: 16630819] 
29. Franzén O, Gan L-M & Björkegren JLM PanglaoDB: a web server for exploration of mouse and 
human single-cell RNA sequencing data. Database (Oxford) 2019, baz406 (2019).
30. Pan G et al. Whole-Genome Analysis of Histone H3 Lysine 4 and Lysine 27 Methylation in 
Human Embryonic Stem Cells. Cell Stem Cell 1, 299–312 (2007). [PubMed: 18371364] 
31. Chen CH et al. Determinants of transcription factor regulatory range. Nat Commun 11, 2472 
(2020). [PubMed: 32424124] 
32. Litviňuková M et al. Cells of the adult human heart. Nature 588, 455–472 (2020).
33. Ang YS et al. Disease Model of GATA4 Mutation Reveals Transcription Factor Cooperativity in 
Human Cardiogenesis. Cell 167, 1734–1749 (2016). [PubMed: 27984724] 
Theodoris et al.
Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

34. Kathiriya IS et al. Modeling Human TBX5 Haploinsufficiency Predicts Regulatory Networks for 
Congenital Heart Disease. Dev Cell 56, 292–309 (2021). [PubMed: 33321106] 
35. Chaffin M et al. Single-nucleus profiling of human dilated and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Nature 608, 174–180 (2022). [PubMed: 35732739] 
36. Hinson JT et al. Titin mutations in iPS cells define sarcomere insufficiency as a cause of dilated 
cardiomyopathy. Science (1979) 349, 982–986 (2015).
37. Seidman CE & Seidman JG Identifying sarcomere gene mutations in hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy: A personal history. Circ Res 108, 743–750 (2011). [PubMed: 21415408] 
38. Kamisago M et al. Mutations in Sarcomere Protein Genes as a Cause of Dilated Cardiomyopathy. 
New England Journal of Medicine 343, 1688–1696 (2000). [PubMed: 11106718] 
39. Ramaccini D et al. Mitochondrial Function and Dysfunction in Dilated Cardiomyopathy. Frontiers 
in Cell and Developmental Biology vol. 8 Preprint at 10.3389/fcell.2020.624216 (2021).
40. Ho D, Yan L, Iwatsubo K, Vatner DE & Vatner SF Modulation of β-adrenergic receptor signaling 
in heart failure and longevity: targeting adenylyl cyclase type 5. Heart Fail Rev 15, 495–512 
(2010). [PubMed: 20658186] 
41. Wagner AH et al. DGIdb 2.0: Mining clinically relevant drug-gene interactions. Nucleic Acids Res 
44, D1036–D1044 (2016). [PubMed: 26531824] 
42. Nakagawa O et al. Centronuclear myopathy in mice lacking a novel muscle-specific protein kinase 
transcriptionally regulated by MEF2. Genes Dev 19, 2066–2077 (2005). [PubMed: 16140986] 
43. Akazawa H & Komuro I Roles of cardiac transcription factors in cardiac hypertrophy. Circulation 
Research vol. 92 1079–1088 Preprint at 10.1161/01.RES.0000072977.86706.23 (2003). [PubMed: 
12775656] 
44. Henighan T et al. Scaling Laws for Autoregressive Generative Modeling. CoRR abs/2010.14701, 
(2020).
45. Madissoon E et al. ScRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue 
stability after cold preservation. Genome Biol 21, (2019).
46. Anderson DJ et al. NKX2–5 regulates human cardiomyogenesis via a HEY2 dependent 
transcriptional network. Nat Commun 9, 1373 (2018). [PubMed: 29636455] 
47. Smillie CS et al. Intra- and Inter-cellular Rewiring of the Human Colon during Ulcerative Colitis. 
Cell 178, (2019).
48. Lee JS et al. Immunophenotyping of covid-19 and influenza highlights the role of type i interferons 
in development of severe covid-19. Sci Immunol 5, (2020).
49. Baron M et al. A Single-Cell Transcriptomic Map of the Human and Mouse Pancreas Reveals 
Inter- and Intra-cell Population Structure. Cell Syst 3, 346–360.e4 (2016). [PubMed: 27667365] 
50. Fang Z et al. Single-Cell Heterogeneity Analysis and CRISPR Screen Identify Key β-Cell-Specific 
Disease Genes. Cell Rep 26, 3132–3144.e7 (2019). [PubMed: 30865899] 
51. Agarwal D et al. A single-cell atlas of the human substantia nigra reveals cell-specific pathways 
associated with neurological disorders. Nat Commun 11, 4183 (2020). [PubMed: 32826893] 
52. Rasouli J et al. A distinct GM-CSF+ T helper cell subset requires T-bet to adopt a TH1 phenotype 
and promote neuroinflammation. Sci Immunol 5, (2020).
53. Park J-E et al. A cell atlas of human thymic development defines T cell repertoire formation. 
Science 367, (2020).
54. Mende N et al. Quantitative and molecular differences distinguish adult human 
medullary and extramedullary haematopoietic stem and progenitor cell landscapes. (2020) 
doi:10.1101/2020.01.26.919753.
55. Setty M et al. Characterization of cell fate probabilities in single-cell data with Palantir. Nat 
Biotechnol 37, 451–460 (2019). [PubMed: 30899105] 
56. Popescu D-M et al. Decoding human fetal liver haematopoiesis. Nature 574, 365–371 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31597962] 
57. Vento-Tormo R et al. Single-cell reconstruction of the early maternal-fetal interface in humans. 
Nature 563, 347–353 (2018). [PubMed: 30429548] 
58. Ramachandran P et al. Resolving the fibrotic niche of human liver cirrhosis at single-cell level. 
Nature 575, 512–518 (2019). [PubMed: 31597160] 
Theodoris et al.
Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

59. Kinchen J et al. Structural Remodeling of the Human Colonic Mesenchyme in Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease. Cell 175, 372–386.e17 (2018). [PubMed: 30270042] 
60. James KR et al. Distinct microbial and immune niches of the human colon. Nat Immunol 21, 
343–353 (2020). [PubMed: 32066951] 
61. Zhou L et al. Single-Cell RNA-Seq Analysis Uncovers Distinct Functional Human NKT Cell 
Sub-Populations in Peripheral Blood. Front Cell Dev Biol 8, 384 (2020). [PubMed: 32528956] 
62. Liao J et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing of human kidney. Sci Data 7, 4 (2020). [PubMed: 
31896769] 
63. Jäkel S et al. Altered human oligodendrocyte heterogeneity in multiple sclerosis. Nature 566, 
543–547 (2019). [PubMed: 30747918] 
64. Merrick D et al. Identification of a mesenchymal progenitor cell hierarchy in adipose tissue. 
Science 364, (2019).
65. Habermann AC et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals profibrotic roles of distinct epithelial and 
mesenchymal lineages in pulmonary fibrosis. Sci Adv 6, eaba1972 (2020). [PubMed: 32832598] 
66. Rosa FF et al. Direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into antigen-presenting dendritic cells. Sci 
Immunol 3, (2018).
67. Stewart BJ et al. Spatiotemporal immune zonation of the human kidney. Science 365, 1461–1466 
(2019). [PubMed: 31604275] 
68. MacParland SA et al. Single cell RNA sequencing of human liver reveals distinct intrahepatic 
macrophage populations. Nat Commun 9, 4383 (2018). [PubMed: 30348985] 
69. Welch J et al. Integrative inference of brain cell similarities and differences from single-cell 
genomics. (2018) doi:10.1101/459891.
70. Ledergor G et al. Single cell dissection of plasma cell heterogeneity in symptomatic and 
asymptomatic myeloma. Nat Med 24, 1867–1876 (2018). [PubMed: 30523328] 
71. Lukowski SW et al. A single-cell transcriptome atlas of the adult human retina. EMBO J 38, 
e100811 (2019). [PubMed: 31436334] 
72. Kang HM et al. Multiplexed droplet single-cell RNA-sequencing using natural genetic variation. 
Nat Biotechnol 36, 89–94 (2018). [PubMed: 29227470] 
73. Zirkel A et al. HMGB2 Loss upon Senescence Entry Disrupts Genomic Organization and Induces 
CTCF Clustering across Cell Types. Mol Cell 70, 730–744.e6 (2018). [PubMed: 29706538] 
74. Goudot C et al. Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Controls Monocyte Differentiation into Dendritic 
Cells versus Macrophages. Immunity 47, 582–596.e6 (2017). [PubMed: 28930664] 
75. McCauley KB et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomic Profiling of Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived 
SCGB3A2+ Airway Epithelium. Stem Cell Reports 10, 1579–1595 (2018). [PubMed: 29657097] 
76. Das R et al. Early B cell changes predict autoimmunity following combination immune checkpoint 
blockade. J Clin Invest 128, 715–720 (2018). [PubMed: 29309048] 
77. Kini Bailur J et al. Changes in bone marrow innate lymphoid cell subsets in monoclonal 
gammopathy: target for IMiD therapy. Blood Adv 1, 2343–2347 (2017). [PubMed: 29296884] 
78. Patil VS et al. Precursors of human CD4+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes identified by single-cell 
transcriptome analysis. Sci Immunol 3, (2018).
79. Wang C et al. Expansion of hedgehog disrupts mesenchymal identity and induces emphysema 
phenotype. J Clin Invest 128, 4343–4358 (2018). [PubMed: 29999500] 
80. Hermann BP et al. The Mammalian Spermatogenesis Single-Cell Transcriptome, from 
Spermatogonial Stem Cells to Spermatids. Cell Rep 25, 1650–1667.e8 (2018). [PubMed: 
30404016] 
81. Menon R et al. Single-cell analysis of progenitor cell dynamics and lineage specification in the 
human fetal kidney. Development 145, (2018).
82. Czerniecki SM et al. High-Throughput Screening Enhances Kidney Organoid Differentiation from 
Human Pluripotent Stem Cells and Enables Automated Multidimensional Phenotyping. Cell Stem 
Cell 22, 929–940.e4 (2018). [PubMed: 29779890] 
83. Papa L et al. Ex vivo human HSC expansion requires coordination of cellular reprogramming 
with mitochondrial remodeling and p53 activation. Blood Adv 2, 2766–2779 (2018). [PubMed: 
30348672] 
Theodoris et al.
Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

84. Schulthess J et al. The Short Chain Fatty Acid Butyrate Imprints an Antimicrobial Program in 
Macrophages. Immunity 50, 432–445.e7 (2019). [PubMed: 30683619] 
85. Guo J et al. The adult human testis transcriptional cell atlas. Cell Res 28, 1141–1157 (2018). 
[PubMed: 30315278] 
86. Karow M et al. Direct pericyte-to-neuron reprogramming via unfolding of a neural stem cell-like 
program. Nat Neurosci 21, 932–940 (2018). [PubMed: 29915193] 
87. Xin Y et al. Pseudotime Ordering of Single Human β-Cells Reveals States of Insulin Production 
and Unfolded Protein Response. Diabetes 67, 1783–1794 (2018). [PubMed: 29950394] 
88. Phipson B et al. Evaluation of variability in human kidney organoids. Nat Methods 16, 79–87 
(2019). [PubMed: 30573816] 
89. Balan S et al. Large-Scale Human Dendritic Cell Differentiation Revealing Notch-Dependent 
Lineage Bifurcation and Heterogeneity. Cell Rep 24, 1902–1915.e6 (2018). [PubMed: 30110645] 
90. Milpied P et al. Human germinal center transcriptional programs are de-synchronized in B cell 
lymphoma. Nat Immunol 19, 1013–1024 (2018). [PubMed: 30104629] 
91. Parikh K et al. Colonic epithelial cell diversity in health and inflammatory bowel disease. Nature 
567, 49–55 (2019). [PubMed: 30814735] 
92. Habiel DM et al. CCR10+ epithelial cells from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis lungs drive 
remodeling. JCI Insight 3, (2018).
93. Paik DT et al. Large-Scale Single-Cell RNA-Seq Reveals Molecular Signatures of Heterogeneous 
Populations of Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Endothelial Cells. Circ Res 123, 
443–450 (2018). [PubMed: 29986945] 
94. Martin JC et al. Single-Cell Analysis of Crohn’s Disease Lesions Identifies a Pathogenic Cellular 
Module Associated with Resistance to Anti-TNF Therapy. Cell 178, 1493–1508.e20 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31474370] 
95. Zheng Y et al. A human circulating immune cell landscape in aging and COVID-19. Protein Cell 
11, 740–770 (2020). [PubMed: 32780218] 
96. Hochane M et al. Single-cell transcriptomics reveals gene expression dynamics of human fetal 
kidney development. PLoS Biol 17, e3000152 (2019). [PubMed: 30789893] 
97. Sohni A et al. The Neonatal and Adult Human Testis Defined at the Single-Cell Level. Cell Rep 
26, 1501–1517.e4 (2019). [PubMed: 30726734] 
98. Tran T et al. In Vivo Developmental Trajectories of Human Podocyte Inform In Vitro 
Differentiation of Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Podocytes. Dev Cell 50, 102–116.e6 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31265809] 
99. Wang Y et al. Single-cell transcriptome analysis reveals differential nutrient absorption functions in 
human intestine. J Exp Med 217, (2020).
100. Vieira Braga FA et al. A cellular census of human lungs identifies novel cell states in health and in 
asthma. Nat Med 25, 1153–1163 (2019). [PubMed: 31209336] 
101. Guo J et al. The Dynamic Transcriptional Cell Atlas of Testis Development during Human 
Puberty. Cell Stem Cell 26, 262–276.e4 (2020). [PubMed: 31928944] 
102. Voigt AP et al. Single-cell transcriptomics of the human retinal pigment epithelium and choroid 
in health and macular degeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116, 24100–24107 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31712411] 
103. Menon M et al. Single-cell transcriptomic atlas of the human retina identifies cell types associated 
with age-related macular degeneration. Nat Commun 10, 4902 (2019). [PubMed: 31653841] 
104. Wilk AJ et al. A single-cell atlas of the peripheral immune response in patients with severe 
COVID-19. Nat Med 26, 1070–1076 (2020). [PubMed: 32514174] 
105. Li B et al. Cumulus provides cloud-based data analysis for large-scale single-cell and single-
nucleus RNA-seq. Nat Methods 17, 793–798 (2020). [PubMed: 32719530] 
106. Daniszewski M et al. Single cell RNA sequencing of stem cell-derived retinal ganglion cells. Sci 
Data 5, 180013 (2018). [PubMed: 29437159] 
107. Goveia J et al. An Integrated Gene Expression Landscape Profiling Approach to Identify Lung 
Tumor Endothelial Cell Heterogeneity and Angiogenic Candidates. Cancer Cell 37, 21–36.e13 
(2020). [PubMed: 31935371] 
Theodoris et al.
Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

108. Norelli M et al. Monocyte-derived IL-1 and IL-6 are differentially required for cytokine-release 
syndrome and neurotoxicity due to CAR T cells. Nat Med 24, 739–748 (2018). [PubMed: 
29808007] 
109. Daniszewski M et al. Single-Cell Profiling Identifies Key Pathways Expressed by iPSCs Cultured 
in Different Commercial Media. iScience 7, 30–39 (2018). [PubMed: 30267684] 
110. Miller AJ et al. In Vitro and In Vivo Development of the Human Airway at Single-Cell 
Resolution. Dev Cell 53, 117–128.e6 (2020). [PubMed: 32109386] 
111. Silvin A et al. Elevated Calprotectin and Abnormal Myeloid Cell Subsets Discriminate Severe 
from Mild COVID-19. Cell 182, 1401–1418.e18 (2020). [PubMed: 32810439] 
112. Deprez M et al. A Single-Cell Atlas of the Human Healthy Airways. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 
202, 1636–1645 (2020). [PubMed: 32726565] 
113. Sridhar A et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomic Comparison of Human Fetal Retina, hPSC-Derived 
Retinal Organoids, and Long-Term Retinal Cultures. Cell Rep 30, 1644–1659.e4 (2020). 
[PubMed: 32023475] 
114. Wu H et al. Comparative Analysis and Refinement of Human PSC-Derived Kidney Organoid 
Differentiation with Single-Cell Transcriptomics. Cell Stem Cell 23, 869–881.e8 (2018). 
[PubMed: 30449713] 
115. Vijay J et al. Single-cell analysis of human adipose tissue identifies depot and disease specific cell 
types. Nat Metab 2, 97–109 (2020). [PubMed: 32066997] 
116. Solé-Boldo L et al. Single-cell transcriptomes of the human skin reveal age-related loss of 
fibroblast priming. Commun Biol 3, 188 (2020). [PubMed: 32327715] 
117. Adams TS et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals ectopic and aberrant lung-resident cell populations 
in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Sci Adv 6, eaba1983 (2020). [PubMed: 32832599] 
118. Moreira LM et al. Paracrine signalling by cardiac calcitonin controls atrial fibrogenesis and 
arrhythmia. Nature 587, 460–465 (2020). [PubMed: 33149301] 
119. Ren X et al. COVID-19 immune features revealed by a large-scale single-cell transcriptome atlas. 
Cell 184, 1895–1913.e19 (2021). [PubMed: 33657410] 
120. Bunis DG et al. Single-Cell Mapping of Progressive Fetal-to-Adult Transition in Human Naive T 
Cells. Cell Rep 34, 108573 (2021). [PubMed: 33406429] 
121. Plasschaert LW et al. A single-cell atlas of the airway epithelium reveals the CFTR-rich 
pulmonary ionocyte. Nature 560, 377–381 (2018). [PubMed: 30069046] 
122. Takeda A et al. Single-Cell Survey of Human Lymphatics Unveils Marked Endothelial Cell 
Heterogeneity and Mechanisms of Homing for Neutrophils. Immunity 51, 561–572.e5 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31402260] 
123. Frumm SM et al. A Hierarchy of Proliferative and Migratory Keratinocytes Maintains the 
Tympanic Membrane. Cell Stem Cell 28, 315–330.e5 (2021). [PubMed: 33181078] 
124. Yu Z et al. Single-Cell Transcriptomic Map of the Human and Mouse Bladders. J Am Soc 
Nephrol 30, 2159–2176 (2019). [PubMed: 31462402] 
125. Rubenstein AB et al. Single-cell transcriptional profiles in human skeletal muscle. Sci Rep 10, 
229 (2020). [PubMed: 31937892] 
126. McCracken IR et al. Transcriptional dynamics of pluripotent stem cell-derived endothelial cell 
differentiation revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing. Eur Heart J 41, 1024–1036 (2020). 
[PubMed: 31242503] 
127. Hua P et al. Single-cell analysis of bone marrow-derived CD34+ cells from children with sickle 
cell disease and thalassemia. Blood 134, 2111–2115 (2019). [PubMed: 31697810] 
128. Orozco LD et al. Integration of eQTL and a Single-Cell Atlas in the Human Eye Identifies Causal 
Genes for Age-Related Macular Degeneration. Cell Rep 30, 1246–1259.e6 (2020). [PubMed: 
31995762] 
129. Hurley K et al. Reconstructed Single-Cell Fate Trajectories Define Lineage Plasticity Windows 
during Differentiation of Human PSC-Derived Distal Lung Progenitors. Cell Stem Cell 26, 593–
608.e8 (2020). [PubMed: 32004478] 
130. Schafflick D et al. Integrated single cell analysis of blood and cerebrospinal fluid leukocytes in 
multiple sclerosis. Nat Commun 11, 247 (2020). [PubMed: 31937773] 
Theodoris et al.
Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

131. Su C et al. Single-Cell RNA Sequencing in Multiple Pathologic Types of Renal Cell Carcinoma 
Revealed Novel Potential Tumor-Specific Markers. Front Oncol 11, 719564 (2021). [PubMed: 
34722263] 
132. He J et al. Dissecting human embryonic skeletal stem cell ontogeny by single-cell transcriptomic 
and functional analyses. Cell Res 31, 742–757 (2021). [PubMed: 33473154] 
133. Liao M et al. Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19. 
Nat Med 26, 842–844 (2020). [PubMed: 32398875] 
134. Liu X et al. Reprogramming roadmap reveals route to human induced trophoblast stem cells. 
Nature 586, 101–107 (2020). [PubMed: 32939092] 
135. He S et al. Single-cell transcriptome profiling of an adult human cell atlas of 15 major organs. 
Genome Biol 21, 294 (2020). [PubMed: 33287869] 
136. Wu C-L et al. Single cell transcriptomic analysis of human pluripotent stem cell chondrogenesis. 
Nat Commun 12, 362 (2021). [PubMed: 33441552] 
137. Cowan CS et al. Cell Types of the Human Retina and Its Organoids at Single-Cell Resolution. 
Cell 182, 1623–1640.e34 (2020). [PubMed: 32946783] 
138. Savas P et al. Single-cell profiling of breast cancer T cells reveals a tissue-resident memory subset 
associated with improved prognosis. Nat Med 24, 986–993 (2018). [PubMed: 29942092] 
139. Wang L et al. Single-Cell Map of Diverse Immune Phenotypes in the Metastatic Brain Tumor 
Microenvironment of Non Small Cell Lung Cancer. (2019) doi:10.1101/2019.12.30.890517.
140. Lu Y-C et al. Single-Cell Transcriptome Analysis Reveals Gene Signatures Associated with 
T-cell Persistence Following Adoptive Cell Therapy. Cancer Immunol Res 7, 1824–1836 (2019). 
[PubMed: 31484655] 
141. Wang L et al. The Phenotypes of Proliferating Glioblastoma Cells Reside on a Single Axis of 
Variation. Cancer Discov 9, 1708–1719 (2019). [PubMed: 31554641] 
142. Wang R et al. Adult Human Glioblastomas Harbor Radial Glia-like Cells. Stem Cell Reports 14, 
338–350 (2020). [PubMed: 32004492] 
143. Wang L, Catalan F, Shamardani K, Babikir H & Diaz A Ensemble learning for classifying 
single-cell data and projection across reference atlases. Bioinformatics 36, 3585–3587 (2020). 
[PubMed: 32105316] 
144. Ruffin AT et al. B cell signatures and tertiary lymphoid structures contribute to outcome in head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Nat Commun 12, 3349 (2021). [PubMed: 34099645] 
145. Zhang Q et al. Landscape and Dynamics of Single Immune Cells in Hepatocellular Carcinoma. 
Cell 179, 829–845.e20 (2019). [PubMed: 31675496] 
146. Song Q et al. Dissecting intratumoral myeloid cell plasticity by single cell RNA-seq. Cancer Med 
8, 3072–3085 (2019). [PubMed: 31033233] 
147. Kim N et al. Single-cell RNA sequencing demonstrates the molecular and cellular reprogramming 
of metastatic lung adenocarcinoma. Nat Commun 11, 2285 (2020). [PubMed: 32385277] 
148. Tang-Huau T-L et al. Human in vivo-generated monocyte-derived dendritic cells and 
macrophages cross-present antigens through a vacuolar pathway. Nat Commun 9, 2570 (2018). 
[PubMed: 29967419] 
149. Peng J et al. Single-cell RNA-seq highlights intra-tumoral heterogeneity and malignant 
progression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Cell Res 29, 725–738 (2019). [PubMed: 
31273297] 
150. 10x Genomics Datasets. https://www.10xgenomics.com/resources/datasets?
menu%5Bproducts.name%5D=Single%20Cell%20Gene%20Expression&query=&page=1&conf
igure%5Bfacets%5D%5B0%5D=chemistryVersionAndThroughput&configure%5Bfacets%5D%
5B1%5D=pipeline.version&configure%5BhitsPerPage%5D=500.
151. de Andrade LF et al. Discovery of specialized NK cell populations infiltrating human melanoma 
metastases. JCI Insight 4, (2019).
152. Zhang P et al. Dissecting the Single-Cell Transcriptome Network Underlying Gastric 
Premalignant Lesions and Early Gastric Cancer. Cell Rep 27, 1934–1947.e5 (2019). [PubMed: 
31067475] 
Theodoris et al.
Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

153. Durante MA et al. Single-cell analysis reveals new evolutionary complexity in uveal melanoma. 
Nat Commun 11, 496 (2020). [PubMed: 31980621] 
154. Svensson V, da Veiga Beltrame E & Pachter L A curated database reveals trends in single-cell 
transcriptomics. Database (Oxford) 2020, (2020).
155. Wolf FA, Angerer P & Theis FJ SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis. 
Genome Biol 19, 15 (2018). [PubMed: 29409532] 
156. Xin J et al. High-performance web services for querying gene and variant annotation. Genome 
Biol 17, 91 (2016). [PubMed: 27154141] 
157. Dunning T The t-digest: Efficient estimates of distributions. Software Impacts 7, 100049 (2021).
158. Lhoest Q et al. Datasets: A Community Library for Natural Language Processing. (2021).
159. Wolf T et al. HuggingFace’s Transformers: State-of-the-art Natural Language Processing. (2019).
160. Loshchilov I & Hutter F Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. (2017).
Theodoris et al.
Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1 |. Geneformer architecture and transfer learning strategy.
a, Schematic of transfer learning strategy with initial self-supervised large-scale pretraining, 
copying pretrained weights to models for each fine-tuning task, adding fine-tuning layer, 
and fine-tuning with limited task-specific data towards each downstream task. Through the 
single initial self-supervised large-scale pretraining on a generalizable learning objective, 
the model gains fundamental knowledge of the learning domain that is then democratized 
to a multitude of downstream applications distinct from the pretraining learning objective, 
transferring knowledge to new tasks. b, Tissue representation of Genecorpus-30M. NOS=not 
otherwise specified. c, Pretrained Geneformer architecture. Each single cell transcriptome 
is encoded into a rank value encoding that then proceeds through 6 layers of transformer 
encoder units with parameters: input size of 2048 (fully represents 93% of rank value 
encodings in Geneformer-30M), 256 embedding dimensions, 4 attention heads per layer, 
Theodoris et al.
Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

and feed forward size of 512. Geneformer employs full dense self-attention across the input 
size of 2048. Extractable outputs include contextual gene and cell embeddings, contextual 
attention weights, and contextual predictions.
Theodoris et al.
Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 2 |. Geneformer boosted predictions of gene dosage sensitivity with limited data.
a, ROC curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish dosage-sensitive versus -insensitive 
transcription factors (TFs) using limited data (10,000 cells) compared to alternative 
methods: support vector machine (SVM), random forest (RF), or logistic regression (LR) 
trained on gene ranks (-r) or counts (-c) or non-pretrained attention-based models with the 
same architecture as Geneformer (6 layers (L)) or shallower (4, 3, or 1L) with retained 
depth-to-width aspect ratios. b, Larger and more diverse pretraining corpuses improved 
predictive potential in downstream task of distinguishing dosage-sensitive versus -insensitive 
TFs using the same limited task-specific data (10,000 cells). Diverse corpuses were 
randomly sampled from Genecorpus-30M, whereas non-diverse corpuses were randomly 
sampled from an esophageal dataset45. c, Fine-tuned Geneformer’s contextual dosage 
sensitivity predictions in (i) random cell types, (ii) neurons (including adult), and (iii) 
fetal cerebrum for neurodevelopmental disease genes newly reported by Collins et al. 
2022. Authors reported either high or moderate confidence gene sets with the indicated 
posterior inclusion probability (PIP) scores. d, In silico deletion of genes associated 
with disease driven by cardiomyocyte pathology (cardiomyopathy and structural heart 
disease) had a more deleterious effect on cardiomyocyte embeddings compared to control 
cardiac disease genes expressed in cardiomyocytes but whose pathology occurs in non-
cardiomyocyte cell types (hyperlipidemia). Validation with experimental data from patients 
with cardiomyopathy (see Fig. 6) demonstrated that in silico deletion of genes distinguishing 
the cardiomyopathy state was also predicted to be more deleterious than in silico deletion 
of control genes. (*p<0.05 Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected; points=outliers). e, Contractile 
stress (force per unit area) of cardiac microtissues derived from WT iPSCs, exposed to 
either control treatment or guides promoting CRISPR-mediated knockout of Geneformer-
predicted dosage-sensitive gene TEAD4. (control n=12, TEAD4 n=11; p<0.05 Wilcoxon; 
points=replicates). In (d-e): center line=median, box limits=upper and lower quartiles, 
whiskers=1.5x interquartile range.
Theodoris et al.
Page 41
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 3 |. Geneformer boosted predictions of chromatin dynamics with limited data.
a-b, ROC curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish bivalent vs. (a) non-methylated or 
(b) Lys4-only-methylated genes in 56 conserved loci from Bernstein et al. Cell 2006 using 
limited data (~15K ESCs), compared to alternative methods. c, ROC curve of Geneformer’s 
genome-wide predictions of bivalent vs. Lys4-only-methylated genes after fine-tuning on 
only 56 loci as in (b). d, ROC curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish long- vs. 
short-range TFs using limited data (~38K cells from iPSC to cardiomyocyte differentiation), 
compared to alternative methods. (Alternative methods described in Fig. 2.)
Theodoris et al.
Page 42
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 4 |. Geneformer encoded gene network hierarchy.
a, ROC curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish central versus peripheral genes 
within the N1-dependent gene network using limited data (~30K ECs), compared to 
alternative methods. b, ROC curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish N1 activated 
versus non-target genes using limited data (~30K ECs), compared to alternative methods. c, 
ROC curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish central versus peripheral genes within 
the N1-dependent gene network using increasingly limited data (1K-30K ECs). d, ROC 
curve of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish central versus peripheral genes within the 
N1-dependent gene network using increasingly limited but more relevant data (884 ECs 
from healthy or dilated aortas). AUC was higher than alternative methods trained on larger 
dataset of ~30K ECs (Fig. 3a). e, Pretrained Geneformer attention weights of transcription 
factors indicated that the model learned in a completely self-supervised way the relative 
importance of transcription factors, which were more highly attended than other genes 
in 20% of attention heads (p<0.05, Wilcoxon rank sum, FDR correction) and were more 
attended in earlier layers (p<0.05, Wilcoxon rank sum). (Alternative methods described in 
Fig. 2.)
Theodoris et al.
Page 43
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 5 |. In silico deletion revealed network connections.
a, In silico deletion of GATA4 was significantly more deleterious to previously reported 
GATA4 direct targets33 than to housekeeping genes, previously reported NOTCH1 targets4, 
previously reported NKX2–5 targets46, or GATA4 indirect targets33 (*p<0.05 Wilcoxon, 
FDR-corrected; center line=median, box limits=upper and lower quartiles, whiskers=1.5x 
interquartile range, points=outliers). b, In silico deletion of GATA4 or TBX5 alone was 
significantly more deleterious to previously reported GATA4/TBX5 co-bound targets33 than 
to housekeeping genes; in silico deletion of the combination of GATA4 and TBX5 was even 
more deleterious to co-bound targets, significantly more than to housekeeping genes and 
significantly more than the sum of the effect of GATA4 or TBX5 alone on co-bound targets 
(*p<0.05 Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected).
Theodoris et al.
Page 44
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 6 |. In silico treatment revealed candidate therapeutic targets.
a, Fine-tuning Geneformer to distinguish cardiomyocytes from non-failing hearts or hearts 
affected by hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy defines the embedding position of 
each cell state. Then, disease modeling (left) can be performed by in silico deleting or 
activating random genes within non-failing cardiomyocytes to define the random distribution 
(gray cloud) and thereby identify genes whose in silico deletion or activation shifts the 
embedding significantly towards either the hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy state. 
The reverse approach is taken for in silico treatment analysis (center and right). b, Out-
of-sample predictions of Geneformer fine-tuned to distinguish cardiomyocytes from non-
failing hearts or hearts affected by hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy. Accuracy: 90%, 
precision: 82%, recall 87%. (Training data: non-failing n=9, hypertrophic n=11, dilated 
n=9, total 93,589 cells; out-of-sample data: non-failing n=4, hypertrophic n=4, dilated n=2, 
total 39,006 cells). c, Hierarchical clustering of fine-tuned Geneformer cardiomyocyte cell 
embeddings. d, Overlap of genes whose in silico deletion in cardiomyocytes from non-
failing hearts significantly shifted the fine-tuned Geneformer cell embeddings towards the 
Theodoris et al.
Page 45
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

hypertrophic or dilated cardiomyopathy states and Gene Ontology terms enriched for each 
state. e, Distribution of mean embedding shift in response to in silico deletion of candidate 
therapeutic targets in cardiomyocytes from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (n=104 genes). f, 
Contractile force of cardiac microtissues derived from WT iPSCs or iPSCs with a TTN 
truncating mutation modeling dilated cardiomyopathy (WT n=11, TTN+/− n=12, *p<0.05 
Wilcoxon). g, Contractile stress (force per unit area) of cardiac microtissues derived from 
TTN+/− iPSCs exposed to either control treatment or guides promoting CRISPR-mediated 
knockout of Geneformer-predicted therapeutic targets. (TTN+/− +control treatment n=22, 
TTN+/− +CRISPR guides targeting knockout of PLN n=22, GSN n=7, ESRRG n=9, 
or HMGB1 n=11; p<0.05 Wilcoxon, FDR-corrected). In (f-g): center line=median, box 
limits=upper and lower quartiles, whiskers=1.5x interquartile range, points=experimental 
replicates.
Theodoris et al.
Page 46
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2024 March 19.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript