Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Analysis of DIA proteomics data using
MSFragger-DIA and FragPipe computational
platform
Fengchao Yu
1
, Guo Ci Teo
1, Andy T. Kong1,2, Klemens Fröhlich
3,
Ginny Xiaohe Li1, Vadim Demichev4,5 & Alexey I. Nesvizhskii
1,2
Liquid chromatography (LC) coupled with data-independent acquisition (DIA)
mass spectrometry (MS) has been increasingly used in quantitative proteomics
studies. Here, we present a fast and sensitive approach for direct peptide
identiﬁcation from DIA data, MSFragger-DIA, which leverages the unmatched
speed of the fragment ion indexing-based search engine MSFragger. Different
from most existing methods, MSFragger-DIA conducts a database search of
the DIA tandem mass (MS/MS) spectra prior to spectral feature detection and
peak tracing across the LC dimension. To streamline the analysis of DIA data
and enable easy reproducibility, we integrate MSFragger-DIA into the FragPipe
computational platform for seamless support of peptide identiﬁcation and
spectral library building from DIA, data-dependent acquisition (DDA), or both
data types combined. We compare MSFragger-DIA with other DIA tools, such
as DIA-Umpire based workﬂow in FragPipe, Spectronaut, DIA-NN library-free,
and MaxDIA. We demonstrate the fast, sensitive, and accurate performance of
MSFragger-DIA across a variety of sample types and data acquisition schemes,
including single-cell proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and large-scale tumor
proteome proﬁling studies.
Liquid chromatography (LC) coupled to data-independent acquisition
(DIA) mass spectrometry (MS) strategy has emerged as a widely used
technological platform for quantitative protein proﬁling, especially in
large-scale studies1,2. Compared to the data-dependent acquisition
(DDA) MS strategy, in which a selected peptide ion population is iso-
lated and subjected to tandem MS (MS/MS) fragmentation, the frag-
ment ion information in DIA is acquired on all peptide ions within a
certain window of m/z values, sequentially covering the entire relevant
range (e.g., 400–1200 Da). This helps alleviate the stochastic nature of
peptide identiﬁcation in DDA-based strategies, and DIA has been
shown to produce more complete (i.e., less missing values) peptide
and protein quantiﬁcation matrices across multiple samples2. DIA has
been successfully used in a variety of proteomics applications,
including
post-translational
modiﬁcation
(PTM)
analysis3–6,
protein–protein interaction7,8, immunopeptidomics9–11, and herit-
ability analysis12.
MS data used as part of a DIA analysisworkﬂowcan be categorized
into primary and auxiliary data. Auxiliary MS data is used solely to build
a spectral library for subsequent targeted extraction of quantiﬁcation
for each peptide ion in the library from the primary DIA data. Examples
of such auxiliary, “library-only” MS data include data acquired from
pooled samples (e.g., all individual samples proﬁled in the study)
fractionated using ofﬂine LC and analyzed using DDA2, fractionated in
the gas phase and analyzed using narrow-window DIA (GPF-DIA)13,14.
For low-input proteomics, including single-cell proteomics, library-
only data can be acquired in DDA or DIA mode from samples prepared
from higher amounts of starting material15–17. The primary DIA data are
DIA runs acquired on individual study samples, typically without
Received: 7 November 2022
Accepted: 28 June 2023
Check for updates
1Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 2Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 3Proteomics Core Facility, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. 4Department of Biochemistry, Charité – Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 5Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
e-mail: yufe@umich.edu; nesvi@med.umich.edu
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

fractionation, although the use of fractionation has been explored18.
The primary DIA data are used for extracting peptide ion quantiﬁca-
tion, but they may also be used for building the spectral library, either
alone or in combination with auxiliary DDA or DIA data19.
The computational analysis of DIA data has two major compo-
nents: (1) creation of the target spectral library, a collection of peptide
ions that are targets for the subsequent quantiﬁcation step, along with
their LC retention times (RT), as well as m/z values and intensities of
the corresponding fragment ions; (2) extraction of quantiﬁcation from
the primary DIA data for all peptide ions in the target spectral library.
Quantiﬁcation is performed using targeted extraction tools, such as
Skyline20, OpenSWATH21, EncyclopeDIA13, Spectronaut22, and DIA-NN23,
with additional intensity data normalization and peptide-to-protein
rollup24,25. The targeted quantiﬁcation step depends on the quality of
the input spectral library26. An ideal library would be as experiment
speciﬁc as possible, that is, it would be complete (containing all pep-
tide ions thatare likely to be detectable in the analyzed samples) and as
speciﬁc (i.e., it would not contain unrelated peptides) as possible27,28.
Library information, such as the RT and fragment ion intensities,
should match the actual DIA data being analyzed well. Thus, building
spectral libraries via the direct identiﬁcation of peptides from primary
DIA data19 has emerged as a widely used computational data analysis
strategy.
Direct identiﬁcation of peptides from DIA data was ﬁrst proposed
and implemented in DIA-Umpire19, along with the concept of building
combined (hybrid) spectral libraries from primary DIA and auxiliary
(e.g., DDA) data. The “spectrum-centric” identiﬁcation approach of
DIA-Umpire is based on feature detection in MS1 and MS/MS data,
followed by grouping precursor peptide and fragment ion signals
exhibiting similar LC elution proﬁle to generate the so-called pseudo-
MS/MS spectra. These pseudo-MS/MS spectra can be searched using
tools developed for conventional DDA data, such as MSFragger29, X!
Tandem30, and Comet31, followed by peptide-spectrum match (PSM)
validation with PeptideProphet32 or Percolator33, protein inference
with ProteinProphet34, and target-decoy based false discovery (FDR)
ﬁltering35. The DIA-Umpire strategy has been increasingly adopted in
other tools and pipelines, including Spectronaut’s directDIA. A draw-
back of this strategy is that the untargeted signal extraction of the
precursor and fragment ion peak curves from DIA MS1 and MS/MS
scans can be time-consuming. The sensitivity of the peptide identiﬁ-
cation process may also be suboptimal compared to targeted peptide
detection methods. Other strategies for the direct identiﬁcation of
peptides from DIA data have also emerged, often taking the peptide-
centric perspective36 to the same problem, as exempliﬁed by tools
such as PECAN37 (Walnut in EncyclopeDIA13). Direct search of DIA MS/
MS spectra against repository-wide spectral libraries or sequence
databases has also been explored38,39. The ability to predict proteome-
wide spectral libraries using deep learning40–46, followed by the crea-
tion of more reﬁned, experiment-speciﬁc libraries for targeted
extraction, has also been shown to be very useful47, and formed the
basis for the in silico library-based (also known as “library-free”) mode
of DIA-NN23,48, EncyclopeDIA13, and MaxDIA49. However, only peptides
with common modiﬁcations (such as oxidation, acetylation, and
phosphorylation) can typically be predicted using the current in silico
spectral library software. Furthermore, workﬂows based on proteome-
wide spectral library prediction suffer from additional limitations, such
as long prediction times or requirements for additional graphics pro-
cessing units (GPUs).
We develop a new approach for direct peptide identiﬁcation from
DIA data, leveraging the unmatched search speed of fragment ion
indexing29. It is based on conducting a database search of DIA MS/MS
spectra prior to feature detection or peak tracing, blurring the differ-
ence between the analysis of DIA and DDA MS/MS spectra. It is
implemented as MSFragger-DIA, a separate module in the MSFragger
search engine29,50,51, and publicly available since MSFragger version 3.1
(released on September 30, 2020). Using MSFragger software, one can
identify peptides from either DDA or DIA data, or from both data types
combined, allowing the seamless generation of a hybrid spectral
library for the most sensitive analysis. We compare MSFragger-DIA
with other tools, such as DIA-Umpire based workﬂow in FragPipe,
Spectronaut, DIA-NN library-free, and MaxDIA in MaxQuant. We
demonstrate the fast, sensitive, precise, and accurate performance of
MSFragger-DIA across a variety of sample types and acquisition
schemes, including single-cell proteomics and phosphoproteomics
applications. To lower the barrier of analyzing DIA data, we fully
integrate MSFragger-DIA into the FragPipe computational platform
(https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/). In tandem with the spectral library
building module EasyPQP48 and the quantiﬁcation tool DIA-NN,
MSFragger-DIA in FragPipe enables the complete analysis of DIA data,
from peptide identiﬁcation to peptide and protein quantiﬁcation.
Results
MSFragger-DIA algorithm
An overview of the algorithm and its implementation within the
FragPipe computational platform is shown in Fig. 1. MSFragger-DIA
starts with a direct search of MS/MS spectra against the entire protein
sequence database, before any peak tracing or feature detection pro-
cedures (Fig. 1a). MSFragger-DIA starts with deisotoping50 and
extraction of the isolation window information from the spectra.
Because no precursor charge information is available for DIA MS/MS
spectra, it enumerates all predeﬁned charge states to calculate the
lower and upper precursor mass bounds for each spectrum. Each
spectrum is then searched against all database peptides within the
precursor mass range. To calibrate fragment masses, MSFragger-DIA
performs two searches: a fast calibration search and a full search. The
ﬁrst, more restricted search (which considers peptides with precursor
charge states 2 and 3 only) is used to select high-quality spectra to
build a mass error proﬁle and perform mass calibration, as described
previously51. MSFragger-DIA then performs a full search using the
calibrated data. The outcome of this step is a list of peptide candidates
(by default, 128 best-scoring peptides per spectrum in wide-window
DIA data; 32 in narrow-window GPF-DIA data), which is then further
reﬁned as described below.
In the second step, MSFragger-DIA traces peaks, extracts ion
chromatograms, and detects features of all candidate peptides for
each spectrum determined as described above. This can be done
quickly using the MS1 and MS/MS spectral indexing technology that we
described previously52. For each peptide, MSFragger-DIA reﬁnes the
list of matched fragments thatcan contribute to the score. The apex LC
retention times of the fragments and precursor features are collected,
and the median retention time is calculated. Fragments with retention
times that differ from the median by more than a certain value (0.1 min
by default) are ﬁltered out. If a precursor ion is detected in the MS1
data and has an apex retention time outside the allowable range, the
PSM is ﬁltered out. Note that if no precursor ion feature is detected in
the MS1 spectrum, MSFragger-DIA still retains the corresponding PSM,
as there are cases where fragment ion signals exist despite missing
(undetectable) precursor features. MSFragger-DIA also ﬁlters out PSMs
with aberrant isotope distributions53. After peak tracing and peptide
and fragment ﬁltering, MSFragger-DIA normalizes and rescores pep-
tide matches using hyperscore29,30.
Since each MS/MS spectrum is matched against candidate pep-
tides independently, the same experimental peaks may match and
contribute to the score of multiple different peptides in the candidate
peptide list; a greedy method is used to prevent this from happening
(Fig. 1b). Given a spectrum and a list of candidate peptides, MSFragger-
DIA selects the highest-scoring peptide and removes matched frag-
ment peaks from the spectrum. Then, it normalizes the remaining
peaks and rescores the peptides on the candidate list to obtain the
second highest scoring PSM. The matched peaks are again removed,
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
2

peptides are rescored, and the process continues until there are fewer
than four peaks left in the spectrum, or no peptide candidates
remained. Finally, MSFragger-DIA generates output ﬁles compatible
with PeptideProphet and Percolator for rescoring and FDR estimation.
MSFragger-DIA has been fully integrated into FragPipe, allowing
one-stop DIA data analysis (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. 1). In
FragPipe, the output of MSFragger-DIA and MSFragger can be pro-
cessed by MSBooster54 to leverage additional scores using deep-
learning prediction. The output from MSBooster is fed to Percolator
for additional rescoring and posterior error probability calculation,
followed by ProteinProphet34 for protein inference, Philosopher55 for
false discovery rate (FDR) ﬁltering, and spectral library building with
EasyPQP48. With FragPipe, users can build the libraries from DDA (with
MSFragger), DIA (with MSFragger-DIA), or all data combined (hybrid
library). The resulting library is then used to extract peptide ion
quantiﬁcation from the primary DIA data using DIA-NN, which is
available as a part of FragPipe.
Evaluating sensitivity and false discovery rates (FDR) using a
benchmark dataset
To evaluate the sensitivity and false discovery rates of the entire
workﬂow, we used the dataset from Fröhlich et al.56, consisting of four
conditions: “Lymphnode”, “1–25”, “1–12”, and “1–06”. The samples used
in the ﬁrst condition contained peptides from Homo sapiens only. The
other three conditions have a mixture of peptides from H. sapiens and
Escherichia coli. E. coli to H. sapiens ratios in “1–25”, “1–12”, and “1–06”
are 1 to 25, 1 to 12, and 1 to 6, respectively. Four conditions have the
same H. sapiens amount. There are 92 wide-window DIA runs (primary
DIA runs), and auxiliary MS ﬁles used for spectral library building: six
narrow-window GPF-DIA runs, and 20 DDA runs. We refer to this as
“benchmark” dataset. We performed two MSFragger-DIA based ana-
lyses (Fig. 2): (1) building the spectral library using the primary DIA data
(FP-MSF workﬂow, see Methods); (2) building the spectral library from
all available data, that is, also including the GPF-DIA and DDA data (FP-
MSF hybrid workﬂow, see Methods). DIA-NN, which is available as part
of FragPipe, was used to quantify the precursors from the DIA runs
using these spectral libraries. The Spectronaut 14, 17, and DIA-NN
library-free results were used for comparison. The number of E. coli
precursors detected in the “Lymphnode” condition (that contained H.
sapiens proteins only) was used to estimate the false discover pro-
portion (FDP, a.k.a. actual FDR or empirical FDR, see Methods).
We also investigated replacing, when performing targeted quan-
tiﬁcation in DIA-NN, empirically observed fragments and their inten-
sities in the FragPipe/MSFragger-DIA generated spectral libraries with
the in silico predicted values. Note that the list of peptide ions included
in the library and their retention time values remained unchanged.
Replacing the experimental fragment peaks with the predicted peaks
resulted in a lower FDP (Supplementary Data 2). The rationale behind
this approach is that, in the case of low-abundance peptides, the
experimental fragment peaks frequently appear incomplete, with
some peptides exhibiting only a few fragment peaks. Also, low-quality
peptides may contain interfering peaks, leading to an increased like-
lihood of false matches. The incompleteness and interference make it
challenging for the target-decoy modeling to accurately distinguish
true matches from false ones. By replacing the experimental fragment
peaks with the in silico predicted peaks, we address this issue of
incompleteness, thus improving the model’s performance. This option
was enabled for all analyses reported in this work.
Figure 2a presents the upset plot illustrating the quantiﬁcation of
precursors obtained from DIA runs. There is a substantial degree of
overlap between the precursors quantiﬁed by both the FP-MSF and
other workﬂows. Although Spectronaut 17 reported the highest num-
ber of precursors, it raised concerns by detecting many unique pre-
cursors that were not detected by any other tools, potentially leading
a
b
top PSMs
for each scan
peptide A
peptide B
peptide C
...
peptide D
peptide B
peptide C
...
peptide D
peptide D
...
peptide B
pepXML/pin
files
PeptideProphet/
Percolator
validation
repeat for each scan
database search
(keep top-N hits)
filter,
rescore
detect
features
select
top PSM
DDA
DIA
ProteinProphet,
1% peptide 
and protein FDR
EasyPQP
spectral
library
DIA-NN for Quant
(DIA mode)
(DDA mode)
Percolator
Percolator
c
peptide A
peptide B
peptide C
...
peptide D
Fig. 1 | Overview of MSFragger-DIA in FragPipe. a DIA spectra are searched by
MSFragger-DIA directly using precursor candidates determined from the isolation
window. MSFragger-DIA builds MS1 and MS/MS spectral indexes, which are then
used to detect extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) features for all fragment and
precursor peaks in a peptide-spectrum match (PSM). Noisy fragment peaks are
ﬁltered out based on the XIC, PSMs are rescored, and only the top scoring PSM
from each feature is kept. b Within each DIA MS/MS scan, a greedy method is used
to remove matched peaks and iteratively rescore peptide candidates from the top-
N list. Finally, MSFragger-DIA generates pepXML and pin ﬁles for PeptideProphet
and Percolator to estimate the peptide probability in FragPipe. c Hybrid (combined
DIA and DDA) data analysis workﬂow in FragPipe (“FP-MSF hybrid” in the main text).
Both DDA and DIA data are used to build a combined spectral library. This spectral
library is used to quantify peptides from the DIA data using DIA-NN.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
3

to false positives. To assess false discovery rates, we analyzed the
number of E. coli precursors present in the “Lymphnode” condition, as
depicted in Fig. 2b. The E. coli box plots show that all tools control the
false positives well (all E. coli peptide detections in the “Lymphnode”
condition are assumed to be false), with slightly higher number of false
identiﬁcations observed for Spectronaut 14 and 17 (Supplementary
Data 2). The box plots from the other three conditions, for both H.
sapiens and E. coli precursors, show that the MSFragger-DIA based
workﬂows and DIA-NN library-free resulted in comparable number of
precursors. Including DDA and GPF-DIA data in the spectral library
building step (FP-MSF hybrid workﬂow) provided an additional small
boost in the number of quantiﬁed precursors.
Quantiﬁcation precision and accuracy evaluation
We used the same “benchmark” dataset to evaluate the precision and
accuracy of DIA data quantiﬁcation. Since the 23 runs in the same
condition have the same amount of E. coli spike-in peptides, we cal-
culated the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) for each E. coli precursors in
the “1–06” condition. We compared our tools with Spectronaut 14, 17,
and DIA-NN library-free pipelines. Figure 2c shows the violin plot of the
CV distribution, with box plots illustrating the quartiles and median of
the CVs. The plots reveal that, except for Spectronaut 17, the tools
have comparable quantiﬁcation precision. Spectronaut 17 exhibits
the noticeably high CVs, indicating the lowest precision among
all tools.
Spectronaut 17
DIA-NN lib-free
FP-MSF
a
d
c
b
Escherichia coli (strain K12)
Homo sapiens
0
3000
6000
9000
0
20000
40000
60000
FP−MSF hybrid
FP−MSF
DIA−NN lib−free
Spectronaut 17
Spectronaut 14
Precursors
Condition
1−06
1−12
1−25
Lymphnode
Fig. 2 | Performance assessment of sensitivity, false discovery rate, precision,
and accuracy using a benchmark dataset. Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle. a Upset plot illustrating the quantiﬁed precursors. The precursors are
from all four conditions of both H. sapiens and E. coli. b Box plots representing the
counts of quantiﬁed precursors under four distinct conditions, each with a unique
color. There are 4 independent conditions. Each condition consists of 23 single-
shot DIA runs from 23 biological independent samples. The “Lymphnode” condi-
tion comprises samples from H. sapiens, while the remaining three conditions
include both H. sapiens and E. coli spike-in samples. H. sapiens and E. coli precursors
are displayed in separate panels. E. coli precursors in the “Lymphnode” condition
are deemed false identiﬁcations. The box in each box plot captures the interquartile
range (IQR), with the bottom and top edges representing the ﬁrst (Q1) and third
quartiles (Q3) respectively. The median (Q2) is marked by a horizontal line within
the box. The whiskers extend to the minima and maxima within 1.5 times the IQR
below Q1 or above Q3. Outliers, signiﬁed by individual dots, fall outside these
bounds. c Violin plots showcasing the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) based on E. coli
precursors from the “1–06” condition. There are 23 replicates. Each violin plot
contains an embedded box plot. The box plots’ edges, median, and whiskers are
same as the previous ones. d Scatter plots depicting the relationship between
protein log2 ratio and intensity, using proteins from the “1–06” (condition A) and
“1–25” (condition B) conditions to compute log-ratios. There are 2 conditions. Each
condition contains 23 replicates. E. coli proteins are colored orange, while H.
sapiens proteins appear in green. Horizontal dashed lines indicate true log-ratios,
while adjacent box plots display the marginal distribution of log-ratios on the right
side of each scatter plot. The box plots’ edges, median, and whiskersare same asthe
previous ones.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
4

We further assessed the quantiﬁcation accuracy using proteins
from the “1–06” and “1–25” conditions. Between these conditions, the
H. sapiens proteins maintain the same quantity, while the E. coli pro-
teins have a 25 to 6 ratio. Figure 2d and Supplementary Fig. 2 show
scatter plots of the log-ratios versus the intensities in both protein and
precursor levels. Green dots represent H. sapiens proteins and orange
dots indicate E. coli proteins. The horizontal dashed lines signify the
true log-ratios, while the curved dashed lines indicate the trend of the
dots. Box plots on the right of each scatter plot demonstrate the
marginal distribution of the log-ratios. The ﬁgures reveal that FP-MSF,
FP-MSF hybrid, and DIA-NN library-free have comparable accuracy.
However, Spectronaut 14 and 17 exhibit lower quantiﬁcation accuracy
due to noisier scatter plots and a higher number of outliers. This
analysis demonstrates that MSFragger-DIA in conjunction with Frag-
Pipe offers high precision and accuracy in quantifying DIA data, while
also maintaining low false discovery rates and comparable sensitivity
among state-of-the-art tools.
Staggered-windows DIA with gas phase fractionation (GPF)
We then tested the ability of MSFragger-DIA to identify peptides from
DIA data acquired using the “staggered” windows approach57,58, with
additional narrow-window GPF-DIA data acquired for spectral library
building. The ﬁrst dataset, taken from Searle et al.13, contains six
narrow -window GPF-DIA runs plus three wide-window, single-
injection DIA runs (the primary DIA runs for quantiﬁcation) from a
HeLa lysate, 130 min gradient time. The isolation windows of the GPF-
DIA and single-injection DIA runs are 4 Th and 24 Th, respectively.
After demultiplexing the staggered windows using ProteoWizard59, the
effective isolation windows were halved. We refer to this dataset as
“2018-HeLa”. The second, similar dataset was taken from Searle et al.60
and contains six GPF-DIA runs, and four single-injection DIA runs of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae lysate,115 min gradient time. The isolation
windows are 4 Th and 8 Th, respectively, with effective widths halved
after demultiplexing. We refer to this dataset as “2020-Yeast”. More
information regarding these data can be found in Supplemen-
tary Data 1.
We used the FP-MSF workﬂow to analyze these two datasets (in
each dataset, GPF-DIA and primary DIA data were processed together
using MSFragger-DIA). We also compared the results with that from
the original publication60, and with the results of running Spectronaut
17, EncyclopeDIA, and DIA-NN library-free pipelines (see Methods).
Figure 3a and Supplementary Fig. 3a show the numbers of quantiﬁed
peptides from single-injection DIA runs. Although the 2018-HeLa
dataset was published earlier13, Searle et al.60 re-analyzed the same
dataset using an optimized spectral library. Thus, we included the
results from Searle et al.60 in the Figure (labeled “Searle et al. 2020”).
Bar heights indicate the average number of quantiﬁed peptides, and
circles show the number of quantiﬁed peptides in each individual run.
Spectronaut 17 demonstrated the highest sensitivity among the com-
pared tools. To examine if those quantiﬁed peptides are true and have
high quality, wegenerated box plots to show the distributions of CVs in
Fig. 3b and Supplementary Fig. 3b. The blue ones are from the peptides
overlapped among all tools, and the brown ones are the unique pep-
tides from a speciﬁc tool. No CVs data were available from Searle
et al.60. Even though Spectronaut 17 quantiﬁed more peptides, the
quantiﬁcation precision is much lower (high CVs) compared to the
peptides from other tools. EncyclopeDIA has the second highest CVs
for its unique peptides. DIA-NN library-free and FP-MSF (which also
uses DIA-NN, but for quantiﬁcation only using the FP-MSF generated
library) yielded similarly low CVs. Overall, this analysis shows that
MSFragger-DIA works well with GPF-DIA and staggered window DIA
data, exhibiting both good precision and sensitivity.
Low-input and single-cell proteomics data
We then used a dataset published by Siyal et al.16 to demonstrate the
performance of MSFragger-DIA in analyzing low-input cell data. We
selected two experiments containing 0.75 ng and 7.5 ng of starting
material. Each experiment was performed in three replicates. A
detailed list of these ﬁles is provided in Supplementary Data 1. We refer
to this dataset as “low-input-cell”. The authors also generated DIA data
on samples with higher amounts of starting material, 1.5 ng and 1 µg,
for the purpose of building spectral libraries. To compare with the
published result, we used the FP-MSF pipeline to perform twoanalyses.
The ﬁrst analysis used the spectral ﬁles from the 0.75 ng samples
(primary DIA data for quantiﬁcation) and the 1.5 ng samples (DIA data
used for spectral library building only). The second analysis used the
spectral ﬁles from the 7.5 ng and 1 µg samples. We also used FP-DIAU,
DIA-NN library-free, and MaxDIA pipelines to analyze the same data for
comparison (see Methods). Figure 4a, b show the number of quantiﬁed
proteins from 0.75 ng and 7.5 ng samples, respectively. All the tools
were run using the same set of input DIA data. We used the MaxLFQ
approach61 for peptide–protein intensity roll-up in all workﬂows that
used DIA-NN quantiﬁcation (see Methods). However, we used the
“Intensity” columns for MaxDIA because of a very high rate of missing
quantiﬁcation values with the “LFQ Intensity” columns (MaxLFQ
approach, Supplementary Fig. 4a, b). The ﬁgures show that FP-MSF and
a
b
Fig. 3 | Quantiﬁed peptides and coefﬁcient of variation (CV) from the 2018-HeLa
dataset. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. a Bar plots of the quantiﬁed
peptides. The bar height is the average number of three replicates. The white dots
indicate the numbers from individual replicates. The results from the original
publication (obtained using EncyclopeDIA version 0.8.3) are shown. We also re-
analyzed the data using the latest EncyclopeDIA (version 2.12.30). b Box plots of
peptide CVs. There are 3 single-shot DIA runs from 3 replicates. Blue box plots
represent overlapping peptides shared among all tools, while brown box plots
depict unique peptides quantiﬁed exclusively by each speciﬁc tool. The box in each
box plot captures the IQR, with the bottom and top edges representing the Q1 and
Q3 respectively. The median is marked by a horizontal line within the box. The
whiskers extend to the minima and maxima within 1.5 times the IQR below Q1 or
above Q3.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
5

DIA-NN library-free pipelines have similar sensitivities that are higher
than those of the other tools.
We also used the single-cell dataset published by Gebreyesus et
al.15; we refer to this dataset as “single-cell”. We picked two experi-
ments with 1 cell and 117 cells. Each experiment has three replicates.
The authors also generated two sets of DIA runs to build two spectral
libraries, referred to as “small-sample-lib” and “large-sample-lib” (with
the latter generated using a higher amount of starting material, see
Methods and Supplementary Data 1). There are 9 DIA runs and 3 DDA
runs in the small-sample-lib list of ﬁles. There are 4 DIA runs and 4 DDA
runs used for large-sample-lib. We used FP-DIAU hybrid, MaxDIA, DIA-
NN library-free, FP-MSF, and FP-MSF hybrid (using DDA data in addi-
tion to the library-only DIA data) pipelines to analyze this dataset (see
Methods). Figure 4c, d show the number of quantiﬁed proteins from 1
cell and 117 cells experiments, respectively. As for the low-input-cell
dataset, for MaxDIA we used the “Intensity” instead of “LFQ Intensity”
because a signiﬁcant fraction of the proteins had zero MaxLFQ inten-
sity (Supplementary Fig. 4c, d). The results show that FP-MSF hybrid
pipeline quantiﬁed more proteins than the other tools in the 1-cell
experiment. In the 117-cell experiment, the difference between differ-
ent pipelines was less noticeable.
Phosphoproteomics data
After showing that MSFragger-DIA performs well in global proteome
data, including single-cell data, we used a phosphopeptide-enriched
dataset62 (Supplementary Data 1) to evaluate the performance of
MSFragger-DIA in identifying phosphorylated peptides. The dataset
contains two single-injection replicates for six different melanoma cell
lines. We refer to this dataset as the “melanoma-phospho” dataset. The
data were acquired with variable-width isolation windows over a
120 min gradient. Because no DDA data were generated in this
experiment, we used FP-DIAU, DIA-NN library-free, and FP-MSF pipe-
lines (see Methods for details). Proteins with more than 50% of missing
values were discarded. Although all pipelines produced similar num-
bers of quantiﬁed phosphopeptides (Fig. 5a), this dataset highlights
the speed advantage of MSFragger-DIA. We used a Windows desktop
and a Linux server (see Methods) to compare the computational times
(Fig. 5b, c). Prior to analysis, the 12 raw ﬁles were converted to mzML
format, which took approximately 7 min. For the sake of simpliﬁcation,
we excluded this conversion time from the runtime comparison, as it
was a prerequisite for all three tools. The total runtime was broken
down into different steps. For FP-DIAU workﬂow there are pseudo-MS/
MS extraction by DIA-Umpire, database search using MSFragger in the
DDA mode, rescoring, FDR ﬁltering, and DIA-NN quantiﬁcation steps.
For DIA-NN library-free, there are in silico spectral library prediction,
identiﬁcation, and quantiﬁcation steps. For the FP-MSF pipeline there
are database searching using MSFragger-DIA, rescoring and FDR ﬁl-
tering, and DIA-NN quantiﬁcation steps. FragPipe with MSFragger-DIA
had the fastest overall speed; it is at least six times faster than that of
the DIA-NN library-free workﬂow for these data.
Large-scale DIA based quantiﬁcation study
We used a clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) cohort63 from a
recent Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) project
to demonstrate large-scale DIA analysis with MSFragger-DIA. This
dataset contains 187 single-injection DIA runs from normal and tumor
samples, plus 8 fractionated DDA runs from pooled samples, all
acquired with a 140 min LC gradient. Detailed ﬁle lists are provided in
Supplementary Data 1. We used the FP-DIAU, FP-DIAU hybrid, DIA-NN
library-free, MaxDIA, FP-MSF, and FP-MSF hybrid pipelines to analyze
the data (see Methods). Figure 6a shows the numbers of proteins
quantiﬁed from the single-injection DIA runs. Proteins with more than
50% of missing values were discarded. Supplementary Fig. 5 shows the
numbers without discarding any proteins. Without using DDA data, FP-
DIAU and FP-MSF performed similarly, quantifying ~6500 proteins,
followed by DIA-NN library-free and MaxDIA. Adding DDA data as part
a
b
c
d
Fig. 4 | The number of quantiﬁed proteins from the low-input-cell and the
single-cell datasets. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. a, b Bar plots
from analyzing the low-input-cell dataset with 0.75 ng and 7.5 ng of starting mate-
rial. Proteins with missing values (zero intensities) were discarded. The dark color is
from the proteins with CVs less than 20%, and the light color is from the proteins
with CVs greater than or equal to 20%. c, d Same as above, for the single-cell
dataset, for 1 cell and for 117 cell data.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
6

of the spectral library building step resulted in a small increase in the
identiﬁcation numbers (FP-DIAU hybrid and FP-MSF hybrid), again
conﬁrming the utility of using auxiliary data, such as fractionated DDA
data, when available.
Running FP-MSF hybrid pipeline took less than 20 h on the Linux
server, and MSFragger-DIA based analyses had the fastest run time.
Because it was impractical to time the entire dataset of 187 ﬁles unin-
terruptedly, a more detailed comparison between the pipelines was
carried out using a subset of 20 DIA runs. The jobs were run on the
same standard Windows desktop (Fig. 6b) and the same Linux server
(Fig. 6c), as mentioned in the previous section (see Methods). The time
spent on predicting the in silico spectral library for MaxDIA was not
included because a previously generated library was used. For FP-
DIAU, DIA-NN, and FP-MSF, the raw ﬁles were converted to mzML
format, which took approximately 8 min. To maintain clarity and
simplicity in the ﬁgures, we excluded this conversion time from the
runtime comparison. FP-MSF pipeline (including the quantiﬁcation
using DIA-NN) was at least two times faster than DIA-NN library-free
analysis, and ﬁve times (Windows desktop) or ten times (Linux server)
faster than MaxDIA. We also compared the runtime between Spec-
tronaut 17 and FP-MSF pipelines on another Windows desktop (see
Methods). Spectronaut 17 took 337 min and FP-MSF took 144 min.
We also evaluated the FDR control using the entrapment database
approach64. The FDP for DIA-NN library-free, FP-MSF, and FP-MSF
hybrid pipelines are 1.2%, 1.9%, and 1.8%, respectively (see Methods).
Overall, these results show that FragPipe with MSFragger-DIA for
peptide identiﬁcation directly from DIA data can be used to process
large-scale datasets, even with relatively standard desktop hardware.
In contrast, other pipelines for DIA analysis are likely to require the use
of cloud computing pipelines65, which can be harder for a typical user
to install and deploy.
Given the availability of tandem mass tag (TMT) DDA proteomics
data—the main quantitative proteomics platform used by the
CPTAC66–and RNA-seq data for the same ccRCC patients63, we per-
formed additional analyses across these data types. We used
OmicsEV67, a recently described tool for quality control and com-
parative evaluation of omics data tables. We used as input, in addition
to the RNA-seq (taken from ref. 63) and TMT-based quantiﬁcation data
(mzML ﬁles from ref. 63, reprocessed as part of this work using the
default FragPipe TMT workﬂow), DIA protein quantiﬁcation tables
from FP-DIAU, FP-DIAU hybrid, FP-MSF, FP-MSF hybrid, and DIA-NN
library-free pipelines. OmicsEV produces comprehensive visual and
quantitative plots that help evaluate data quality of individual data
tables and facilitate the comparisons (for the full output from Omic-
sEV, see Supplementary Data 3). Reassuringly, all quantitative pro-
teomics data tables produced similar results across all OmicsEV
metrics. Figure 6d shows the principal component analysis (PCA) plot
for the quantiﬁcation tables from the FP-MSF hybrid pipeline. The
tumor and normal samples are well separated, as observed in the ori-
ginal study, based on the TMT DDA data. OmicsEV also calculated the
gene-wise correlation between the RNA and protein abundances, with
Spearman’s correlation for the FP-MSF hybrid pipeline results shown in
Fig. 6e. For comparison, the gene-wise correlation between the RNA
and TMT-based protein abundance data is shown in Fig. 6f. DIA and
TMT DDA-based protein quantiﬁcation data have similar gene-wise
correlations with RNA abundances, albeit slightly higher for the TMT
DDA-based data. Furthermore, more proteins were quantiﬁed using
TMT DDA. This is not unexpected, however, given that the TMT DDA
data was generated on highly fractionated peptide samples (25 frac-
tions), whereas DIA data was acquired without fractionation. The
functional pathways identiﬁed as enriched in tumor vs. normal sam-
ples were nevertheless similar between the DIA and TMT-based data
(Supplementary Data 3). Overall, our analysis shows that DIA data is
comparable to that from the more established, TMT-based protein
quantiﬁcation platform.
Discussion
We described a new method for identiﬁcation of peptides directly
from DIA data. The MSFragger-DIA strategy differs from that of DIA-
a
b
c
Fig. 5 | The number of quantiﬁed phosphopeptide sequences and runtime for
the melanoma-phospho dataset. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
a An upset plot of the number of quantiﬁed phosphopeptide sequences. b The
runtime analysis performed on a Windows desktop. c The runtime analysis per-
formed on a Linux server.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
7

Umpire by reversing the order in which the two key steps are per-
formed: detection and correlation of precursor and fragment ion
features, and peptide-spectrum matching. While DIA-Umpire starts
with untargeted feature detection, MSFragger-DIA ﬁrst determines a
list of all meritorious candidate peptides for each MS/MS scan without
spectral deconvolution. Feature detection and peak tracing across the
LC dimension are performed in MSFragger-DIA as a second step, in a
targeted manner, and for selected candidate peptide ions. Using sev-
eral common experimental DIA workﬂows, we demonstrated that
MSFragger-DIA is faster than DIA-Umpire followed by the conventional
(DDA mode) MSFragger search. It also has a higher sensitivity for
peptide identiﬁcation, in part due to improved feature detection and
peak tracing performed in MSFragger-DIA in the targeted mode.
However, we consider the MSFragger-DIA and DIA-Umpire workﬂows
to be complementary. One advantage of the DIA-Umpire is that
extraction of pseudo-MS/MS spectra needs to be done once; these
spectra can then be re-searched using MSFragger (in DDA mode)
multiple times, for example, using different sequence databases or
search parameters. In contrast, MSFragger-DIA needs to be run each
time, starting from the raw data. Furthermore, the speed advantage of
MSFragger over DIA-Umpire is less signiﬁcant for searches containing
multiple variable modiﬁcations. For nonspeciﬁc searches (e.g., HLA
peptidome data), MSFragger-DIA is signiﬁcantly slower; thus, the
default FragPipe workﬂow for nonspeciﬁc DIA searches is based on
DIA-Umpire.
MSFragger-DIA, with its direct database search-ﬁrst approach,
essentially blurs the difference between the analysis of DIA and DDA
MS/MS spectra. Thus, we believe that MSFragger-DIA can be further
extended to the analysis of wide-window DDA data68,69, enabling
identiﬁcation of chimeric (co-fragmented) peptides from such data.
The strategy described here is also different from those based on
peptide-centric searches using in silico predicted spectral libraries.
Using MSFragger-DIA, it is not necessary to predict the entire spectral
library in advance, and there is no restriction on the size of peptides,
peptide ion charge states, or modiﬁcations that can be considered.
However, our workﬂows in FragPipe (for both DDA and DIA data) do
d
a
e
b
f
c
Fig. 6 | Results from the ccRCC dataset. Source data are provided as a Source Data
ﬁle. a Bar plots of the number of quantiﬁed proteins in the ccRCC dataset. There are
187 independent biological samples. The bar height is the total number. The white
dots are the numbers from individual runs. Proteins with more than 50% missing
values are discarded. b The runtime of analyzing 20 runs of the ccRCC dataset on a
Windows desktop. c The runtime of analyzing 20 runs on a Linux server. d PCA plot
based on the FP-MSF hybrid results, showing tumor (blue) and normal (red)
samples. e Histogram of Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcients between the RNA-Seq
and the DIA protein abundance data (FP-MSF hybrid pipeline). The adjusted p-value
is from the two-sided test followed by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.
f Histogram of the Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcients between the RNA-Seq and
the TMT DDA-based protein abundance data. The adjusted p-value is from the two-
sided test followed by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
8

beneﬁt from deep learning-based predictions at the subsequent,
rescoring stage with the help of MSBooster and Percolator54. Inter-
estingly, we observed some advantages of using predicted spectra
(instead of empirical ones) at the ﬁnal targeted quantiﬁcation extrac-
tion step. This indicates that while MSFragger-DIA has high sensitivity
for peptide identiﬁcation, some fragment ions may not be detectable
in every MS/MS scan where the peptide was conﬁdently identiﬁed.
Because the spectral library building step in EasyPQP considers each
MS/MS scan in isolation, some fragments that are detectable using
targeted peak tracing (in FragPipe, using DIA-NN) may be missing in
the empirical spectra in the library. Replacing the empirical spectra
with the predicted spectra improves the number of quantiﬁed pre-
cursors. Such a replacement, however, is not advised in all situations,
for example, when performing MSFragger-DIA searches with less
common variable modiﬁcations, because such spectra may not be
predicted well.
Since this study focuses on the peptide identiﬁcation, we did not
thoroughly investigate other aspects of the DIA data analysis such as
modiﬁcation localization. However, by integrating with FragPipe and
DIA-NN, we can perform site localization in the DIA-NN quantiﬁcation
step5. Lou et al.70 demonstrated that the DIA-NN localization algorithm
was more conservative than Spectronaut’s but resulted in lower sen-
sitivity. Considering the modiﬁcation localization for the DIA data is
still an open question, we will investigate it in the future work.
MSFragger coupled with FragPipe enables researchers to conduct
DIA data analysis using different approaches, including library-based,
library-free, and hybrid methods. The term “library” in this context
typically refers to DDA or GPF-DIA data obtained from fractionated
pooled samples. An in silico spectral library from deep-learning pre-
dictions is not considered a “library”, as it eliminates the need for extra
sample preparation and data acquisition. Within the FragPipe, the
library-based approach employs DDA or GPF-DIA data to create a
spectral library. The library-free approach directly searches DIA data to
generate a library. The hybrid approach combines DDA/GPF-DIA and
DIA data to construct a spectral library. The library is then used as a
reference for targeted extraction and identiﬁcation of peptides in DIA
data. This method utilizes the strengths of both library-based and
library-free methods, resulting in a more comprehensive library. Our
experiments have shown that the hybrid approach tends to result in
the quantiﬁcation of more peptides and proteins in comparison to
library-based and library-free methods. One of the reasons is the
enhanced library coverage. By integrating both DDA/GPF-DIA and DIA
data, the hybrid approach generates a spectral library with a broader
range of peptide and protein entries. This increased coverage allows
for the identiﬁcation of peptides that may not be present or detectable
in either library-based or library-free approaches alone. The deeply
fractionated DDA or GPF-DIA data can contribute low-abundance
peptides, and the DIA data can contribute unique peptides speciﬁc to
the experiment. Therefore, we propose to use the hybrid approach
when DDA or GPF-DIA data is available.
Recently, Bruker developed a timsTOF platform to couple ion
mobility separation with time-of-ﬂight (TOF) mass spectrometer. To
generate DIA data using the timsTOF platform, researchers proposed
diaPASEF data acquisition strategy71, and demonstrated a very pro-
mising performance of this platform. diaPASEF data poses new chal-
lenges to data analysis, as it becomes necessary to accommodate an
additional dimension of ion mobility separation. To address some of
those challenges, researchers have been investigating different
approaches to generate the data. Three protocols, including Slice-
PASEF72, midiaPASEF73, and Synchro-PASEF74, have been proposed very
recently. Due to the new data structure and the rapid development,
support in MSF-DIA for diaPASEF data is beyond the scope of this
manuscript. In future work, we plan to leverage the fragment ion
indexing to support direct peptide identiﬁcation from diaPASEF data
in MSFragger.
In summary, we have developed a new direct DIA peptide identi-
ﬁcation method and implemented it as a module of the MSFragger
search engine. By integrating MSFragger-DIA into the FragPipe com-
putational platform, users can perform one-stop DIA data analysis,
from peptide identiﬁcation to quantiﬁcation, optionally with the use of
auxiliary (e.g., DDA) data to achieve optimal performance. With
experiments covering various data acquisition schemes and sample
types, we show that MSFragger-DIA demonstrates high sensitivity,
fastest speed, and comparable quantiﬁcation precision to other state-
of-the-art DIA analysis tools. Coupled with the ease of use of FragPipe,
we believe that this work describes an attractive computational solu-
tion for the analysis of a wide range of DIA datasets.
Methods
DIA data analysis pipelines
MSFragger and FragPipe can perform one-stop DIA data analysis with
and without the use of auxiliary DDA data to build the library. The
comparisons were done with the DIA-Umpire workﬂow in FragPipe
based on pseudo-MS/MS generation, Spectronaut directDIA (library-
free) analysis, DIA-NN library-free analysis (based on in silico spectral
library prediction), EncyclopeDIA in silico library-based analysis, and
MaxDIA in silico library-based analyses. We used DIA-Umpire (version
2.2.8), Spectronaut (version 14 and 17, Biognosys), DIA-NN (version
1.8.1), EncyclopeDIA (version 2.12.30), MaxDIA in MaxQuant (Max-
Quant version 2.1.3.0 for the runtime comparison and 2.2.0.0 for other
experiments), and MSFragger (version 3.5). The pipelines are brieﬂy
described below.
FP-MSF: Only DIA data were used in this pipeline. MSFragger-DIA
was used to directly search the DIA data. The search results were
processed using MSBooster for deep learning-based score calculation,
Percolator33 for rescoring and posterior error probability calculation,
ProteinProphet34 for protein inference, Philosopher55 for FDR ﬁltering,
and EasyPQP for spectral library building. The peptide ions in the
spectral library were ﬁltered with 1% global peptide and protein FDR.
The resulting library was passed to DIA-NN23 to extract and quantify
precursors,
peptides,
and
proteins
from
the
DIA
data.
For
peptide–protein quantiﬁcation roll-up, MaxLFQ normalization was
performed using the R package available at https://github.com/
tvpham/iq.
FP-MSF hybrid: Both DIA and DDA data were used in this pipeline.
MSFragger in the DIA and DDA modes was used to search the DIA and
DDA data, respectively. The subsequent steps are the same as those in
the FP-MSF pipeline.
FP-DIAU: Only DIA data was used in this pipeline. DIA-Umpire was
used to generate pseudo-MS/MS spectra from the DIA data. Then,
MSFragger in DDA mode was used to search these spectra. The
remaining steps are the same as those used in the FP-MSF pipeline.
FP-DIAU hybrid: Both DIA and DDA data were used in this pipeline.
MSFragger in the DDA mode was used to search the DIA extracted
pseudo-MS/MS spectra and DDA data. The remaining steps are the
same as those used in the FP-MSF pipeline.
Spectronaut: Only DIA data was used in this pipeline. The direct-
DIA from Spectronaut 14 and directDIA+ from Spectronaut 17 were
used to analyze the data. Due to the commercial license, our access to
the Spectronaut software is limited. Therefore, only a few experiments
use Spectronaut.
DIA-NN library-free: Only DIA data was used in this pipeline. DIA-
NN predicted an in silico spectral library from the protein sequence
database and then used the library to search and quantify the DIA data.
This mode of DIA-NN is also known as DIA-NN library-free mode.
MaxLFQ normalization was used for peptide–protein quantiﬁcation
roll-up.
MaxDIA: Only DIA data was used in this pipeline. MaxDIA49 inside
MaxQuant was used to analyze the DIA data using the in silico spectral
library
downloaded
from
https://datashare.biochem.mpg.de/s/
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
9

qe1IqcKbz2j2Ruf?path=%2FDiscoveryLibraries. This is also known as
the “MaxDIA discovery mode”49. Unless otherwise noted, MaxLFQ
intensity was used. Due to the limitation of the in silico spectral library,
experiments involving multiple species or phosphoproteomics do not
use MaxDIA.
EncyclopeDIA: This pipeline requires GPF-DIA data to build an
experiment-speciﬁc spectral library to analyze the single-injection DIA
data. Since not all datasets contain GPF-DIA data, EncyclopeDIA was
only used in some of the experiments. Prosit40 (https://www.
proteomicsdb.org/prosit/) was used to predict the in silico spectral
library from a provided fasta ﬁle. Subsequently, EncyclopeDIA used
six GPF-DIA runs to generate an experiment-speciﬁc spectral library by
searching against the in silico spectral library. This experiment-speciﬁc
spectral library was used to analyze the single-injection DIA runs
with EncyclopeDIA. These steps were recommended by Searle et al.60
and detailed in the supplementary documents of the original
publication.
To ensure a fair comparison, we used the iq R package75 to ﬁlter
the results and calculate the MaxLFQ61 intensity for FP-MSF, FP-MSF
hybrid, FP-DIAU, FP-DIAU hybrid, Spectronaut, and DIA-NN library-free
pipelines.MaxDIA and EncyclopeDIA pipelines are not compatible with
the iq package; hence, their results were ﬁltered using the tools
themselves. For FP-MSF, FP-MSF hybrid, FP-DIAU, FP-DIAU hybrid, DIA-
NN library-free, and EncyclopeDIA pipelines, the input data ﬁles were
converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard76 to facilitate a fair and
straightforward comparison. However, Spectronaut and MaxDIA per-
form better with raw format, so we used raw ﬁles for those two pipe-
lines. It is worth noting that both FP-MSF and FP-MSF hybrid pipeline
support raw format on Windows operating system. Converting to
mzML format is not mandatory. Additionally, there is no need to run
the iq R package in real applications, as our tools can carry out FDR
ﬁltering and MaxLFQ intensity calculation.
Sensitivity and FDR evaluation
The dataset published by Fröhlich et al.56 was used to benchmark the
sensitivity and estimate the false discover proportion (FDP, a.k.a.
actual FDR or empirical FDR). There are 92 single-injection DIA runs, 6
GPF-DIA runs, and 20 DDA runs. Among single-injection DIA runs,
there are four conditions: “Lymphnode”, “1–25”, “1–12”, and “1–06”.
Each condition has 23 runs from different patients. Details of sample
preparation and data acquisition can be found from the original pub-
lication. We used the DIA runs in the Spectronaut, DIA-NN library-free,
and FP-MSF pipelines. We used all the DIA, GPF-DIA, and DDA runs in
the FP-MSF hybrid analysis. The FASTA ﬁle was a combination of H.
sapiens, E. coli, and common contaminant proteins (downloaded on
February 18, 2022, UP000005640 and UP000000625, 24750 pro-
teins). The enzyme was set to restricted trypsin (i.e., allowing cleavage
before Proline). Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a ﬁxed mod-
iﬁcation. Protein N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine
were set as the variable modiﬁcations. The maximum allowed number
of missed cleavages was set to 1. For DIA-NN library-free, FP-MSF, and
FP-MSF hybrid, the precursors were ﬁltered with the combination of 1%
run-speciﬁc precursor FDR, global precursor FDR, run-speciﬁc protein
FDR, and global protein FDR. For Spectronaut 14, the precursors were
ﬁltered with the combination of 1% precursor FDR and global protein
FDR. There is no run-speciﬁc protein FDR available. For Spectronaut 17,
the precursors were ﬁltered with the combination of 1% precursor
FDR, run-speciﬁc protein FDR, and global protein FDR. The Zenodo
link to the detailed parameters can be found in the ”Data availability”
section.
There are only H. sapiens peptides in the “Lymphnode” experi-
ment. Thus, the FDP can be calculated as:
FDP = nf t
nt
ð1Þ
where nft is the number of false H. sapiens peptides and nt is the total
number of detected H. sapiens peptides. To estimate the FDP, we ﬁrst
have:
nd
Nd
≈
nf t
ðNt  nttÞ
ð2Þ
where nd is the number of detected E. coli peptides, Nd is the number of
E. coli peptides in the spectral library, Nt is the number of H. sapiens
peptides in the spectral library, and ntt is the number of detected true
H. sapiens peptides. Combining Eqs. (1) and (2), and assuming ntt ≈nt,
we have:
FDP ≈nd
nt
: ðNt  nttÞ
Nd
≈nd
nt
: ðNt  ntÞ
Nd
ð3Þ
Quantiﬁcation precision and accuracy evaluation
We used the same dataset56 used in the previous section to evaluate the
precision and accuracy of quantiﬁcation. In the “1–06” condition, each
run contains an equal amount of E. coli spike-in peptides. Those pep-
tides were used to calculate CV for benchmarking the precisions of the
tools. Between the “1–06” and “1–25” conditions, the H. sapiens pro-
teins maintain the same quantity, while the E. coli proteins are expec-
ted to have a 25 to 6 ratio. Therefore, we used the proteins intensities
from these conditions to evaluate the quantiﬁcation accuracy.
LFQbench77 was used to generate the scatter plots. In those two eva-
luations, Spectronaut 14, 17, DIA-NN library-free, FP-MSF, and FP-MSF
hybrid pipelines were used. The database and parameters are the same
as the previous section.
Staggered isolation window data
We used two sets of DIA data acquired with staggered isolation win-
dows to demonstrate the performance of MSFragger-DIA. The ﬁrst
dataset was published by Searle et al.13 from HeLa samples acquired on
a Thermo Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer. It contains six GPF-DIA
runs with 4 Th isolation windows, and three single-injection DIA runs
with 24 Th isolation windows. After demultiplexing59, the effective
isolation windows were 2 Th and 12 Th, respectively. We refer to this
dataset as 2018-HeLa. The second dataset was published by Searle
et al.60 from S. cerevisiae strain BY4741 samples acquired on a Thermo
Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. It contains six GPF-DIA runs with 4
Th isolation windows and four single-injection DIA runs with 8 Th
isolation windows. After demultiplexing, the effective isolation win-
dows are 2 Th and 4 Th, respectively. We refer to this dataset as 2020-
Yeast.
The
raw ﬁles
were converted
to
mzML
format using
ProteoWizard76 with the vendor’s peak picking and demultiplexing.
Details of the sample preparation and data acquisition can be found in
the original publications13,60.
Spectronaut 17, EncyclopeDIA, DIA-NN library-free, and FP-MSF
pipelines were used. The enzyme was set to restricted trypsin. Carba-
midomethyl cysteine was set as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation. Protein
N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as the
variable modiﬁcations. The maximum allowed number of missed
cleavages was set to 1. For Spectronaut 17, EncyclopeDIA, DIA-NN
library-free, and FP-MSF pipelines, reviewed H. sapiens proteins and
common contaminant sequences were downloaded from UniProt
(downloaded on March 23, 2021, UP000005640, 20431 proteins) for
2018-HeLa dataset. The reviewed S. cerevisiae proteins and common
contaminants were downloaded from UniProt (downloaded on March
16, 2021, UP000002311, 6164 proteins) for 2020-Yeast dataset. Decoy
(reversed) sequences were appended to the original database for
MSFragger-DIA analysis. For Spectronaut 17, the quantiﬁed peptides
were ﬁltered with the combination of 1% precursor FDR, run-speciﬁc
protein FDR, and global protein FDR. For EncyclopeDIA, the quantiﬁed
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
10

peptides were ﬁltered with 1% global precursor FDR by the tool itself.
For DIA-NN library-free and FP-MSF pipelines, the quantiﬁed peptides
were ﬁltered with the combination of 1% run-speciﬁc precursor FDR,
run-speciﬁc protein FDR, global precursor FDR, and global protein
FDR. The Zenodo link to the detailed parameters can be found in the
“Data availability” section.
Low-input-cell data
A dataset from Siyal et al.16 was used to demonstrate the performance
of MSFragger-DIA in analyzing low-input data. We picked two experi-
ments with 0.75 ng and 7.5 ng cells. Each experiment has three repli-
cates. The authors also generated two sets of auxiliary DIA runs
(“library runs”) for spectral library building, using samples with 1.5 ng
and 1 µg of starting material. The database was obtained from the
original publication (20387 proteins). FP-DIAU, DIA-NN library-free,
MaxDIA, and FP-MSF pipelines were used because no DDA data was
available. For MaxDIA, the H. sapiens spectral library named “mis-
sed_cleavages_1”
from
https://datashare.biochem.mpg.de/s/
qe1IqcKbz2j2Ruf?path=%2FDiscoveryLibraries was used. For FP-DIAU
and FP-MSF workﬂows, the primary DIA data from the low-input cell
runs and library DIA runs were used together to build a spectral library.
For FP-DIAU, DIA-NN library-free, and FP-MSF pipelines, the proteins
were ﬁltered with the combination of 1% run-speciﬁc precursor FDR,
run-speciﬁc protein FDR, global precursor FDR, and global protein
FDR. For MaxDIA, proteins were ﬁltered with 1% global PSM and pro-
tein FDR. The remaining parameters are the same as those described in
the preceding section.
Single-cell data
A single-cell dataset published by Gebreyesus et al.15 was used in this
study. We picked two experiments, with 1 and 117 cells. Each experiment
has three replicates. The authors also generated two sets of auxiliary
runs for spectral library building. The ﬁrst one has 9 DIA runs and 3 DDA
runs from low-input data. We refer to this library as small-sample-lib.
The second one has 4 DIA runs and 4 DDA runs from the bulk cells. We
refer to it as large-sample-lib. For the 1 cell experiment, we used the
small-sample-lib, as suggested by the authors. For the 117 cells experi-
ment, we used the large-sample-lib. The protein sequence database was
obtained from the original publication (20194 proteins). FP-DIAU
hybrid, DIA-NN library-free, MaxDIA, FP-MSF, and FP-MSF hybrid pipe-
lines were used. For the FP-DIAU and FP-MSF hybrid pipelines, both DIA
and DDA data from the single-cell and library runs were used to gen-
erate a spectral library. For the DIA-NN library-free, FP-MSF, and MaxDIA
pipelines, the DIA data from the single-cell and library runs were used.
The remaining parameters are the same as above.
Phosphoproteome data
We used a phosphoproteome dataset obtained from Gao et al.62. There
are six experiments from six melanoma cell lines. Each experiment has
two replicates. FP-DIAU, DIA-NN library-free, and FP-MSF pipelines
were used. MaxDIA was not used to analyze these data because no
phosphoproteome spectral library was available on the corresponding
tool website. The enzyme was set to restricted trypsin. Carbamido-
methyl cysteine was set as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation. Protein N-terminal
acetylation, oxidation of methionine, and phosphorylation of serine,
threonine, and tyrosine were set as variable modiﬁcations. The max-
imum allowed number of missed cleavage was set to 1. The H. sapiens
proteins and common contaminant sequences downloaded from
UniProt (downloaded on March 23, 2021, UP000005640, 20431 pro-
teins) were used as the target protein sequence database. The
remaining parameters are the same as above.
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) data
In the clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) cohort63, there are 187
single-injection DIA runs from normal and tumor tissues, and 8
fractionated DDA runs from pooled tissues generated for spectral
library building. We used FP-DIAU, FP-DIAU hybrid, DIA-NN library-
free, FP-MSF, and FP-MSF hybrid pipelines to analyze the data. The
enzyme was set to restricted trypsin. Carbamidomethyl cysteine
was set as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation. Protein N-terminal acetylation and
oxidation of methionine were set as variable modiﬁcations. The
maximum allowed number of missed cleavages was set to 1. The
database contains the reviewed H. sapiens proteins and common
contaminant sequences downloaded from UniProt (downloaded on
March 23, 2021, UP000005640, 20431 proteins). The Zenodo link to
the detailed parameters can be found in the “Data availability”
section.
False discovery rate evaluation using entrapment database
We used 20 DIA runs from the ccRCC cohort63 to evaluate the FDR
control with the entrapment database approach64. To ensure a
sufﬁcient number of entrapment sequences, we combined data-
bases of H. sapiens, S. cerevisiae, E. coli, and Arabidopsis thaliana,
obtained
from
UniProt
(downloaded
on
April
18,
2023,
UP000005640, UP000002311, UP000006548, and UP000000625,
47092 proteins). This includes 20407 H. sapiens proteins, 6060 S.
cerevisiae proteins, 4401 E. coli proteins, and 16224 A. thaliana
proteins. We analyzed 20 DIA runs using DIA-NN library-free, FP-
MSF, and FP-MSF hybrid pipelines with the custom fasta ﬁle.
Quantiﬁed H. sapiens proteins were considered true, while proteins
from other species were considered false. We calculated the FDP
using the following equation:
FDP = Nh
No
 no
nh
ð4Þ
where Nh is the number of H. sapiens proteins in the database, No is the
number of non-H. sapiens proteins in the database, no is the number of
quantiﬁed non-H. sapiens proteins in the results, and nh is the number
of quantiﬁed H. sapiens proteins in the results.
Speed benchmarks
The runtime for each pipeline was measured on three computers: (1)
Windows desktop: Intel Core i9-10900K, 3.70 GHz, 10 cores, 20 logical
processors, 128 GB of memory; (2) Linux server: Intel Xeon E5-2690 v4,
2.6 GHz, 28 cores, 56 logical processors, and 512 GB of memory. We
used 19 threads on Windows desktop and 56 threads on the Linux
server. And the third computer with a Windows desktop: Intel Xeon W-
2175, 2.50 GHz, 14 cores, 28 logical processors, 128 GB of memory. The
third computer only ran Spectronaut 17 and FP-MSF pipelines to get
the runtime comparison.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The parameter, log, and result ﬁles in this study are available in https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7261712. The raw mass spectrometry data
used in this study are available in the MassIVE under accession code
MSV000082805 and MSV000084000; in the ProteomeXchange
under accession code PXD022992, PXD023325, and PXD027679; in the
National Cancer Institute Proteomic Data Commons under accession
code PDC000200; and in the European Genome-phenome Archive
under accession code EGAD00010002223. The proteome database
ﬁles used in this study are available in the UniProt database under the
proteome ID UP000005640 (H. sapiens), UP000002311 (S. cerevisiae),
UP000000625 (E. coli), and UP000006548 (A. thaliana). The con-
taminant protein database used in this study are available in https://
www.thegpm.org/crap/. Source data are provided with this paper.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
11

Code availability
MSFragger-DIA and MSFragger can be downloaded as a single JAR
binary ﬁle at https://msfragger.nesvilab.org/. FragPipe is available on
GitHub at https://github.com/Nesvilab/FragPipe. The Python and R
scripts for summarizing the results and generating the ﬁgures is
available at https://github.com/Nesvilab/MSFragger-DIA-manuscript.
References
1.
Kitata, R. B., Yang, J. C. & Chen, Y. J. Advances in data-independent
acquisition mass spectrometry towards comprehensive digital
proteome landscape. Mass Spectrom. Rev. e21781 (2022).
2.
Ludwig, C. et al. Data-independent acquisition-based SWATH-MS
for quantitative proteomics: a tutorial. Mol. Syst. Biol. 14,
e8126 (2018).
3.
Robinson, A. E. et al. Lysine and arginine protein post-translational
modiﬁcations by enhanced DIA libraries: quantiﬁcation in murine
liver disease. J. Proteome. Res. 19, 4163–4178 (2020).
4.
Kitata, R. B. et al. A data-independent acquisition-based global
phosphoproteomics system enables deep proﬁling. Nat. Commun.
12, 2539 (2021).
5.
Steger, M. et al. Time-resolved in vivo ubiquitinome proﬁling by
DIA-MS reveals USP7 targets on a proteome-wide scale. Nat.
Commun. 12, 5399 (2021).
6.
Bekker-Jensen, D. B. et al. Rapid and site-speciﬁc deep phospho-
proteome proﬁling by data-independent acquisition without the
need for spectral libraries. Nat. Commun. 11, 787 (2020).
7.
Lambert, J. P. et al. Mapping differential interactomes by afﬁnity
puriﬁcation coupled with data-independent mass spectrometry
acquisition. Nat. Methods 10, 1239–1245 (2013).
8.
Fossati, A. et al. PCprophet: a framework for protein complex pre-
diction and differential analysis using proteomic data. Nat. Methods
18, 520–527 (2021).
9.
Caron, E., et al. An open-source computational and data resource to
analyze digital maps of immunopeptidomes. Elife 4 (2015).
10.
Pak, H. et al. Sensitive immunopeptidomics by leveraging available
large-scale multi-HLA spectral libraries, data-independent acquisi-
tion, and MS/MS prediction. Mol. Cell Proteom. 20, 100080 (2021).
11.
Ritz, D. et al. Data-Independent acquisition of HLA class I pepti-
domes on the Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer Platform. Proteomics
17 (2017).
12.
Liu, Y. et al. Quantitative variability of 342 plasma proteins in a
human twin population. Mol. Syst. Biol. 11, 786 (2015).
13.
Searle, B. C. et al. Chromatogram libraries improve peptide
detection and quantiﬁcation by data independent acquisition mass
spectrometry. Nat. Commun. 9, 5128 (2018).
14.
Heil, L. R. et al. Building spectral libraries from narrow-window data-
independent acquisition mass spectrometry data. J. Proteome. Res.
21, 1382–1391 (2022).
15.
Gebreyesus, S. T. et al. Streamlined single-cell proteomics by an
integrated microﬂuidic chip and data-independent acquisition
mass spectrometry. Nat. Commun. 13, 37 (2022).
16.
Siyal, A. A. et al. Sample size-comparable spectral library enhances
data-independent acquisition-based proteome coverage of low-
input cells. Anal. Chem. 93, 17003–17011 (2021).
17.
Brunner, A. D. et al. Ultra-high sensitivity mass spectrometry
quantiﬁes single-cell proteome changes upon perturbation. Mol.
Syst. Biol. 18, e10798 (2022).
18.
Cho, K. C. et al. Deep proteomics using two dimensional data
independent acquisition mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 92,
4217–4225 (2020).
19.
Tsou, C. C. et al. DIA-Umpire: comprehensive computational fra-
mework for data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat. Meth-
ods 12, 258–264 (2015).
20. MacLean, B. et al. Skyline: an open source document editor for
creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinfor-
matics 26, 966–968 (2010).
21.
Rost, H. L. et al. OpenSWATH enables automated, targeted analysis
of data-independent acquisition MS data. Nat. Biotechnol. 32,
219–223 (2014).
22. Bruderer, R. et al. Extending the limits of quantitative proteome
proﬁling with data-independent acquisition and application to
acetaminophen-treated three-dimensional liver microtissues. Mol.
Cell Proteom. 14, 1400–1410 (2015).
23. Demichev, V. et al. DIA-NN: neural networks and interference cor-
rection enable deep proteome coverage in high throughput. Nat.
Methods 17, 41–44 (2020).
24. Teo, G. et al. mapDIA: Preprocessing and statistical analysis of
quantitative proteomics data from data independent acquisition
mass spectrometry. J. Proteom. 129, 108–120 (2015).
25. Tsai, T. H. et al. Selection of features with consistent proﬁles
improves relative protein quantiﬁcation in mass spectrometry
experiments. Mol. Cell Proteom. 19, 944–959 (2020).
26. Parker, S. J., Venkatraman, V. & Van Eyk, J. E. Effect of peptide assay
library size and composition in targeted data-independent acqui-
sition-MS analyses. Proteomics 16, 2221–2237 (2016).
27.
Rosenberger, G. et al. Statistical control of peptide and protein
error rates in large-scale targeted data-independent acquisition
analyses. Nat. Methods 14, 921–927 (2017).
28. Barkovits, K. et al. Reproducibility, speciﬁcity and accuracy of
relative quantiﬁcation using spectral library-based data-indepen-
dent acquisition. Mol. Cell Proteom. 19, 181–197 (2020).
29. Kong, A. T. et al. MSFragger: ultrafast and comprehensive peptide
identiﬁcation in mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Nat. Meth-
ods 14, 513–520 (2017).
30. Craig, R. & Beavis, R. C. TANDEM: matching proteins with tandem
mass spectra. Bioinformatics 20, 1466–1467 (2004).
31.
Eng, J. K., Jahan, T. A. & Hoopmann, M. R. Comet: an open-source
MS/MS sequence database search tool. Proteomics 13,
22–24 (2013).
32. Keller, A. et al. Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy
of peptide identiﬁcations made by MS/MS and database search.
Anal. Chem. 74, 5383–5392 (2002).
33. Kall, L. et al. Semi-supervised learning for peptide identiﬁcation
from shotgun proteomics datasets. Nat. Methods 4,
923–925 (2007).
34. Nesvizhskii, A. I. et al. A statistical model for identifying proteins by
tandem mass spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 75, 4646–4658 (2003).
35. Nesvizhskii, A. I. A survey of computational methods and error rate
estimation procedures for peptide and protein identiﬁcation in
shotgun proteomics. J. Proteom. 73, 2092–2123 (2010).
36. Ting, Y. S. et al. Peptide-centric proteome analysis: an alternative
strategy for the analysis of tandem mass spectrometry data. Mol.
Cell Proteom. 14, 2301–2307 (2015).
37. Ting, Y. S. et al. PECAN: library-free peptide detection for data-
independent acquisition tandem mass spectrometry data. Nat.
Methods 14, 903–908 (2017).
38. Lu, Y. Y. et al. DIAmeter: matching peptides to data-independent
acquisition mass spectrometry data. Bioinformatics 37,
i434–i442 (2021).
39. Wang, J. et al. MSPLIT-DIA: sensitive peptide identiﬁcation for data-
independent acquisition. Nat. Methods 12, 1106–1108 (2015).
40. Gessulat, S. et al. Prosit: proteome-wide prediction of peptide
tandem mass spectra by deep learning. Nat. Methods 16,
509–518 (2019).
41.
Zhou, X. X. et al. pDeep: predicting MS/MS spectra of peptides with
deep learning. Anal. Chem. 89, 12690–12697 (2017).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
12

42. Zeng, W. F. et al. MS/MS spectrum prediction for modiﬁed peptides
using pDeep2 Trained by Transfer Learning. Anal. Chem. 91,
9724–9731 (2019).
43. Tiwary, S. et al. High-quality MS/MS spectrum prediction for data-
dependent and data-independent acquisition data analysis. Nat.
Methods 16, 519–525 (2019).
44. Tarn, C. & Zeng, W. F. pDeep3: toward more accurate spectrum
prediction with fast few-shot learning. Anal. Chem. 93,
5815–5822 (2021).
45. Yang, Y. et al. In silico spectral libraries by deep learning facilitate
data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat. Commun. 11,
146 (2020).
46. Lou, R. et al. DeepPhospho accelerates DIA phosphoproteome
proﬁling through in silico library generation. Nat. Commun. 12,
6685 (2021).
47. Gotti, C. et al. Extensive and accurate benchmarking of DIA acqui-
sition methods and software tools using a complex proteomic
standard. J. Proteome Res. 20, 4801–4814 (2021).
48. Demichev, V. et al. dia-PASEF data analysis using FragPipe and DIA-
NN for deep proteomics of low sample amounts. Nat. Commun. 13,
3944 (2022).
49. Sinitcyn, P. et al. MaxDIA enables library-based and library-free
data-independent acquisition proteomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 39,
1563–1573 (2021).
50. Teo, G. C. et al. Fast deisotoping algorithm and its implementation
in the MSFragger Search Engine. J. Proteome Res. 20,
498–505 (2021).
51.
Yu, F. et al. Identiﬁcation of modiﬁed peptides using localization-
aware open search. Nat. Commun. 11, 4065 (2020).
52. Yu, F. et al. Fast quantitative analysis of timsTOF PASEF data with
MSFragger and IonQuant. Mol. Cell Proteom. 19, 1575–1585 (2020).
53. Yu, F., Haynes, S. E. & Nesvizhskii, A. I. IonQuant enables accurate
and sensitive label-free quantiﬁcation with FDR-controlled match-
between-runs. Mol. Cell Proteom. 20, 100077 (2021).
54. Yang, K. L., et al. MSBooster: improving peptide identiﬁcation rates
using deep learning-based features. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.
org/10.1101/2022.10.19.512904 (2022).
55. Leprevost, F. V. et al. Philosopher: a versatile toolkit for shotgun
proteomics data analysis. Nat. Methods 17, 869–870 (2020).
56. Frohlich, K. et al. Benchmarking of analysis strategies for data-
independent acquisition proteomics using a large-scale dataset
comprising inter-patient heterogeneity. Nat. Commun. 13,
2622 (2022).
57. Egertson, J. D. et al. Multiplexed MS/MS for improved data-
independent acquisition. Nat. Methods 10, 744–746 (2013).
58. Pino, L. K. et al. Acquiring and analyzing data independent acqui-
sition proteomics experiments without spectrum libraries. Mol. Cell
Proteom. 19, 1088–1103 (2020).
59. Amodei, D. et al. Improving precursor selectivity in data-
independent acquisition using overlapping windows. J. Am. Soc.
Mass Spectrom. 30, 669–684 (2019).
60. Searle, B. C. et al. Generating high quality libraries for DIA MS with
empirically corrected peptide predictions. Nat. Commun. 11,
1548 (2020).
61.
Cox, J. et al. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantiﬁcation by
delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction,
termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell Proteom. 13, 2513–2526 (2014).
62. Gao, E. et al. Data-independent acquisition-based proteome and
phosphoproteome proﬁling across six melanoma cell lines reveals
determinants of proteotypes. Mol. Omics 17, 413–425 (2021).
63. Clark, D. J. et al. Integrated proteogenomic characterization of clear
cell renal cell carcinoma. Cell 179, 964–983.e31 (2019).
64. Granholm, V. et al. Determining the calibration of conﬁdence esti-
mation procedures for unique peptides in shotgun proteomics. J.
Proteom. 80, 123–131 (2013).
65. Allen, C. et al. nf-encyclopedia: a cloud-ready pipeline for chro-
matogram library data-independent acquisition proteomics work-
ﬂows. J. Proteome Res., https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jproteome.
2c00613 (2023).
66. Mertins, P. et al. Reproducible workﬂow for multiplexed deep-
scale proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of tumor tissues
by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry. Nat. Protoc. 13,
1632–1661 (2018).
67. Wen, B., Jaehnig, E. J. & Zhang, B. OmicsEV: a tool for compre-
hensive quality evaluation of omics data tables. Bioinformatics 38,
5463–5465 (2022).
68. Truong, T. et al. Data-dependent acquisition with precursor coiso-
lation improves proteome coverage and measurement throughput
for label-free single-cell proteomics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.
e202303415, https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.10.18.512791 (2022).
69. Mayer, R. L. et al. Wide window acquisition and AI-based data
analysis to reach deep proteome coverage for a wide sample range,
including single cell proteomic inputs. Preprint at bioRxiv https://
doi.org/10.1101/2022.09.01.506203 (2022).
70. Lou, R. et al. Benchmarking commonly used software suites and
analysis workﬂows for DIA proteomics and phosphoproteomics.
Nat. Commun. 14, 94 (2023).
71.
Meier, F. et al. diaPASEF: parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation
combined with data-independent acquisition. Nat. Methods 17,
1229–1236 (2020).
72.
Szyrwiel, L. et al. Slice-PASEF: fragmenting all ions for maximum
sensitivity in proteomics. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/
2022.10.31.514544 (2022).
73. Distler, U., et al. midiaPASEF maximizes information content in data-
independent acquisition proteomics. Preprint at bioRxiv https://doi.
org/10.1101/2023.01.30.526204 (2023).
74. Skowronek, P. et al. Synchro-PASEF allows precursor-speciﬁc
fragment ion extraction and interference removal in data-
independent acquisition. Mol. Cell Proteom. 22, 100489 (2023).
75. Pham, T. V., Henneman, A. A. & Jimenez, C. R. iq: an R package to
estimate relative protein abundances from ion quantiﬁcation in DIA-
MS-based proteomics. Bioinformatics 36, 2611–2613 (2020).
76. Chambers, M. C. et al. A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectro-
metry and proteomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 30, 918–920 (2012).
77.
Navarro, P. et al. A multicenter study benchmarks software tools for
label-free proteome quantiﬁcation. Nat. Biotechnol. 34,
1130–1136 (2016).
78. Li, K. et al. PDV: an integrative proteomics data viewer. Bioinfor-
matics 35, 1249–1251 (2019).
Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by NIH grants R01-GM-094231, U24-
CA210967, U24-CA271037 received by F.Y., G.C.T., A.T.K., G.X.L., A.I.N.
This work was also funded in part by German Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF), as part of the National Research Node “Mass spec-
trometry in Systems Medicine” (MSCoreSys), under grant agreement
161L0221 received by V.D. We thank Sarah Haynes for help with the
manuscript, George Rosenberger for help with EasyPQP, and Kai Li for
adopting the PDV78 viewer in FragPipe to support MSFragger-DIA output.
We also thank Michael MacCoss for the helpful discussions, and Brian
Searle for the help with EncyclopeDIA.
Author contributions
F.Y. developed MSFragger-DIA, A.T.K. contributed to the algorithm and
software development at an early stage of the project. G.C.T. made the
FragPipe support Percolator and EasyPQP. V.D. modiﬁed DIA-NN for
FragPipe and contributed to data analysis. F.Y. and A.I.N. analyzed the
data. K.E.F. helped the data analysis using Spectronaut. G.X.L. helped
the data analysis using OmicsEV. F.Y. and A.I.N. wrote the manuscript
with input from all authors. A.I.N. conceived and supervised the project.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
13

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Fengchao Yu or Alexey I. Nesvizhskii.
Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon-
ymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39869-5
Nature Communications|   (2023) 14:4154 
14