A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
Lei WANG, Chen MA*, Xueyang FENG*, Zeyu ZHANG, Hao YANG, Jingsen ZHANG,
Zhiyuan CHEN, Jiakai TANG, Xu CHEN (✉), Yankai LIN (✉),
Wayne Xin ZHAO, Zhewei WEI, Jirong WEN
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China
 The Author(s) 2024. This article is published with open access at link.springer.com and journal.hep.com.cn
 
Abstract    Autonomous  agents  have  long  been  a  research
focus in academic and industry communities. Previous research
often focuses on training agents with limited knowledge within
isolated  environments,  which  diverges  significantly  from
human  learning  processes,  and  makes  the  agents  hard  to
achieve human-like decisions. Recently, through the acquisition
of  vast  amounts  of  Web  knowledge,  large  language  models
(LLMs)  have  shown  potential  in  human-level  intelligence,
leading  to  a  surge  in  research  on  LLM-based  autonomous
agents.  In  this  paper,  we  present  a  comprehensive  survey  of
these  studies,  delivering  a  systematic  review  of  LLM-based
autonomous agents from a holistic perspective. We first discuss
the construction of LLM-based autonomous agents, proposing a
unified  framework  that  encompasses  much  of  previous  work.
Then,  we  present  a  overview  of  the  diverse  applications  of
LLM-based  autonomous  agents  in  social  science,  natural
science, and engineering. Finally, we delve into the evaluation
strategies commonly used for LLM-based autonomous agents.
Based  on  the  previous  studies,  we  also  present  several
challenges and future directions in this field.
Keywords    autonomous  agent, large  language  model,
human-level intelligence
 1    Introduction
“An autonomous agent is a system situated within and a part
of an environment that senses that environment and acts on it,
over time, in pursuit of its own agenda and so as to effect what
it senses in the future.”
Franklin and Graesser (1997)
Autonomous  agents  have  long  been  recognized  as  a
promising approach to achieving artificial general intelligence
(AGI),  which  is  expected  to  accomplish  tasks  through  self-
directed planning and actions. In previous studies, the agents
are  assumed  to  act  based  on  simple  and  heuristic  policy
functions, and learned in isolated and restricted environments
[1–6]. Such assumptions significantly differs from the human
learning  process,  since  the  human  mind  is  highly  complex,
and  individuals  can  learn  from  a  much  wider  variety  of
environments. Because of these gaps, the agents obtained from
the  previous  studies  are  usually  far  from  replicating  human-
level  decision  processes,  especially  in  unconstrained,  open-
domain settings.
In  recent  years,  large  language  models  (LLMs)  have
achieved
 notable
 successes,
 demonstrating
 significant
potential  in  attaining  human-like  intelligence  [5–10].  This
capability  arises  from  leveraging  comprehensive  training
datasets alongside a substantial number of model parameters.
Building  upon  this  capability,  there  has  been  a  growing
research  area  that  employs  LLMs  as  central  controllers  to
construct  autonomous  agents  to  obtain  human-like  decision-
making capabilities [11–17].
Comparing with reinforcement learning, LLM-based agents
have  more  comprehensive  internal  world  knowledge,  which
facilitates more informed agent actions even without training
on specific domain data. Additionally, LLM-based agents can
provide  natural  language  interfaces  to  interact  with  humans,
which is more flexible and explainable.
Along this direction, researchers have developed numerous
promising  models  (see Fig. 1 for  an  overview  of  this  field),
where  the  key  idea  is  to  equip  LLMs  with  crucial  human
capabilities like memory and planning to make them behave
like  humans  and  complete  various  tasks  effectively.
Previously,  these  models  were  proposed  independently,  with
limited  efforts  made  to  summarize  and  compare  them
holistically.  However,  we  believe  a  systematic  summary  on
this  rapidly  developing  field  is  of  great  significance  to
comprehensively  understand  it  and  benefit  to  inspire  future
research.
In  this  paper,  we  conduct  a  comprehensive  survey  of  the
field  of  LLM-based  autonomous  agents.  Specifically,  we
organize  our  survey  based  on  three  aspects  including  the
construction,  application,  and  evaluation  of  LLM-based
autonomous agents. For the agent construction, we focus on
two problems, that is, (1) how to design the agent architecture
to better leverage LLMs, and (2) how to inspire and enhance
the agent capability to complete different tasks. Intuitively, the
first problem aims to build the hardware fundamentals for the
agent, while the second problem focus on providing the agent
 
Received March 5, 2024; accepted March 10, 2024
E-mail: xu.chen@ruc.edu.cn; yankailin@ruc.edu.cn
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1
REVIEW ARTICLE

with  software  resources.  For  the  first  problem,  we  present  a
unified  agent  framework,  which  can  encompass  most  of  the
previous  studies.  For  the  second  problem,  we  provide  a
summary  on  the  commonly-used  strategies  for  agents’
capability  acquisition.  In  addition  to  discussing  agent
construction,  we  also  provide  an  systematic  overview  of  the
applications  of  LLM-based  autonomous  agents  in  social
science,  natural  science,  and  engineering.  Finally,  we  delve
into  the  strategies  for  evaluating  LLM-based  autonomous
agents, focusing on both subjective and objective strategies.
In summary, this survey conducts a systematic review and
establishes comprehensive taxonomies for existing studies in
the burgeoning field of LLM-based autonomous agents. Our
focus  encompasses  three  primary  areas:  construction  of
agents, their applications, and methods of evaluation. Drawing
from  a  wealth  of  previous  studies,  we  identify  various
challenges in this field and discuss potential future directions.
We expect that our survey can provide newcomers of LLM-
based  autonomous  agents  with  a  comprehensive  background
knowledge,  and  also  encourage  further  groundbreaking
studies.
 2    LLM-based autonomous agent
construction
LLM-based  autonomous  agents  are  expected  to  effectively
perform  diverse  tasks  by  leveraging  the  human-like
capabilities of LLMs. In order to achieve this goal, there are
two significant aspects, that is, (1) which architecture should
be  designed  to  better  use  LLMs  and  (2)  give  the  designed
architecture, how to enable the agent to acquire capabilities for
accomplishing  specific  tasks.  Within  the  context  of
architecture  design,  we  contribute  a  systematic  synthesis  of
existing  research,  culminating  in  a  comprehensive  unified
framework.  As  for  the  second  aspect,  we  summarize  the
strategies  for  agent  capability  acquisition  based  on  whether
they  fine-tune  the  LLMs.  When  comparing  LLM-based
autonomous agents to traditional machine learning, designing
the agent architecture is analogous to determining the network
structure,  while  the  agent  capability  acquisition  is  similar  to
learning  the  network  parameters.  In  the  following,  we
introduce these two aspects more in detail.
 2.1    Agent architecture design
Recent advancements in LLMs have demonstrated their great
potential to accomplish a wide range of tasks in the form of
question-answering  (QA).  However,  building  autonomous
agents is far from QA, since they need to fulfill specific roles
and autonomously perceive and learn from the environment to
evolve  themselves  like  humans.  To  bridge  the  gap  between
traditional LLMs and autonomous agents, a crucial aspect is to
design  rational  agent  architectures  to  assist  LLMs  in
maximizing  their  capabilities.  Along  this  direction,  previous
work has developed a number of modules to enhance LLMs.
In this section, we propose a unified framework to summarize
these  modules.  In  specific,  the  overall  structure  of  our
framework  is  illustrated Fig. 2,  which  is  composed  of  a
profiling module, a memory module, a planning module, and
an action module. The purpose of the profiling module is to
identify  the  role  of  the  agent.  The  memory  and  planning
modules place the agent into a dynamic environment, enabling
it to recall past behaviors and plan future actions. The action
module is responsible for translating the agent’s decisions into
specific outputs. Within these modules, the profiling module
impacts the memory and planning modules, and collectively,
these  three  modules  influence  the  action  module.  In  the
following, we detail these modules.
 2.1.1    Profiling module
Autonomous  agents  typically  perform  tasks  by  assuming
specific  roles,  such  as  coders,  teachers  and  domain  experts
[18,19]. The profiling module aims to indicate the profiles of
the agent roles, which are usually written into the prompt to
 
 
Fig. 1    Illustration of the growth trend in the field of LLM-based autonomous agents. We present the cumulative number of papers published
from January 2021 to August 2023. We assign different colors to represent various agent categories. For example, a game agent aims to simulate
a game-player, while a tool agent mainly focuses on tool using. For each time period, we provide a curated list of studies with diverse agent
categories
 
2
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

influence  the  LLM  behaviors.  Agent  profiles  typically
encompass basic information such as age, gender, and career
[20],  as  well  as  psychology  information,  reflecting  the
personalities of the agent, and social information, detailing the
relationships between agents [21]. The choice of information
to  profile  the  agent  is  largely  determined  by  the  specific
application scenarios. For instance, if the application aims to
study  human  cognitive  process,  then  the  psychology
information  becomes  pivotal.  After  identifying  the  types  of
profile  information,  the  next  important  problem  is  to  create
specific profiles for the agents. Existing literature commonly
employs the following three strategies.
Handcrafting  method:  in  this  method,  agent  profiles  are
manually specified. For instance, if one would like to design
agents  with  different  personalities,  he  can  use “you  are  an
outgoing person” or “you are an introverted person” to profile
the agent. The handcrafting method has been leveraged in a lot
of previous work to indicate the agent profiles. For example,
Generative Agent [22] describes the agent by the information
like  name,  objectives,  and  relationships  with  other  agents.
MetaGPT  [23],  ChatDev  [18],  and  Self-collaboration  [24]
predefine
 various
 roles
 and
 their
 corresponding
responsibilities in software development, manually assigning
distinct  profiles  to  each  agent  to  facilitate  collaboration.
PTLLM  [25]  aims  to  explore  and  quantify  personality  traits
displayed  in  texts  generated  by  LLMs.  This  method  guides
LLMs  in  generating  diverse  responses  by  manfully  defining
various  agent  characters  through  the  use  of  personality
assessment  tools  such  as  IPIP-NEO  [26]  and  BFI  [27].  [28]
studies the toxicity of the LLM output by manually prompting
LLMs with different roles, such as politicians, journalists and
businesspersons. In general, the handcrafting method is very
flexible,  since  one  can  assign  any  profile  information  to  the
agents.  However,  it  can  be  also  labor-intensive,  particularly
when dealing with a large number of agents.
LLM-generation method: in this method, agent profiles are
automatically generated based on LLMs. Typically, it begins
by  indicating  the  profile  generation  rules,  elucidating  the
composition  and  attributes  of  the  agent  profiles  within  the
target  population.  Then,  one  can  optionally  specify  several
seed  agent  profiles  to  serve  as  few-shot  examples.  At  last,
LLMs  are  leveraged  to  generate  all  the  agent  profiles.  For
example, RecAgent [21] first creates seed profiles for a few
number of agents by manually crafting their backgrounds like
age,  gender,  personal  traits,  and  movie  preferences.  Then,  it
leverages ChatGPT to generate more agent profiles based on
the  seed  information.  The  LLM-generation  method  can  save
significant time when the number of agents is large, but it may
lack precise control over the generated profiles.
Dataset  alignment  method:  in  this  method,  the  agent
profiles are obtained from real-world datasets. Typically, one
can  first  organize  the  information  about  real  humans  in  the
datasets into natural language prompts, and then leverage it to
profile  the  agents.  For  instance,  in  [29],  the  authors  assign
roles to GPT-3 based on the demographic backgrounds (such
as  race/ethnicity,  gender,  age,  and  state  of  residence)  of
participants  in  the  American  National  Election  Studies
(ANES).  They  subsequently  investigate  whether  GPT-3  can
produce  similar  results  to  those  of  real  humans.  The  dataset
alignment method accurately captures the attributes of the real
population,  thereby  making  the  agent  behaviors  more
meaningful and reflective of real-world scenarios.
Remark. While most of the previous work leverage the above
profile  generation  strategies  independently,  we  argue  that
combining them may yield additional benefits. For example,
in order to predict social developments via agent simulation,
one can leverage real-world datasets to profile a subset of the
agents, thereby accurately reflecting the current social status.
Subsequently, roles that do not exist in the real world but may
emerge  in  the  future  can  be  manually  assigned  to  the  other
agents, enabling the prediction of future social development.
Beyond this example, one can also flexibly combine the other
strategies.  The  profile  module  serves  as  the  foundation  for
agent  design,  exerting  significant  influence  on  the  agent
memorization, planning, and action procedures.
 
 
Fig. 2    A unified framework for the architecture design of LLM-based autonomous agent
 
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
3

 2.1.2    Memory module
The memory module plays a very important role in the agent
architecture  design.  It  stores  information  perceived  from  the
environment and leverages the recorded memories to facilitate
future  actions.  The  memory  module  can  help  the  agent  to
accumulate  experiences,  self-evolve,  and  behave  in  a  more
consistent,  reasonable,  and  effective  manner.  This  section
provides  a  comprehensive  overview  of  the  memory  module,
focusing on its structures, formats, and operations.
Memory  structures:  LLM-based  autonomous  agents
usually  incorporate  principles  and  mechanisms  derived  from
cognitive  science  research  on  human  memory  processes.
Human  memory  follows  a  general  progression  from  sensory
memory that registers perceptual inputs, to short-term memory
that  maintains  information  transiently,  to  long-term  memory
that  consolidates  information  over  extended  periods.  When
designing  the  agent  memory  structures,  researchers  take
inspiration from these aspects of human memory. In specific,
short-term  memory  is  analogous  to  the  input  information
within  the  context  window  constrained  by  the  transformer
architecture. Long-term memory resembles the external vector
storage  that  agents  can  rapidly  query  and  retrieve  from  as
needed.  In  the  following,  we  introduce  two  commonly  used
memory  structures  based  on  the  short-  and  long-term
memories.
● Unified memory. This structure only simulates the human
shot-term  memory,  which  is  usually  realized  by  in-context
learning, and the memory information is directly written into
the prompts. For example, RLP [30] is a conversation agent,
which  maintains  internal  states  for  the  speaker  and  listener.
During each round of conversation, these states serve as LLM
prompts,  functioning  as  the  agent’s  short-term  memory.
SayPlan [31] is an embodied agent specifically designed for
task planning. In this agent, the scene graphs and environment
feedback serve as the agent’s short-term memory, guiding its
actions.  CALYPSO  [32]  is  an  agent  designed  for  the  game
Dungeons & Dragons, which can assist Dungeon Masters in
the creation and narration of stories. Its short-term memory is
built  upon  scene  descriptions,  monster  information,  and
previous summaries. DEPS [33] is also a game agent, but it is
developed  for  Minecraft.  The  agent  initially  generates  task
plans and then utilizes them to prompt LLMs, which in turn
produce  actions  to  complete  the  task.  These  plans  can  be
deemed  as  the  agent’s  short-term  memory.  In  practice,
implementing  short-term  memory  is  straightforward  and  can
enhance an agent’s ability to perceive recent or contextually
sensitive  behaviors  and  observations.  However,  due  to  the
limitation  of  context  window  of  LLMs,  it’s  hard  to  put  all
memories into prompt, which may degrade the performance of
agents.  This  method  has  high  requirements  on  the  window
length  of  LLMs  and  the  ability  to  handle  long  contexts.
Therefore,  many  researchers  resort  to  hybrid  memory  to
alleviate this question. However, the limited context window
of LLMs restricts incorporating comprehensive memories into
prompts, which can impair agent performance. This challenge
necessitates LLMs with larger context windows and the ability
to  handle  extended  contexts.  Consequently,  numerous
researchers  turn  to  hybrid  memory  systems  to  mitigate  this
issue.
● Hybrid  memory.  This  structure  explicitly  models  the
human  short-term  and  long-term  memories.  The  short-term
memory  temporarily  buffers  recent  perceptions,  while  long-
term  memory  consolidates  important  information  over  time.
For  instance,  Generative  Agent  [20]  employs  a  hybrid
memory structure to facilitate agent behaviors. The short-term
memory  contains  the  context  information  about  the  agent
current  situations,  while  the  long-term  memory  stores  the
agent  past  behaviors  and  thoughts,  which  can  be  retrieved
according  to  the  current  events.  AgentSims  [34]  also
implements  a  hybrid  memory  architecture.  The  information
provided  in  the  prompt  can  be  considered  as  short-term
memory. In order to enhance the storage capacity of memory,
the authors propose a long-term memory system that utilizes a
vector  database,  facilitating  efficient  storage  and  retrieval.
Specifically,  the  agent’s  daily  memories  are  encoded  as
embeddings  and  stored  in  the  vector  database.  If  the  agent
needs to recall its previous memories, the long-term memory
system  retrieves  relevant  information  using  embedding
similarities. This process can improve the consistency of the
agent’s behavior. In GITM [16], the short-term memory stores
the  current  trajectory,  and  the  long-term  memory  saves
reference plans summarized from successful prior trajectories.
Long-term  memory  provides  stable  knowledge,  while  short-
term memory allows flexible planning. Reflexion [12] utilizes
a  short-term  sliding  window  to  capture  recent  feedback  and
incorporates persistent long-term storage to retain condensed
insights.  This  combination  allows  for  the  utilization  of  both
detailed  immediate  experiences  and  high-level  abstractions.
SCM  [35]  selectively  activates  the  most  relevant  long-term
knowledge  to  combine  with  short-term  memory,  enabling
reasoning over complex contextual dialogues. SimplyRetrieve
[36]  utilizes  user  queries  as  short-term  memory  and  stores
long-term  memory  using  external  knowledge  bases.  This
design enhances the model accuracy while guaranteeing user
privacy.  MemorySandbox  [37]  implements  long-term  and
short-term memory by utilizing a 2D canvas to store memory
objects,  which  can  then  be  accessed  throughout  various
conversations.  Users  can  create  multiple  conversations  with
different agents on the same canvas, facilitating the sharing of
memory objects through a simple drag-and-drop interface. In
practice, integrating both short-term and long-term memories
can  enhance  an  agent’s  ability  for  long-range  reasoning  and
accumulation  of  valuable  experiences,  which  are  crucial  for
accomplishing tasks in complex environments.
Remark.  Careful  readers  may  find  that  there  may  also  exist
another type of memory structure, that is, only based on the
long-term  memory.  However,  we  find  that  such  type  of
memory is rarely documented in the literature. Our speculation
is  that  the  agents  are  always  situated  in  continuous  and
dynamic environments, with consecutive actions displaying a
high correlation. Therefore, the capture of short-term memory
is very important and usually cannot be disregarded.
Memory  formats:  In  addition  to  the  memory  structure,
another perspective to analyze the memory module is based on
the  formats  of  the  memory  storage  medium,  for  example,
4
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

natural  language  memory  or  embedding  memory.  Different
memory formats possess distinct strengths and are suitable for
various  applications.  In  the  following,  we  introduce  several
representative memory formats.
● Natural  languages.  In  this  format,  memory  information
such  as  the  agent  behaviors  and  observations  are  directly
described using raw natural language. This format possesses
several  strengths.  Firstly,  the  memory  information  can  be
expressed in a flexible and understandable manner. Moreover,
it  retains  rich  semantic  information  that  can  provide
comprehensive  signals  to  guide  agent  behaviors.  In  the
previous work, Reflexion [12] stores experiential feedback in
natural  language  within  a  sliding  window.  Voyager  [38]
employs  natural  language  descriptions  to  represent  skills
within  the  Minecraft  game,  which  are  directly  stored  in
memory.
● Embeddings.  In  this  format,  memory  information  is
encoded  into  embedding  vectors,  which  can  enhance  the
memory  retrieval  and  reading  efficiency.  For  instance,
MemoryBank  [39]  encodes  each  memory  segment  into  an
embedding  vector,  which  creates  an  indexed  corpus  for
retrieval.  [16]  represents  reference  plans  as  embeddings  to
facilitate  matching  and  reuse.  Furthermore,  ChatDev  [18]
encodes dialogue history into vectors for retrieval.
● Databases. In this format, memory information is stored in
databases,  allowing  the  agent  to  manipulate  memories
efficiently  and  comprehensively.  For  example,  ChatDB  [40]
uses a database as a symbolic memory module. The agent can
utilize SQL statements to precisely add, delete, and revise the
memory information. In DB-GPT [41], the memory module is
constructed based on a database. To more intuitively operate
the  memory  information,  the  agents  are  fine-tuned  to
understand and execute SQL queries, enabling them to interact
with databases using natural language directly.
● Structured  lists.  In  this  format,  memory  information  is
organized  into  lists,  and  the  semantic  of  memory  can  be
conveyed  in  an  efficient  and  concise  manner.  For  instance,
GITM  [16]  stores  action  lists  for  sub-goals  in  a  hierarchical
tree structure. The hierarchical structure explicitly captures the
relationships  between  goals  and  corresponding  plans.  RET-
LLM  [42]  initially  converts  natural  language  sentences  into
triplet phrases, and subsequently stores them in memory.
Remark.  Here  we  only  show  several  representative  memory
formats,  but  it  is  important  to  note  that  there  are  many
uncovered ones, such as the programming code used by [38].
Moreover, it should be emphasized that these formats are not
mutually exclusive; many models incorporate multiple formats
to  concurrently  harness  their  respective  benefits.  A  notable
example is the memory module of GITM [16], which utilizes
a  key-value  list  structure.  In  this  structure,  the  keys  are
represented by embedding vectors, while the values consist of
raw natural languages. The use of embedding vectors allows
for efficient retrieval of memory records. By utilizing natural
languages,
 the
 memory
 contents
 become
 highly
comprehensive, enabling more informed agent actions.
Above,  we  mainly  discuss  the  internal  designs  of  the
memory  module.  In  the  following,  we  turn  our  focus  to
memory operations, which are used to interact with external
environments.
Memory operations: The memory module plays a critical
role in allowing the agent to acquire, accumulate, and utilize
significant  knowledge  by  interacting  with  the  environment.
The  interaction  between  the  agent  and  the  environment  is
accomplished  through  three  crucial  memory  operations:
memory reading, memory writing, and memory reflection. In
the following, we introduce these operations more in detail.
● Memory reading. The objective of memory reading is to
extract meaningful information from memory to enhance the
agent’s actions. For example, using the previously successful
actions  to  achieve  similar  goals  [16].  The  key  of  memory
reading  lies  in  how  to  extract  valuable  information  from
history  actions.  Usually,  there  three  commonly  used  criteria
for information extraction, that is, the recency, relevance, and
importance [20]. Memories that are more recent, relevant, and
important  are  more  likely  to  be  extracted.  Formally,  we
conclude  the  following  equation  from  existing  literature  for
memory information extraction:
 
m∗= argmin
m∈Mαsrec(q,m)+βsrel(q,m)+γsimp(m),
(1)
q
M
srec(·) srel(·)
simp(·)
m
srel(q,m)
simp
q α β
γ
α = γ = 0
srel
α = β = γ = 1.0
where  is  the  query,  for  example,  the  task  that  the  agent
should address or the context in which the agent is situated. 
is  the  set  of  all  memories. 
, 
,  and 
 are  the
scoring  functions  for  measuring  the  recency,  relevance,  and
importance of the memory . These scoring functions can be
implemented  using  various  methods,  for  example, 
can be realized based on LSH, ANNOY, HNSW, FAISS, and
so on. It should be noted that 
 only reflects the characters
of the memory itself, thus it is unrelated to the query . , ,
and 
 are  balancing  parameters.  By  assigning  them  with
different  values,  one  can  obtain  various  memory  reading
strategies.  For  example,  by  setting 
,  many  studies
[16,30,38,42]  only  consider  the  relevance  score 
 for
memory  reading.  By  assigning 
,  [20]  equally
weights all the above three metrics to extract information from
memory.
● Memory  writing.  The  purpose  of  memory  writing  is  to
store information about the perceived environment in memory.
Storing valuable information in memory provides a foundation
for retrieving informative memories in the future, enabling the
agent  to  act  more  efficiently  and  rationally.  During  the
memory writing process, there are two potential problems that
should  be  carefully  addressed.  On  one  hand,  it  is  crucial  to
address  how  to  store  information  that  is  similar  to  existing
memories (i.e., memory duplicated). On the other hand, it is
important  to  consider  how  to  remove  information  when  the
memory reaches its storage limit (i.e., memory overflow). In
the  following,  we  discuss  these  problems  more  in  detail.
(1)  Memory  duplicated.  To  incorporate  similar  information,
people  have  developed  various  methods  for  integrating  new
and  previous  records.  For  instance,  in  [7],  the  successful
action sequences related to the same sub-goal are stored in a
list. Once the size of the list reaches N(=5), all the sequences
in it are condensed into a unified plan solution using LLMs.
The original sequences in the memory are replaced with the
newly  generated  one.  Augmented  LLM  [43]  aggregates
duplicate  information  via  count  accumulation,  avoiding
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
5

redundant  storage.  (2)  Memory  overflow.  In  order  to  write
information  into  the  memory  when  it  is  full,  people  design
different  methods  to  delete  existing  information  to  continue
the  memorizing  process.  For  example,  in  ChatDB  [40],
memories can be explicitly deleted based on user commands.
RET-LLM  [42]  uses  a  fixed-size  buffer  for  memory,
overwriting  the  oldest  entries  in  a  first-in-first-out  (FIFO)
manner.
● Memory reflection. Memory reflection emulates humans’
ability to witness and evaluate their own cognitive, emotional,
and  behavioral  processes.  When  adapted  to  agents,  the
objective  is  to  provide  agents  with  the  capability  to
independently  summarize  and  infer  more  abstract,  complex
and  high-level  information.  More  specifically,  in  Generative
Agent [20], the agent has the capability to summarize its past
experiences stored in memory into broader and more abstract
insights.  To  begin  with,  the  agent  generates  three  key
questions based on its recent memories. Then, these questions
are used to query the memory to obtain relevant information.
Building  upon  the  acquired  information,  the  agent  generates
five  insights,  which  reflect  the  agent  high-level  ideas.  For
example, the low-level memories “Klaus Mueller is writing a
research paper”, “Klaus Mueller is engaging with a librarian to
further his research”, and “Klaus Mueller is conversing with
Ayesha  Khan  about  his  research” can  induce  the  high-level
insight “Klaus  Mueller  is  dedicated  to  his  research”.  In
addition,  the  reflection  process  can  occur  hierarchically,
meaning that the insights can be generated based on existing
insights.  In  GITM  [16],  the  actions  that  successfully
accomplish  the  sub-goals  are  stored  in  a  list.  When  the  list
contains more than five elements, the agent summarizes them
into  a  common  and  abstract  pattern  and  replaces  all  the
elements.  In  ExpeL  [44],  two  approaches  are  introduced  for
the  agent  to  acquire  reflection.  Firstly,  the  agent  compares
successful  or  failed  trajectories  within  the  same  task.
Secondly,  the  agent  learns  from  a  collection  of  successful
trajectories to gain experiences.
A significant distinction between traditional LLMs and the
agents is that the latter must possess the capability to learn and
complete tasks in dynamic environments. If we consider the
memory module as responsible for managing the agents’ past
behaviors,  it  becomes  essential  to  have  another  significant
module  that  can  assist  the  agents  in  planning  their  future
actions.  In  the  following,  we  present  an  overview  of  how
researchers design the planning module.
 2.1.3    Planning module
When faced with a complex task, humans tend to deconstruct
it  into  simpler  subtasks  and  solve  them  individually.  The
planning  module  aims  to  empower  the  agents  with  such
human capability, which is expected to make the agent behave
more  reasonably,  powerfully,  and  reliably.  In  specific,  we
summarize  existing  studies  based  on  whether  the  agent  can
receive feedback in the planing process, which are detailed as
follows:
Planning without feedback: In this method, the agents do
not  receive  feedback  that  can  influence  its  future  behaviors
after  taking  actions.  In  the  following,  we  present  several
representative strategies.
● Single-path  reasoning.  In  this  strategy,  the  final  task  is
decomposed  into  several  intermediate  steps.  These  steps  are
connected  in  a  cascading  manner,  with  each  step  leading  to
only one subsequent step. LLMs follow these steps to achieve
the  final  goal.  Specifically,  Chain  of  Thought  (CoT)  [45]
proposes  inputting  reasoning  steps  for  solving  complex
problems  into  the  prompt.  These  steps  serve  as  examples  to
inspire LLMs to plan and act in a step-by-step manner. In this
method, the plans are created based on the inspiration from the
examples in the prompts. Zero-shot-CoT [46] enables LLMs
to generate task reasoning processes by prompting them with
trigger sentences like “think step by step”. Unlike CoT, this
method  does  not  incorporate  reasoning  steps  as  examples  in
the  prompts.  Re-Prompting  [47]  involves  checking  whether
each step meets the necessary prerequisites before generating
a plan. If a step fails to meet the prerequisites, it introduces a
prerequisite error message and prompts the LLM to regenerate
the  plan.  ReWOO  [48]  introduces  a  paradigm  of  separating
plans  from  external  observations,  where  the  agents  first
generate  plans  and  obtain  observations  independently,  and
then  combine  them  together  to  derive  the  final  results.
HuggingGPT  [13]  first  decomposes  the  task  into  many  sub-
goals,  and  then  solves  each  of  them  based  on  Huggingface.
Different  from  CoT  and  Zero-shot-CoT,  which  outcome  all
the  reasoning  steps  in  a  one-shot  manner,  ReWOO  and
HuggingGPT produce the results by accessing LLMs multiply
times.
● Multi-path reasoning. In this strategy, the reasoning steps
for  generating  the  final  plans  are  organized  into  a  tree-like
structure.  Each  intermediate  step  may  have  multiple
subsequent  steps.  This  approach  is  analogous  to  human
thinking,  as  individuals  may  have  multiple  choices  at  each
reasoning step. In specific, Self-consistent CoT (CoT-SC) [49]
believes  that  each  complex  problem  has  multiple  ways  of
thinking  to  deduce  the  final  answer.  Thus,  it  starts  by
employing  CoT  to  generate  various  reasoning  paths  and
corresponding  answers.  Subsequently,  the  answer  with  the
highest  frequency  is  chosen  as  the  final  output.  Tree  of
Thoughts  (ToT)  [50]  is  designed  to  generate  plans  using  a
tree-like reasoning structure. In this approach, each node in the
tree  represents  a “thought,” which  corresponds  to  an
intermediate
 reasoning
 step.
 The
 selection
 of
 these
intermediate  steps  is  based  on  the  evaluation  of  LLMs.  The
final  plan  is  generated  using  either  the  breadth-first  search
(BFS)  or  depth-first  search  (DFS)  strategy.  Comparing  with
CoT-SC,  which  generates  all  the  planed  steps  together,  ToT
needs  to  query  LLMs  for  each  reasoning  step.  In  RecMind
[51], the authors designed a self-inspiring mechanism, where
the discarded historical information in the planning process is
also leveraged to derive new reasoning steps. In GoT [52], the
authors  expand  the  tree-like  reasoning  structure  in  ToT  to
graph  structures,  resulting  in  more  powerful  prompting
strategies. In AoT [53], the authors design a novel method to
enhance  the  reasoning  processes  of  LLMs  by  incorporating
algorithmic  examples  into  the  prompts.  Remarkably,  this
method  only  needs  to  query  LLMs  for  only  one  or  a  few
times. In [54], the LLMs are leveraged as zero-shot planners.
6
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

At  each  planning  step,  they  first  generate  multiple  possible
next  steps,  and  then  determine  the  final  one  based  on  their
distances to admissible actions. [55] further improves [54] by
incorporating  examples  that  are  similar  to  the  queries  in  the
prompts.  RAP  [56]  builds  a  world  model  to  simulate  the
potential  benefits  of  different  plans  based  on  Monte  Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS), and then, the final plan is generated by
aggregating
 multiple
 MCTS
 iterations.
 To
 enhance
comprehension,  we  provide  an  illustration  comparing  the
strategies of single-path and multi-path reasoning in Fig. 3.
● External  planner.  Despite  the  demonstrated  power  of
LLMs in zero-shot planning, effectively generating plans for
domain-specific  problems  remains  highly  challenging.  To
address  this  challenge,  researchers  turn  to  external  planners.
These  tools  are  well-developed  and  employ  efficient  search
algorithms to rapidly identify correct, or even optimal, plans.
In specific, LLM+P [57] first transforms the task descriptions
into formal Planning Domain Definition Languages (PDDL),
and then it uses an external planner to deal with the PDDL.
Finally, the generated results are transformed back into natural
language by LLMs. Similarly, LLM-DP [58] utilizes LLMs to
convert the observations, the current world state, and the target
objectives into PDDL. Subsequently, this transformed data is
passed to an external planner, which efficiently determines the
final action sequence. CO-LLM [22] demonstrates that LLMs
is good at generating high-level plans, but struggle with low-
level  control.  To  address  this  limitation,  a  heuristically
designed external low-level planner is employed to effectively
execute actions based on high-level plans.
Planning with feedback: In many real-world scenarios, the
agents need to make long-horizon planning to solve complex
tasks.  When  facing  these  tasks,  the  above  planning  modules
without  feedback  can  be  less  effective  due  to  the  following
reasons:  firstly,  generating  a  flawless  plan  directly  from  the
beginning is extremely difficult as it needs to consider various
complex  preconditions.  As  a  result,  simply  following  the
initial plan often leads to failure. Moreover, the execution of
the  plan  may  be  hindered  by  unpredictable  transition
dynamics,
 rendering
 the
 initial
 plan
 non-executable.
Simultaneously, when examining how humans tackle complex
tasks, we find that individuals may iteratively make and revise
their  plans  based  on  external  feedback.  To  simulate  such
human  capability,  researchers  have  designed  many  planning
modules,  where  the  agent  can  receive  feedback  after  taking
actions.  The  feedback  can  be  obtained  from  environments,
humans, and models, which are detailed in the following.
● Environmental feedback. This feedback is obtained from
the  objective  world  or  virtual  environment.  For  instance,  it
could  be  the  game’s  task  completion  signals  or  the
observations made after the agent takes an action. In specific,
ReAct [59] proposes constructing prompts using thought-act-
observation triplets. The thought component aims to facilitate
high-level reasoning and planning for guiding agent behaviors.
The  act  represents  a  specific  action  taken  by  the  agent.  The
observation corresponds to the outcome of the action, acquired
through external feedback, such as search engine results. The
next thought is influenced by the previous observations, which
makes the generated plans more adaptive to the environment.
Voyager  [38]  makes  plans  by  incorporating  three  types  of
environment feedback including the intermediate progress of
program  execution,  the  execution  error  and  self-verification
results. These signals can help the agent to make better plans
for  the  next  action.  Similar  to  Voyager,  Ghost  [16]  also
incorporates  feedback  into  the  reasoning  and  action  taking
processes. This feedback encompasses the environment states
as  well  as  the  success  and  failure  information  for  each
executed  action.  SayPlan  [31]  leverages  environmental
feedback derived from a scene graph simulator to validate and
refine  its  strategic  formulations.  This  simulator  is  adept  at
discerning  the  outcomes  and  state  transitions  subsequent  to
agent  actions,  facilitating  SayPlan’s  iterative  recalibration  of
its strategies until a viable plan is ascertained. In DEPS [33],
the authors argue that solely providing information about the
completion  of  a  task  is  often  inadequate  for  correcting
planning errors. Therefore, they propose informing the agent
about the detail reasons for task failure, allowing them to more
effectively revise their plans. LLM-Planner [60] introduces a
grounded  re-planning  algorithm  that  dynamically  updates
plans  generated  by  LLMs  when  encountering  object
mismatches  and  unattainable  plans  during  task  completion.
Inner Monologue [61] provides three types of feedback to the
agent after it takes actions: (1) whether the task is successfully
 
 
Fig. 3    Comparison between the strategies of single-path and multi-path reasoning. LMZSP is the model proposed in [54]
 
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
7

completed, (2) passive scene descriptions, and (3) active scene
descriptions.  The  former  two  are  generated  from  the
environments,  which  makes  the  agent  actions  more
reasonable.
● Human feedback. In addition to obtaining feedback from
the  environment,  directly  interacting  with  humans  is  also  a
very  intuitive  strategy  to  enhance  the  agent  planning
capability. The human feedback is a subjective signal. It can
effectively  make  the  agent  align  with  the  human  values  and
preferences,  and  also  help  to  alleviate  the  hallucination
problem. In Inner Monologue [61], the agent aims to perform
high-level  natural  language  instructions  in  a  3D  visual
environment.  It  is  given  the  capability  to  actively  solicit
feedback from humans regarding scene descriptions. Then, the
agent  incorporates  the  human  feedback  into  its  prompts,
enabling more informed planning and reasoning. In the above
cases,  we  can  see,  different  types  of  feedback  can  be
combined  to  enhance  the  agent  planning  capability.  For
example, Inner Monologue [61] collects both environment and
human feedback to facilitate the agent plans.
● Model
 feedback.
 Apart
 from
 the
 aforementioned
environmental  and  human  feedback,  which  are  external
signals,  researchers  have  also  investigated  the  utilization  of
internal  feedback  from  the  agents  themselves.  This  type  of
feedback is usually generated based on pre-trained models. In
specific,  [62]  proposes  a  self-refine  mechanism.  This
mechanism  consists  of  three  crucial  components:  output,
feedback,  and  refinement.  Firstly,  the  agent  generates  an
output.  Then,  it  utilizes  LLMs  to  provide  feedback  on  the
output  and  offer  guidance  on  how  to  refine  it.  At  last,  the
output  is  improved  by  the  feedback  and  refinement.  This
output-feedback-refinement  process  iterates  until  reaching
some  desired  conditions.  SelfCheck  [63]  allows  agents  to
examine  and  evaluate  their  reasoning  steps  generated  at
various stages. They can then correct any errors by comparing
the  outcomes.  InterAct  [64]  uses  different  language  models
(such as ChatGPT and InstructGPT) as auxiliary roles, such as
checkers and sorters, to help the main language model avoid
erroneous and inefficient actions. ChatCoT [65] utilizes model
feedback to improve the quality of its reasoning process. The
model  feedback  is  generated  by  an  evaluation  module  that
monitors  the  agent  reasoning  steps.  Reflexion  [12]  is
developed to enhance the agent’s planning capability through
detailed  verbal  feedback.  In  this  model,  the  agent  first
produces  an  action  based  on  its  memory,  and  then,  the
evaluator generates feedback by taking the agent trajectory as
input.  In  contrast  to  previous  studies,  where  the  feedback  is
given as a scalar value, this model leverages LLMs to provide
more  detailed  verbal  feedback,  which  can  provide  more
comprehensive supports for the agent plans.
Remark.  In  conclusion,  the  implementation  of  planning
module  without  feedback  is  relatively  straightforward.
However,  it  is  primarily  suitable  for  simple  tasks  that  only
require  a  small  number  of  reasoning  steps.  Conversely,  the
strategy of planning with feedback needs more careful designs
to handle the feedback. Nevertheless, it is considerably more
powerful and capable of effectively addressing complex tasks
that involve long-range reasoning.
 2.1.4    Action module
The  action  module  is  responsible  for  translating  the  agent’s
decisions into specific outcomes. This module is located at the
most  downstream  position  and  directly  interacts  with  the
environment.  It  is  influenced  by  the  profile,  memory,  and
planning modules. This section introduces the action module
from four perspectives: (1) Action goal: what are the intended
outcomes of the actions? (2) Action production: how are the
actions  generated?  (3)  Action  space:  what  are  the  available
actions? (4) Action impact: what are the consequences of the
actions? Among these perspectives, the first two focus on the
aspects  preceding  the  action  (“before-action” aspects),  the
third focuses on the action itself (“in-action” aspect), and the
fourth  emphasizes  the  impact  of  the  actions  (“after-action”
aspect).
Action  goal:  The  agent  can  perform  actions  with  various
objectives. Here, we present several representative examples:
(1) Task Completion. In this scenario, the agent’s actions are
aimed at accomplishing specific tasks, such as crafting an iron
pickaxe in Minecraft [38] or completing a function in software
development  [18].  These  actions  usually  have  well-defined
objectives,  and  each  action  contributes  to  the  completion  of
the  final  task.  Actions  aimed  at  this  type  of  goal  are  very
common  in  existing  literature.  (2) Communication.  In  this
case,  the  actions  are  taken  to  communicate  with  the  other
agents
 or
 real
 humans
 for
 sharing
 information
 or
collaboration. For example, the agents in ChatDev [18] may
communicate  with  each  other  to  collectively  accomplish
software  development  tasks.  In  Inner  Monologue  [61],  the
agent  actively  engages  in  communication  with  humans  and
adjusts  its  action  strategies  based  on  human  feedback.
(3) Environment Exploration. In this example, the agent aims
to  explore  unfamiliar  environments  to  expand  its  perception
and  strike  a  balance  between  exploring  and  exploiting.  For
instance,  the  agent  in  Voyager  [38]  may  explore  unknown
skills in their task completion process, and continually refine
the  skill  execution  code  based  on  environment  feedback
through trial and error.
Action production: Different from ordinary LLMs, where
the model input and output are directly associated, the agent
may  take  actions  via  different  strategies  and  sources.  In  the
following, we introduce two types of commonly used action
production strategies. (1) Action via memory recollection. In
this strategy, the action is generated by extracting information
from the agent memory according to the current task. The task
and the extracted memories are used as prompts to trigger the
agent  actions.  For  example,  in  Generative  Agents  [20],  the
agent  maintains  a  memory  stream,  and  before  taking  each
action, it retrieves recent, relevant and important information
from the memory steam to guide the agent actions. In GITM
[16],  in  order  to  achieve  a  low-level  sub-goal,  the  agent
queries  its  memory  to  determine  if  there  are  any  successful
experiences  related  to  the  task.  If  similar  tasks  have  been
completed  previously,  the  agent  invokes  the  previously
successful  actions  to  handle  the  current  task  directly.  In
collaborative agents such as ChatDev [18] and MetaGPT [23],
different  agents  may  communicate  with  each  other.  In  this
process, the conversation history in a dialog is remembered in
8
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

the agent memories. Each utterance generated by the agent is
influenced  by  its  memory.  (2)  Action  via  plan  following.  In
this  strategy,  the  agent  takes  actions  following  its  pre-
generated plans. For instance, in DEPS [33], for a given task,
the  agent  first  makes  action  plans.  If  there  are  no  signals
indicating plan failure, the agent will strictly adhere to these
plans.  In  GITM  [16],  the  agent  makes  high-level  plans  by
decomposing  the  task  into  many  sub-goals.  Based  on  these
plans,  the  agent  takes  actions  to  solve  each  sub-goal
sequentially to complete the final task.
Action  space:  Action  space  refers  to  the  set  of  possible
actions that can be performed by the agent. In general, we can
roughly  divide  these  actions  into  two  classes:  (1)  external
tools  and  (2)  internal  knowledge  of  the  LLMs.  In  the
following, we introduce these actions more in detail.
● External tools. While LLMs have been demonstrated to be
effective in accomplishing a large amount of tasks, they may
not  work  well  for  the  domains  which  need  comprehensive
expert  knowledge.  In  addition,  LLMs  may  also  encounter
hallucination  problems,  which  are  hard  to  be  resolved  by
themselves.  To  alleviate  the  above  problems,  the  agents  are
empowered  with  the  capability  to  call  external  tools  for
executing  action.  In  the  following,  we  present  several
representative  tools  which  have  been  exploited  in  the
literature.
(1)  APIs.  Leveraging  external  APIs  to  complement  and
expand action space is a popular paradigm in recent years. For
example,  HuggingGPT  [13]  leverages  the  models  on
HuggingFace  to  accomplish  complex  user  tasks.  [66,67]
propose  to  automatically  generate  queries  to  extract  relevant
content  from  external  Web  pages  when  responding  to  user
request.  TPTU  [67]  interfaces  with  both  Python  interpreters
and  LaTeX  compilers  to  execute  sophisticated  computations
such as square roots, factorials and matrix operations. Another
type of APIs is the ones that can be directly invoked by LLMs
based on natural language or code inputs. For instance, Gorilla
[68] is a fine-tuned LLM designed to generate accurate input
arguments for API calls and mitigate the issue of hallucination
during external API invocations. ToolFormer [15] is an LLM-
based  tool  transformation  system  that  can  automatically
convert  a  given  tool  into  another  one  with  different
functionalities  or  formats  based  on  natural  language
instructions.
 API-Bank
 [69]
 is
 an
 LLM-based
 API
recommendation  agent  that  can  automatically  search  and
generate  appropriate  API  calls  for  various  programming
languages and domains. API-Bank also provides an interactive
interface for users to easily modify and execute the generated
API  calls.  ToolBench  [14]  is  an  LLM-based  tool  generation
system  that  can  automatically  design  and  implement  various
practical  tools  based  on  natural  language  requirements.  The
tools  generated  by  ToolBench  include  calculators,  unit
converters,  calendars,  maps,  charts,  etc.  RestGPT  [70]
connects  LLMs  with  RESTful  APIs,  which  follow  widely
accepted standards for Web services development, making the
resulting
 program
 more
 compatible
 with
 real-world
applications.  TaskMatrix.AI  [71]  connects  LLMs  with
millions of APIs to support task execution. At its core lies a
multimodal  conversational  foundational  model  that  interacts
with  users,  understands  their  goals  and  context,  and  then
produces executable code for particular tasks. All these agents
utilize  external  APIs  as  their  tools,  and  provide  interactive
interfaces for users to easily modify and execute the generated
or transformed tools.
(2)  Databases  &  Knowledge  Bases.  Integrating  external
database or knowledge base enables agents to obtain specific
domain information for generating more realistic actions. For
example,  ChatDB  [40]  employs  SQL  statements  to  query
databases,  facilitating  actions  by  the  agents  in  a  logical
manner.  MRKL  [72]  and  OpenAGI  [73]  incorporate  various
expert  systems  such  as  knowledge  bases  and  planners  to
access domain-specific information.
(3) External models. Previous studies often utilize external
models to expand the range of possible actions. In comparison
to APIs, external models typically handle more complex tasks.
Each  external  model  may  correspond  to  multiple  APIs.  For
example,
 to
 enhance
 the
 text
 retrieval
 capability,
MemoryBank [39] incorporates two language models: one is
designed  to  encode  the  input  text,  while  the  other  is
responsible for matching the query statements. ViperGPT [74]
firstly uses Codex, which is implemented based on language
model,  to  generate  Python  code  from  text  descriptions,  and
then executes the code to complete the given tasks. TPTU [67]
incorporates  various  LLMs  to  accomplish  a  wide  range  of
language generation tasks such as generating code, producing
lyrics, and more. ChemCrow [75] is an LLM-based chemical
agent  designed  to  perform  tasks  in  organic  synthesis,  drug
discovery,  and  material  design.  It  utilizes  seventeen  expert-
designed  models  to  assist  its  operations.  MM-REACT  [76]
integrates  various  external  models,  such  as  VideoBERT  for
video  summarization,  X-decoder  for  image  generation,  and
SpeechBERT for audio processing, enhancing its capability in
diverse multimodal scenarios.
● Internal knowledge. In addition to utilizing external tools,
many agents rely solely on the internal knowledge of LLMs to
guide  their  actions.  We  now  present  several  crucial
capabilities  of  LLMs  that  can  support  the  agent  to  behave
reasonably  and  effectively.  (1)  Planning  capability.  Previous
work  has  demonstrated  that  LLMs  can  be  used  as  decent
planers  to  decompose  complex  task  into  simpler  ones  [45].
Such  capability  of  LLMs  can  be  even  triggered  without
incorporating  examples  in  the  prompts  [46].  Based  on  the
planning capability of LLMs, DEPS [33] develops a Minecraft
agent,  which  can  solve  complex  task  via  sub-goal
decomposition.  Similar  agents  like  GITM  [16]  and  Voyager
[38] also heavily rely on the planning capability of LLMs to
successfully  complete  different  tasks.  (2)  Conversation
capability.
 LLMs
 can
 usually
 generate
 high-quality
conversations.  This  capability  enables  the  agent  to  behave
more  like  humans.  In  the  previous  work,  many  agents  take
actions based on the strong conversation capability of LLMs.
For example, in ChatDev [18], different agents can discuss the
software  developing  process,  and  even  can  make  reflections
on  their  own  behaviors.  In  RLP  [30],  the  agent  can
communicate  with  the  listeners  based  on  their  potential
feedback  on  the  agent’s  utterance.  (3)  Common  sense
understanding  capability.  Another  important  capability  of
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
9

LLMs  is  that  they  can  well  comprehend  human  common
sense.  Based  on  this  capability,  many  agents  can  simulate
human  daily  life  and  make  human-like  decisions.  For
example,  in  Generative  Agent,  the  agent  can  accurately
understand its current state, the surrounding environment, and
summarize  high-level  ideas  based  on  basic  observations.
Without the common sense understanding capability of LLMs,
these  behaviors  cannot  be  reliably  simulated.  Similar
conclusions  may  also  apply  to  RecAgent  [21]  and  S3 [77],
where  the  agents  aim  to  simulate  user  recommendation  and
social behaviors.
Action impact: Action impact refers to the consequences of
the action. In fact, the action impact can encompass numerous
instances,  but  for  brevity,  we  only  provide  a  few  examples.
(1)  Changing  environments.  Agents  can  directly  alter
environment states by actions, such as moving their positions,
collecting items, and constructing buildings. For instance, in
GITM [16] and Voyager [38], the environments are changed
by the actions of the agents in their task completion process.
For example, if the agent mines three woods, then they may
disappear  in  the  environments.  (2)  Altering  internal  states.
Actions  taken  by  the  agent  can  also  change  the  agent  itself,
including  updating  memories,  forming  new  plans,  acquiring
novel  knowledge,  and  more.  For  example,  in  Generative
Agents  [20],  memory  streams  are  updated  after  performing
actions within the system. SayCan [78] enables agents to take
actions  to  update  understandings  of  the  environment.
(3)  Triggering  new  actions.  In  the  task  completion  process,
one  agent  action  can  be  triggered  by  another  one.  For
example,  Voyager  [38]  constructs  buildings  once  it  has
gathered all the necessary resources.
 2.2    Agent capability acquisition
In the above sections, we mainly focus on how to design the
agent architecture to better inspire the capability of LLMs to
make  it  qualified  for  accomplishing  tasks  like  humans.  The
architecture  functions  as  the “hardware” of  the  agent.
However,  relying  solely  on  the  hardware  is  insufficient  for
achieving  effective  task  performance.  This  is  because  the
agent may lack the necessary task-specific capabilities, skills
and  experiences,  which  can  be  regarded  as “software”
resources.  In  order  to  equip  the  agent  with  these  resources,
various strategies have been devised. Generally, we categorize
these strategies into two classes based on whether they require
fine-tuning of the LLMs. In the following, we introduce each
of them more in detail.
Capability acquisition with fine-tuning: A straightforward
method to enhance the agent capability for task completion is
fine-tuning  the  agent  based  on  task-dependent  datasets.
Generally,  the  datasets  can  be  constructed  based  on  human
annotation,  LLM  generation  or  collected  from  real-world
applications.  In  the  following,  we  introduce  these  methods
more in detail.
● Fine-tuning with human annotated datasets. To fine-tune
the  agent,  utilizing  human  annotated  datasets  is  a  versatile
approach  that  can  be  employed  in  various  application
scenarios. In this approach, researchers first design annotation
tasks and then recruit workers to complete them. For example,
in  CoH  [79],  the  authors  aim  to  align  LLMs  with  human
values  and  preferences.  Different  from  the  other  models,
where  the  human  feedback  is  leveraged  in  a  simple  and
symbolic  manner,  this  method  converts  the  human  feedback
into  detailed  comparison  information  in  the  form  of  natural
languages. The LLMs are directly fine-tuned based on these
natural language datasets. In RET-LLM [42], in order to better
convert natural languages into structured memory information,
the  authors  fine-tune  LLMs  based  on  a  human  constructed
dataset, where each sample is a “triplet-natural language” pair.
In WebShop [80], the authors collect 1.18 million real-world
products form amazon.com, and put them onto a simulated e-
commerce website, which contains several carefully designed
human shopping scenarios. Based on this website, the authors
recruit 13 workers to collect a real-human behavior dataset. At
last, three methods based on heuristic rules, imitation learning
and reinforcement learning are trained based on this dataset.
Although the authors do not fine-tune LLM-based agents, we
believe that the dataset proposed in this paper holds immense
potential to enhance the capabilities of agents in the field of
Web shopping. In EduChat [81], the authors aim to enhance
the  educational  functions  of  LLMs,  such  as  open-domain
question answering, essay assessment, Socratic teaching, and
emotional  support.  They  fine-tune  LLMs  based  on  human
annotated  datasets  that  cover  various  educational  scenarios
and tasks. These datasets are manually evaluated and curated
by  psychology  experts  and  frontline  teachers.  SWIFTSAGE
[82]  is  an  agent  influenced  by  the  dual-process  theory  of
human cognition [83], which is effective for solving complex
interactive reasoning tasks. In this agent, the SWIFT module
constitutes a compact encoder-decoder language model, which
is fine-tuned using human-annotated datasets.
● Fine-tuning  with  LLM  generated  datasets.  Building
human annotated dataset needs to recruit people, which can be
costly, especially when one needs to annotate a large amount
of  samples.  Considering  that  LLMs  can  achieve  human-like
capabilities  in  a  wide  range  of  tasks,  a  natural  idea  is  using
LLMs  to  accomplish  the  annotation  task.  While  the  datasets
produced from this method can be not as perfect as the human
annotated ones, it is much cheaper, and can be leveraged to
generate  more  samples.  For  example,  in  ToolBench  [14],  to
enhance  the  tool-using  capability  of  open-source  LLMs,  the
authors collect 16,464 real-world APIs spanning 49 categories
from  the  RapidAPI  Hub.  They  used  these  APIs  to  prompt
ChatGPT  to  generate  diverse  instructions,  covering  both
single-tool  and  multi-tool  scenarios.  Based  on  the  obtained
dataset,  the  authors  fine-tune  LLaMA  [9],  and  obtain
significant performance improvement in terms of tool using.
In  [84],  to  empower  the  agent  with  social  capability,  the
authors  design  a  sandbox,  and  deploy  multiple  agents  to
interact with each other. Given a social question, the central
agent  first  generates  initial  responses.  Then,  it  shares  the
responses  to  its  nearby  agents  for  collecting  their  feedback.
Based on the feedback as well as its detailed explanations, the
central  agent  revise  its  initial  responses  to  make  them  more
consistent  with  social  norms.  In  this  process,  the  authors
collect a large amount of agent social interaction data, which
is then leveraged to fine-tune the LLMs.
10
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

● Fine-tuning  with  real-world  datasets.  In  addition  to
building datasets based on human or LLM annotation, directly
using  real-world  datasets  to  fine-tune  the  agent  is  also  a
common  strategy.  For  example,  in  MIND2WEB  [85],  the
authors  collect  a  large  amount  of  real-world  datasets  to
enhance the agent capability in the Web domain. In contrast to
prior studies, the dataset presented in this paper encompasses
diverse  tasks,  real-world  scenarios,  and  comprehensive  user
interaction  patterns.  Specifically,  the  authors  collect  over
2,000  open-ended  tasks  from  137  real-world  websites
spanning 31 domains. Using this dataset, the authors fine-tune
LLMs  to  enhance  their  performance  on  Web-related  tasks,
including movie discovery and ticket booking, among others.
In SQL-PALM [86], researchers fine-tune PaLM-2 based on a
cross-domain  large-scale  text-to-SQL  dataset  called  Spider.
The  obtained  model  can  achieve  significant  performance
improvement on text-to-SQL tasks.
Capability acquisition without fine-tuning: In the era of
tradition  machine  learning,  the  model  capability  is  mainly
acquired  by  learning  from  datasets,  where  the  knowledge  is
encoded into the model parameters. In the era of LLMs, the
model capability can be acquired either by training/fine-tuning
the  model  parameters  or  designing  delicate  prompts  (i.e.,
prompt  engineer).  In  prompt  engineer,  one  needs  to  write
valuable  information  into  the  prompts  to  enhance  the  model
capability or unleash existing LLM capabilities. In the era of
agents,  the  model  capability  can  be  acquired  based  on  three
strategies:  (1)  model  fine-tuning,  (2)  prompt  engineer,  and
(3) designing proper agent evolution mechanisms (we called it
as mechanism  engineering).  Mechanism  engineering  is  a
broad concept that involves developing specialized modules,
introducing  novel  working  rules,  and  other  strategies  to
enhance  agent  capabilities.  For  clearly  understanding  such
transitions on the strategy of model capability acquisition, we
illustrate  them  in Fig. 4.  In  the  following,  we  introduce
prompting engineering and mechanism engineering for agent
capability acquisition.
● Prompting  engineering.  Due  to  the  strong  language
comprehension capabilities, people can directly interact with
LLMs  using  natural  languages.  This  introduces  a  novel
strategy  for  enhancing  agent  capabilities,  that  is,  one  can
describe the desired capability using natural language and then
use it as prompts to influence LLM actions. For example, in
CoT [45], in order to empower the agent with the capability
for  complex  task  reasoning,  the  authors  present  the
intermediate  reasoning  steps  as  few-shot  examples  in  the
prompt. Similar techniques are also used in CoT-SC [49] and
ToT  [50].  In  SocialAGI  [30],  in  order  to  enhance  the  agent
self-awareness capability in conversation, the authors prompt
LLMs  with  the  agent  beliefs  about  the  mental  states  of  the
listeners and itself, which makes the generated utterance more
engaging  and  adaptive.  In  addition,  the  authors  also
incorporate  the  target  mental  states  of  the  listeners,  which
enables the agents to make more strategic plans. Retroformer
[87] presents a retrospective model that enables the agent to
generate  reflections  on  its  past  failures.  The  reflections  are
integrated into the prompt of LLMs to guide the agent’s future
actions.  Additionally,  this  model  utilizes  reinforcement
learning  to  iteratively  improve  the  retrospective  model,
thereby refining the LLM prompt.
● Mechanism  engineering.  Unlike  model  fine-tuning  and
prompt  engineering,  mechanism  engineering  is  a  unique
strategy  to  enhance  agent  capability.  In  the  following,  we
present  several  representative  methods  of  mechanism
engineering.
(1) Trial-and-error. In this method, the agent first performs
an action, and subsequently, a pre-defined critic is invoked to
judge the action. If the action is deemed unsatisfactory, then
the agent reacts by incorporating the critic’s feedback. In RAH
[88],  the  agent  serves  as  a  user  assistant  in  recommender
systems. One of the agent’s crucial roles is to simulate human
behavior  and  generate  responses  on  behalf  of  the  user.  To
fulfill  this  objective,  the  agent  first  generates  a  predicted
response and then compares it with the real human feedback.
If the predicted response and the real human feedback differ,
the critic generates failure information, which is subsequently
incorporated  into  the  agent’s  next  action.  In  DEPS  [33],  the
agent first designs a plan to accomplish a given task. In the
plan  execution  process,  if  an  action  fails,  the  explainer
generates specific details explaining the cause of the failure.
This information is then incorporated by the agent to redesign
the plan. In RoCo [89], the agent first proposes a sub-task plan
and  a  path  of  3D  waypoints  for  each  robot  in  a  multi-robot
collaboration task. The plan and waypoints are then validated
 
 
Fig. 4    Illustration of transitions in strategies for acquiring model capabilities
 
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
11

by a set of environment checks, such as collision detection and
inverse kinematics. If any of the checks fail, the feedback is
appended to each agent’s prompt and another round of dialog
begins.  The  agents  use  LLMs  to  discuss  and  improve  their
plan and waypoints until they pass all validations. In PREFER
[90], the agent first evaluates its performance on a subset of
data. If it fails to solve certain examples, LLMs are leveraged
to generate feedback information reflecting on the reasons of
the failure. Based on this feedback, the agent improves itself
by iteratively refining its actions.
(2) Crowd-sourcing. In [91], the authors design a debating
mechanism that leverages the wisdom of crowds to enhance
agent  capabilities.  To  begin  with,  different  agents  provide
separate responses to a given question. If their responses are
not  consistent,  they  will  be  prompted  to  incorporate  the
solutions from other agents and provide an updated response.
This  iterative  process  continues  until  reaching  a  final
consensus answer. In this method, the capability of each agent
is  enhanced  by  understanding  and  incorporating  the  other
agents’ opinions.
(3) Experience accumulation. In GITM [16], the agent does
not know how to solve a task in the beginning. Then, it makes
explorations, and once it has successfully accomplished a task,
the actions used in this task are stored into the agent memory.
In the future, if the agent encounters a similar task, then the
relevant memories are extracted to complete the current task.
In this process, the improved agent capability comes from the
specially  designed  memory  accumulation  and  utilization
mechanisms.  In  Voyager  [38],  the  authors  equip  the  agent
with a skill library, and each skill in the library is represented
by  executable  codes.  In  the  agent-environment  interaction
process,  the  codes  for  each  skill  will  be  iteratively  refined
according  to  the  environment  feedback  and  the  agent  self-
verification results. After a period of execution, the agent can
successfully complete different tasks efficiently by accessing
the  skill  library.  In  AppAgent  [92],  the  agent  is  designed  to
interact with apps in a manner akin to human users, learning
through  both  autonomous  exploration  and  observation  of
human demonstrations. Throughout this process, it constructs
a knowledge base, which serves as a reference for performing
intricate tasks across various applications on a mobile phone.
In  MemPrompt  [93],  the  users  are  requested  to  provide
feedback  in  natural  language  regarding  the  problem-solving
intentions of the agent, and this feedback is stored in memory.
When the agent encounters similar tasks, it attempts to retrieve
related memories to generate more suitable responses.
(4)  Self-driven  evolution.  In  LMA3  [94],  the  agent  can
autonomously  set  goals  for  itself,  and  gradually  improve  its
capability  by  exploring  the  environment  and  receiving
feedback from a reward function. Following this mechanism,
the  agent  can  acquire  knowledge  and  develop  capabilities
according  to  its  own  preferences.  In  SALLM-MS  [95],  by
integrating advanced large language models like GPT-4 into a
multi-agent  system,  agents  can  adapt  and  perform  complex
tasks,  showcasing  advanced  communication  capabilities,
thereby  realizing  self-driven  evolution  in  their  interactions
with  the  environment.  In  CLMTWA  [96],  by  using  a  large
language model as a teacher and a weaker language model as a
student,  the  teacher  can  generate  and  communicate  natural
language  explanations  to  improve  the  student’s  reasoning
skills via theory of mind. The teacher can also personalize its
explanations  for  the  student  and  intervene  only  when
necessary,  based  on  the  expected  utility  of  intervention.  In
NLSOM  [97],  different  agents  communicate  and  collaborate
through  natural  language  to  solve  tasks  that  a  single  agent
cannot  solve.  This  can  be  seen  as  a  form  of  self-driven
learning, utilizing the exchange of information and knowledge
between multiple agents. However, unlike other models such
as LMA3, SALLM-MS, and CLMTWA, NLSOM allows for
dynamic  adjustment  of  agent  roles,  tasks,  and  relationships
based on the task requirements and feedback from other agents
or the environment.
Remark.  Upon  comparing  the  aforementioned  strategies  for
agent capability acquisition, we can find that the fine-tuning
method  improves  the  agent  capability  by  adjusting  model
parameters,  which  can  incorporate  a  large  amount  of  task-
specific  knowledge,  but  is  only  suitable  for  open-source
LLMs. The method without fine-tuning usually enhances the
agent  capability  based  on  delicate  prompting  strategies  or
mechanism engineering. They can be used for both open- and
closed-source  LLMs.  However,  due  to  the  limitation  of  the
input context window of LLMs, they cannot incorporate too
much  task  information.  In  addition,  the  designing  spaces  of
the  prompts  and  mechanisms  are  extremely  large,  which
makes it not easy to find optimal solutions.
In the above sections, we have detailed the construction of
LLM-based agents, where we focus on two aspects including
the architecture design and capability acquisition. We present
the  correspondence  between  existing  work  and  the  above
taxonomy in Table 1. It should be noted that, for the sake of
integrity, we have also incorporated several studies, which do
not  explicitly  mention  LLM-based  agents  but  are  highly
related to this area.
 3    LLM-based autonomous agent
application
Owing  to  the  strong  language  comprehension,  complex  task
reasoning,  and  common  sense  understanding  capabilities,
LLM-based  autonomous  agents  have  shown  significant
potential to influence multiple domains. This section provides
a  succinct  summary  of  previous  studies,  categorizing  them
according  to  their  applications  in  three  distinct  areas:  social
science, natural science, and engineering (see the left part of
Fig. 5 for a global overview).
 3.1    Social science
Social science is one of the branches of science, devoted to the
study  of  societies  and  the  relationships  among  individuals
within  those  societies.  LLM-based  autonomous  agents  can
promote  this  domain  by  leveraging  their  impressive  human-
like  understanding,  thinking  and  task  solving  capabilities.  In
the  following,  we  discuss  several  key  areas  that  can  be
affected by LLM-based autonomous agents.
Psychology:  For  the  domain  of  psychology,  LLM-based
agents
 can
 be
 leveraged
 for
 conducting
 simulation
experiments,  providing  mental  health  support  and  so  on
12
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

[102–105].  For  example,  in  [102],  the  authors  assign  LLMs
with  different  profiles,  and  let  them  complete  psychology
experiments. From the results, the authors find that LLMs are
capable of generating results that align with those from studies
involving  human  participants.  Additionally,  it  was  observed
that  larger  models  tend  to  deliver  more  accurate  simulation
results compared to their smaller counterparts. An interesting
discovery is that, in many experiments, models like ChatGPT
   
Table  1    For  the  profile  module,  we  use ①, ②,  and ③ to  represent  the  handcrafting  method,  LLM-generation  method,  and  dataset  alignment  method,
respectively. For the memory module, we focus on the implementation strategies for memory operation and memory structure. For memory operation, we use
① and ② to indicate that the model only has read/write operations and has read/write/reflection operations, respectively. For memory structure, we use ① and
② to represent unified and hybrid memories, respectively. For the planning module, we use ① and ② to represent planning w/o feedback and w/ feedback,
respectively. For the action module, we use ① and ② to represent that the model does not use tools and use tools, respectively. For the agent capability
acquisition (CA) strategy, we use ① and ② to represent the methods with and without fine-tuning, respectively. “−” indicates that the corresponding content is
not explicitly discussed in the paper
Model
Profile
Memory
Planning
Action
CA
Time
Operation
Structure
WebGPT [66]
−
−
−
−
②
①
12/2021
SayCan [78]
−
−
−
①
①
②
04/2022
MRKL [72]
−
−
−
①
②
−
05/2022
Inner Monologue [61]
−
−
−
②
①
②
07/2022
Social Simulacra [98]
②
−
−
−
①
−
08/2022
ReAct [59]
−
−
−
②
②
①
10/2022
MALLM [43]
−
①
②
−
①
−
01/2023
DEPS [33]
−
−
−
②
①
②
02/2023
Toolformer [15]
−
−
−
①
②
①
02/2023
Reflexion [12]
−
②
②
②
①
②
03/2023
CAMEL [99]
① ②
−
−
②
①
−
03/2023
API-Bank [69]
−
−
−
②
②
②
04/2023
ViperGPT [74]
−
−
−
−
②
−
03/2023
HuggingGPT [13]
−
−
①
①
②
−
03/2023
Generative Agents [20]
①
②
②
②
①
−
04/2023
LLM+P [57]
−
−
−
①
①
−
04/2023
ChemCrow [75]
−
−
−
②
②
−
04/2023
OpenAGI [73]
−
−
−
②
②
①
04/2023
AutoGPT [100]
−
①
②
②
②
②
04/2023
SCM [35]
−
②
②
−
①
−
04/2023
Socially Alignment [84]
−
①
②
−
①
①
05/2023
GITM [16]
−
②
②
②
①
②
05/2023
Voyager [38]
−
②
②
②
①
②
05/2023
Introspective Tips [101]
−
−
−
②
①
②
05/2023
RET-LLM [42]
−
①
②
−
①
①
05/2023
ChatDB [40]
−
①
②
②
②
−
06/2023
S 3 [77]
③
②
②
−
①
−
07/2023
ChatDev [18]
①
②
②
②
①
②
07/2023
ToolLLM [14]
−
−
−
②
②
①
07/2023
MemoryBank [39]
−
②
②
−
①
−
07/2023
MetaGPT [23]
①
②
②
②
②
−
08/2023
 
 
 
Fig. 5    The applications (left) and evaluation strategies (right) of LLM-based agents
 
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
13

and GPT-4 can provide too perfect estimates (called “hyper-
accuracy  distortion”),  which  may  influence  the  downstream
applications. In [104], the authors systematically analyze the
effectiveness  of  LLM-based  conversation  agents  for  mental
well-being support. They collect 120 posts from Reddit, and
find that such agents can help users cope with anxieties, social
isolation and depression on demand. At the same time, they
also  find  that  the  agents  may  produce  harmful  contents
sometimes.
Political science and economy: LLM-based agents can also
be  utilized  to  study  political  science  and  economy
[29,105,106].  In  [29],  LLM-based  agents  are  utilized  for
ideology detection and predicting voting patterns. In [105], the
authors focuses on understanding the discourse structure and
persuasive elements of political speech through the assistance
of  LLM-based  agents.  In  [106],  LLM-based  agents  are
provided with specific traits such as talents, preferences, and
personalities  to  explore  human  economic  behaviors  in
simulated scenarios.
Social simulation: Previously, conducting experiments with
human  societies  is  often  expensive,  unethical,  or  even
infeasible.  With  the  ever  prospering  of  LLMs,  many  people
explore to build virtual environment with LLM-based agents
to  simulate  social  phenomena,  such  as  the  propagation  of
harmful  information,  and  so  on  [20,34,77,79,107–110].  For
example,  Social  Simulacra  [79]  simulates  an  online  social
community and explores the potential of utilizing agent-based
simulations  to  aid  decision-makers  to  improve  community
regulations.  [107,108]  investigates  the  potential  impacts  of
different  behavioral  characteristics  of  LLM-based  agents  in
social networks. Generative Agents [20] and AgentSims [34]
construct  multiple  agents  in  a  virtual  town  to  simulate  the
human daily life. SocialAI School [109] employs LLM-based
agents  to  simulate  and  investigate  the  fundamental  social
cognitive  skills  during  the  course  of  child  development.  S3
[77]  builds  a  social  network  simulator,  focusing  on  the
propagation of information, emotion and attitude. CGMI [111]
is  a  framework  for  multi-agent  simulation.  CGMI  maintains
the  personality  of  the  agents  through  a  tree  structure  and
constructs  a  cognitive  model.  The  authors  simulated  a
classroom scenario using CGMI.
Jurisprudence:  LLM-based  agents  can  serve  as  aids  in
legal  decision-making  processes,  facilitating  more  informed
judgements  [112,113].  Blind  Judgement  [113]  employs
several  language  models  to  simulate  the  decision-making
processes of multiple judges. It gathers diverse opinions and
consolidates  the  outcomes  through  a  voting  mechanism.
ChatLaw [112] is a prominent Chinese legal model based on
LLM. It adeptly supports both database and keyword search
strategies,  specifically  designed  to  mitigate  the  hallucination
issue  prevalent  in  such  models.  In  addition,  this  model  also
employs  self-attention  mechanism  to  enhance  the  LLM’s
capability via mitigating the impact of reference inaccuracies.
Research assistant: Beyond their application in specialized
domains,  LLM-based  agents  are  increasingly  adopted  as
versatile assistants in the broad field of social science research
[105,114].  In  [105],  LLM-based  agents  offer  multifaceted
assistance,  ranging  from  generating  concise  article  abstracts
and extracting pivotal keywords to crafting detailed scripts for
studies, showcasing their ability to enrich and streamline the
research  process.  Meanwhile,  in  [114],  LLM-based  agents
serve as a writing assistant, demonstrating their capability to
identify novel research inquiries for social scientists, thereby
opening  new  avenues  for  exploration  and  innovation  in  the
field.  These  examples  highlight  the  potential  of  LLM-based
agents in enhancing the efficiency, creativity, and breadth of
social science research.
 3.2    Natural science
Natural  science  is  one  of  the  branches  of  science  concerned
with the description, understanding and prediction of natural
phenomena,  based  on  empirical  evidence  from  observation
and experimentation. With the ever prospering of LLMs, the
application of LLM-based agents in natural sciences becomes
more  and  more  popular.  In  the  following,  we  present  many
representative  areas,  where  LLM-based  agents  can  play
important roles.
Documentation and data management: Natural scientific
research  often  involves  the  collection,  organization,  and
synthesis of substantial amounts of literature, which requires a
significant  dedication  of  time  and  human  resources.  LLM-
based  agents  have  shown  strong  capabilities  on  language
understanding  and  employing  tools  such  as  the  internet  and
databases for text processing. These capabilities empower the
agent  to  excel  in  tasks  related  to  documentation  and  data
management [75,115,116]. In [115], the agent can efficiently
query and utilize internet information to complete tasks such
as  question  answering  and  experiment  planning.  ChatMOF
[116] utilizes LLMs to extract important information from text
descriptions  written  by  humans.  It  then  formulates  a  plan  to
apply relevant tools for predicting the properties and structures
of  metal-organic  frameworks.  ChemCrow  [75]  utilizes
chemistry-related  databases  to  both  validate  the  precision  of
compound representations and identify potentially dangerous
substances.  This  functionality  enhances  the  reliability  and
comprehensiveness  of  scientific  inquiries  by  ensuring  the
accuracy of the data involved.
Experiment assistant: LLM-based agents have the ability
to independently conduct experiments, making them valuable
tools  for  supporting  scientists  in  their  research  projects
[75,115].  For  instance,  [115]  introduces  an  innovative  agent
system that utilizes LLMs for automating the design, planning,
and  execution  of  scientific  experiments.  This  system,  when
provided  with  the  experimental  objectives  as  input,  accesses
the  Internet  and  retrieves  relevant  documents  to  gather  the
necessary information. It subsequently utilizes Python code to
conduct  essential  calculations  and  carry  out  the  following
experiments.  ChemCrow  [75]  incorporates  17  carefully
developed  tools  that  are  specifically  designed  to  assist
researchers  in  their  chemical  research.  Once  the  input
objectives  are  received,  ChemCrow  provides  valuable
recommendations  for  experimental  procedures,  while  also
emphasizing  any  potential  safety  risks  associated  with  the
proposed experiments.
Natural  science  education:  LLM-based  agents  can
communicate  with  humans  fluently,  often  being  utilized  to
14
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

develop  agent-based  educational  tools  [115,117–119].  For
example,  [115]  develops  agent-based  education  systems  to
facilitate
 students
 learning
 of
 experimental
 design,
methodologies, and analysis. The objective of these systems is
to  enhance  students’ critical  thinking  and  problem-solving
skills,  while  also  fostering  a  deeper  comprehension  of
scientific principles. Math Agents [117] can assist researchers
in  exploring,  discovering,  solving  and  proving  mathematical
problems. Additionally, it can communicate with humans and
aids  them  in  understanding  and  using  mathematics.  [118]
utilize the capabilities of CodeX [119] to automatically solve
and  explain  university-level  mathematical  problems,  which
can  be  used  as  education  tools  to  teach  students  and
researchers.  CodeHelp  [120]  is  an  education  agent  for
programming. It offers many useful features, such as setting
course-specific  keywords,  monitoring  student  queries,  and
providing feedback to the system. EduChat [81] is an LLM-
based agent designed specifically for the education domain. It
provides  personalized,  equitable,  and  empathetic  educational
support  to  teachers,  students,  and  parents  through  dialogue.
FreeText [121] is an agent that utilizes LLMs to automatically
assess students’ responses to open-ended questions and offer
feedback.
 3.3    Engineering
LLM-based autonomous agents have shown great potential in
assisting and enhancing engineering research and applications.
In this section, we review and summarize the applications of
LLM-based agents in several major engineering domains.
Civil engineering: In civil engineering, LLM-based agents
can be used to design and optimize complex structures such as
buildings, bridges, dams, roads. [122] proposes an interactive
framework where human architects and agents collaborate to
construct  structures  in  a  3D  simulation  environment.  The
interactive agent can understand natural language instructions,
place  blocks,  detect  confusion,  seek  clarification,  and
incorporate  human  feedback,  showing  the  potential  for
human-AI collaboration in engineering design.
Computer  science  &  software  engineering:  In  the  field
of  computer  science  and  software  engineering,  LLM-
based  agents  offer  potential  for  automating  coding,
testing,
 debugging,
 and
 documentation
 generation
[14,18,23,24,123–125]. ChatDev [18] proposes an end-to-end
framework,  where  multiple  agent  roles  communicate  and
collaborate  through  natural  language  conversations  to
complete the software development life cycle. This framework
demonstrates  efficient  and  cost-effective  generation  of
executable software systems. ToolBench [14] can be used for
tasks such as code auto-completion and code recommendation.
MetaGPT  [23]  abstracts  multiple  roles,  such  as  product
managers,  architects,  project  managers,  and  engineers,  to
supervise code generation process and enhance the quality of
the  final  output  code.  This  enables  low-cost  software
development. [24] presents a self-collaboration framework for
code  generation  using  LLMs.  In  this  framework,  multiple
LLMs are assumed to be distinct “experts” for specific sub-
tasks.  They  collaborate  and  interact  according  to  specified
instructions, forming a virtual team that facilitates each other’s
work.  Ultimately,  the  virtual  team  collaboratively  addresses
code  generation  tasks  without  requiring  human  intervention.
LLIFT  [126]  employs  LLMs  to  assist  in  conducting  static
analysis,
 specifically
 for
 identifying
 potential
 code
vulnerabilities.  This  approach  effectively  manages  the  trade-
off  between  accuracy  and  scalability.  ChatEDA  [127]  is  an
agent  developed  for  electronic  design  automation  (EDA)  to
streamline  the  design  process  by  integrating  task  planning,
script generation, and execution. CodeHelp [120] is an agent
designed to assist students and developers in debugging and
testing  their  code.  Its  features  include  providing  detailed
explanations of error messages, suggesting potential fixes, and
ensuring the accuracy of the code. PENTESTGPT [128] is a
penetration testing tool based on LLMs, which can effectively
identify common vulnerabilities, and interpret source code to
develop  exploits.  DB-GPT  [41]  utilizes  the  capabilities  of
LLMs  to  systematically  assess  potential  root  causes  of
anomalies in databases. Through the implementation of a tree
of thought approach, DB-GPT enables LLMs to backtrack to
previous  steps  in  case  the  current  step  proves  unsuccessful,
thus enhancing the accuracy of the diagnosis process.
Industrial
 automation:
 In
 the
 field
 of
 industrial
automation,  LLM-based  agents  can  be  used  to  achieve
intelligent planning and control of production processes. [129]
proposes  a  novel  framework  that  integrates  large  language
models  (LLMs)  with  digital  twin  systems  to  accommodate
flexible  production  needs.  The  framework  leverages  prompt
engineering techniques to create LLM agents that can adapt to
specific  tasks  based  on  the  information  provided  by  digital
twins.  These  agents  can  coordinate  a  series  of  atomic
functionalities  and  skills  to  complete  production  tasks  at
different levels within the automation pyramid. This research
demonstrates the potential of integrating LLMs into industrial
automation systems, providing innovative solutions for more
agile,  flexible  and  adaptive  production  processes.  IELLM
[130] showcases a case study on LLMs’ role in the oil and gas
industry,  covering  applications  like  rock  physics,  acoustic
reflectometry, and coiled tubing control.
Robotics & embodied artificial intelligence: Recent works
have developed more efficient reinforcement learning agents
for
 robotics
 and
 embodied
 artificial
 intelligence
[16,38,78,131–138].  The  focus  is  on  enhancing  autonomous
agents’ abilities for planning, reasoning, and collaboration in
embodied environments. In specific, [135] proposes a unified
agent  system  for  embodied  reasoning  and  task  planning.  In
this system, the authors design high-level commands to enable
improved  planning  while  propose  low-level  controllers  to
translate  commands  into  actions.  Additionally,  one  can
leverage  dialogues  to  gather  information  [136]  to  accelerate
the  optimization  process.  [137,138]  employ  autonomous
agents  for  embodied  decision-making  and  exploration.  To
overcome  the  physical  constraints,  the  agents  can  generate
executable  plans  and  accomplish  long-term  tasks  by
leveraging multiple skills. In terms of control policies, SayCan
[78]  focuses  on  investigating  a  wide  range  of  manipulation
and  navigation  skills  utilizing  a  mobile  manipulator  robot.
Taking inspiration from typical tasks encountered in a kitchen
environment, it presents a comprehensive set of 551 skills that
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
15

cover  seven  skill  families  and  17  objects.  These  skills
encompass various actions such as picking, placing, pouring,
grasping,  and  manipulating  objects,  among  others.  TidyBot
[139] is an embodied agent designed to personalize household
cleanup  tasks.  It  can  learn  users’ preferences  on  object
placement  and  manipulation  methods  through  textual
examples.
To  promote  the  application  of  LLM-based  autonomous
agents,  researchers  have  also  introduced  many  open-source
libraries,  based  on  which  the  developers  can  quickly
implement and evaluate agents according to their customized
requirements [19,108,124,140–153]. For example, LangChain
[145]  is  an  open-source  framework  that  automates  coding,
testing,  debugging,  and  documentation  generation  tasks.  By
integrating language models with data sources and facilitating
interaction with the environment, LangChain enables efficient
and  cost-effective  software  development  through  natural
language  communication  and  collaboration  among  multiple
agent roles. Based on LangChain, XLang [143] comes with a
comprehensive  set  of  tools,  a  complete  user  interface,  and
support  three  different  agent  scenarios,  namely  data
processing, plugin usage, and Web agent. AutoGPT [100] is
an  agent  that  is  fully  automated.  It  sets  one  or  more  goals,
breaks  them  down  into  corresponding  tasks,  and  cycles
through the tasks until the goal is achieved. WorkGPT [146] is
an agent framework similar to AutoGPT and LangChain. By
providing it with an instruction and a set of APIs, it engages in
back-and-forth  conversations  with  AI  until  the  instruction  is
completed.  GPT-Engineer  [125],  SmolModels  [123]  and
DemoGPT  [124]  are  open-source  projects  that  focus  on
automating  code  generation  through  prompts  to  complete
development tasks. AGiXT [142] is a dynamic AI automation
platform  designed  to  orchestrate  efficient  AI  command
management  and  task  execution  across  many  providers.
AgentVerse  [19]  is  a  versatile  framework  that  facilitates
researchers
 in
 creating
 customized
 LLM-based
 agent
simulations  efficiently.  GPT  Researcher  [148]  is  an
experimental application that leverages large language models
to efficiently develop research questions, trigger Web crawls
to  gather  information,  summarize  sources,  and  aggregate
summaries. BMTools [149] is an open-source repository that
extends  LLMs  with  tools  and  provides  a  platform  for
community-driven  tool  building  and  sharing.  It  supports
various  types  of  tools,  enables  simultaneous  task  execution
using multiple tools, and offers a simple interface for loading
plugins
 via
 URLs,
 fostering
 easy
 development
 and
contribution to the BMTools ecosystem.
Remark. Utilization of LLM-based agents in supporting above
applications  may  also  entail  risks  and  challenges.  On  one
hand,  LLMs  themselves  may  be  susceptible  to  illusions  and
other  issues,  occasionally  providing  erroneous  answers,
leading to incorrect conclusions, experimental failures, or even
posing  risks  to  human  safety  in  hazardous  experiments.
Therefore,  during  experimentation,  users  must  possess  the
necessary  expertise  and  knowledge  to  exercise  appropriate
caution.  On  the  other  hand,  LLM-based  agents  could
potentially  be  exploited  for  malicious  purposes,  such  as  the
development
 of
 chemical
 weapons,
 necessitating
 the
implementation  of  security  measures,  such  as  human
alignment, to ensure responsible and ethical use.
In summary, in the above sections, we introduce the typical
applications  of  LLM-based  autonomous  agents  in  three
important  domains.  To  facilitate  a  clearer  understanding,  we
have  summarized  the  relationship  between  previous  studies
and their respective applications in Table 2.
 4    LLM-based autonomous agent
evaluation
Similar  to  LLMs  themselves,  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of
LLM-based  autonomous  agents  is  a  challenging  task.  This
section  outlines  two  prevalent  approaches  to  evaluation:
subjective  and  objective  methods.  For  a  comprehensive
overview, please refer to the right portion of Fig. 5.
 4.1    Subjective evaluation
Subjective evaluation measures the agent capabilities based on
human  judgements  [20,22,29,79,158].  It  is  suitable  for  the
scenarios where there are no evaluation datasets or it is very
   
Table 2    Representative applications of LLM-based autonomous agents
Domain
Work
Social
Science
Psychology
TE [102], Akata et al. [103], Ziems et al. [105], Ma et al. [104]
Political Science and
Economy
Out of One [29], Horton [106], Ziems et al. [105]
Social Simulation
Social Simulacra [79], Generative Agents [20], SocialAI School [109], AgentSims [34],
S3 [77], Williams et al. [110], Li et al. [107], Chao et al. [108]
Jurisprudence
ChatLaw [112], Blind Judgement [113]
Research Assistant
Ziems et al. [105], Bail et al. [114]
Natural
Science
Documentation and
Data Management
ChemCrow [75], Boiko et al. [115]
Experiment Assistant
ChemCrow [75], Boiko et al. [115], Grossmann et al. [154]
Natural Science
Education
ChemCrow [75], CodeHelp [120], Boiko et al. [115], MathAgent [117], Drori et al. [118]
Engineering
CS & SE
RestGPT [70], Self-collaboration [24], SQL-PALM [86], RAH [88], DB-GPT [41], RecMind [51], ChatEDA [127],
InteRecAgent [155], PentestGPT [128], CodeHelp [120], SmolModels [123], DemoGPT [124], GPTEngineer [125]
Industrial
Automation
GPT4IA [129], IELLM [130], TaskMatrix.AI [71]
Robotics &
Embodied AI
ProAgent [156], LLM4RL [131], PET [132], REMEMBERER [133], DEPS [33], Unified Agent [134], SayCan [78],
LMMWM [157], TidyBot [139], RoCo [89], SayPlan [31]
 
16
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

hard  to  design  quantitative  metrics,  for  example,  evaluating
the agent’s intelligence or user-friendliness. In the following,
we  present  two  commonly  used  strategies  for  subjective
evaluation.
Human  annotation:  This  evaluation  method  involves
human  evaluators  directly  scoring  or  ranking  the  outputs
generated by various agents [22,29,102]. For example, in [20],
the authors employ many annotators, and ask them to provide
feedback  on  five  key  questions  that  directly  associated  with
the
 agent
 capability.
 Similarly,
 [159]
 assess
 model
effectiveness by having human participants rate the models on
harmlessness,
 honesty,
 helpfulness,
 engagement,
 and
unbiasedness,  subsequently  comparing  these  scores  across
different  models.  In  [79],  annotators  are  asked  to  determine
whether  the  specifically  designed  models  can  significantly
enhance the development of rules within online communities.
Turing  test:  This  evaluation  strategy  necessitates  that
human  evaluators  differentiate  between  outputs  produced  by
agents and those created by humans. If, in a given task, the
evaluators  cannot  separate  the  agent  and  human  results,  it
demonstrates  that  the  agent  can  achieve  human-like
performance  on  this  task.  For  instance,  researchers  in  [29]
conduct  experiments  on  free-form  Partisan  text,  and  the
human evaluators are asked to guess whether the responses are
from  human  or  LLM-based  agent.  In  [20],  the  human
evaluators are required to identify whether the behaviors are
generated from the agents or real-humans. In EmotionBench
[160],  human  annotations  are  collected  to  compare  the
emotional  states  expressed  by  LLM  software  and  human
participants across various scenarios. This comparison serves
as  a  benchmark  for  evaluating  the  emotional  intelligence  of
the  LLM  software,  illustrating  a  nuanced  approach  to
understanding  agent  capabilities  in  mimicking  human-like
performance and emotional expression.
Remark.  LLM-based  agents  are  usually  designed  to  serve
humans. Thus, subjective agent evaluation plays a critical role,
since it reflects human criterion. However, this strategy also
faces  issues  such  as  high  costs,  inefficiency,  and  population
bias. To address these issues, a growing number of researchers
are
 investigating
 the
 use
 of
 LLMs
 themselves
 as
intermediaries  for  carrying  out  these  subjective  assessments.
For  example,  in  ChemCrow  [75],  researchers  assess  the
experimental  results  using  GPT.  They  consider  both  the
completion  of  tasks  and  the  accuracy  of  the  underlying
processes.  Similarly,  ChatEval  [161]  introduces  a  novel
approach by employing multiple agents to critique and assess
the  results  generated  by  various  candidate  models  in  a
structured  debate  format.  This  innovative  use  of  LLMs  for
evaluation  purposes  holds  promise  for  enhancing  both  the
credibility  and  applicability  of  subjective  assessments  in  the
future.  As  LLM  technology  continues  to  evolve,  it  is
anticipated  that  these  methods  will  become  increasingly
reliable and find broader applications, thereby overcoming the
current limitations of direct human evaluation.
 4.2    Objective evaluation
Objective  evaluation  refers  to  assessing  the  capabilities  of
LLM-based autonomous agents using quantitative metrics that
can be computed, compared and tracked over time. In contrast
to  subjective  evaluation,  objective  metrics  aim  to  provide
concrete, measurable insights into the agent performance. For
conducting  objective  evaluation,  there  are  three  important
aspects,  that  is,  the  evaluation  metrics,  protocols  and
benchmarks.  In  the  following,  we  introduce  these  aspects
more in detail.
Metrics: In order to objectively evaluate the effectiveness of
the agents, designing proper metrics is significant, which may
influence  the  evaluation  accuracy  and  comprehensiveness.
Ideal evaluation metrics should precisely reflect the quality of
the  agents,  and  align  with  the  human  feelings  when  using
them  in  real-world  scenarios.  In  existing  work,  we  can
conclude  the  following  representative  evaluation  metrics.
(1) Task success metrics: These metrics measure how well an
agent can complete tasks and achieve goals. Common metrics
include success rate [12,22,57,59], reward/score [22,59,122],
coverage  [16],  and  accuracy  [18,40,102].  Higher  values
indicate greater task completion ability. (2) Human similarity
metrics: These metrics quantify the degree to which the agent
behaviors closely resembles that of humans. Typical examples
include
 trajectory/location
 accuracy
 [38,162],
 dialogue
similarities  [79,102],  and  mimicry  of  human  responses
[29,102]. Higher similarity suggests better human simulation
performance.  (3) Efficiency  metrics:  In  contrast  to  the
aforementioned
 metrics
 used
 to
 evaluate
 the
 agent
effectiveness,  these  metrics  aim  to  assess  the  efficiency  of
agent. Commonly considered metrics encompass the length of
planning [57], the cost associated with development [18], the
speed  of  inference  [16,38],  and  number  of  clarification
dialogues [122].
Protocols:  In  addition  to  the  evaluation  metrics,  another
important  aspect  for  objective  evaluation  is  how  to  leverage
these  metrics.  In  the  previous  work,  we  can  identify  the
following  commonly  used  evaluation  protocols:  (1) Real-
world  simulation:  In  this  method,  the  agents  are  evaluated
within  immersive  environments  like  games  and  interactive
simulators.  The  agents  are  required  to  perform  tasks
autonomously,  and  then  metrics  like  task  success  rate  and
human  similarity  are  leveraged  to  evaluate  the  capability  of
the agents based on their trajectories and completed objectives
[16,22,33,38,59,80,122,162,163,164]. This method is expected
to  evaluate  the  agents’ practical  capabilities  in  real-world
scenarios. (2) Social evaluation: This method utilizes metrics
to assess social intelligence based on the agent interactions in
simulated  societies.  Various  approaches  have  been  adopted,
such  as  collaborative  tasks  to  evaluate  teamwork  skills,
debates  to  analyze  argumentative  reasoning,  and  human
studies to measure social aptitude [34,98,102,165,166]. These
approaches  analyze  qualities  such  as  coherence,  theory  of
mind,  and  social  IQ  to  assess  agents’ capabilities  in  areas
including
 cooperation,
 communication,
 empathy,
 and
mimicking  human  social  behavior.  By  subjecting  agents  to
complex  interactive  settings,  social  evaluation  provides
valuable  insights  into  agents’ higher-level  social  cognition.
(3) Multi-task  evaluation:  In  this  method,  people  use  a  set
of  diverse  tasks  from  different  domains  to  evaluate  the
agent,
 which
 can
 effectively
 measure
 the
 agent
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
17

generalization  capability  in  open-domain  environments
[29,80,153,163,165,166,167].  (4) Software  testing:  In  this
method,  researchers  evaluate  the  agents  by  letting  them
conduct  tasks  such  as  software  testing  tasks,  such  as
generating test cases, reproducing bugs, debugging code, and
interacting
 with
 developers
 and
 external
 tools
[166,168,169,170].  Then,  one  can  use  metrics  like  test
coverage and bug detection rate to measure the effectiveness
of LLM-based agents.
Benchmarks:  Given  the  metrics  and  protocols,  a  crucial
remaining aspect is the selection of an appropriate benchmark
for  conducting  the  evaluation.  In  the  past,  people  have  used
various benchmarks in their experiments. For example, many
researchers use simulation environments like ALFWorld [59],
IGLU  [122],  and  Minecraft  [16,33,38]  as  benchmarks  to
evaluate  the  agent  capabilities.  Tachikuma  [164]  is  a
benchmark that leverages TRPG game logs to evaluate LLMs’
ability  to  understand  and  infer  complex  interactions  with
multiple  characters  and  novel  objects.  AgentBench  [167]
provides a comprehensive framework for evaluating LLMs as
autonomous agents across diverse environments. It represents
the  first  systematic  assessment  of  LLMs  as  agents  on  real-
world challenges across diverse domains. SocKET [165] is a
comprehensive
 benchmark
 for
 evaluating
 the
 social
capabilities of LLMs across 58 tasks covering five categories
of  social  information  such  as  humor  and  sarcasm,  emotions
and  feelings,  and  credibility.  AgentSims  [34]  is  a  versatile
framework for evaluating LLM-based agents, where one can
flexibly  design  the  agent  planning,  memory  and  action
strategies,  and  measure  the  effectiveness  of  different  agent
modules  in  interactive  environments.  ToolBench  [149]  is  an
open-source project that aims to support the development of
powerful  LLMs  with  general  tool-use  capability.  It  provides
an open platform for training, serving, and evaluating LLMs
based on tool learning. WebShop [80] develops a benchmark
for evaluating LLM-based agents in terms of their capabilities
for product search and retrieval. The benchmark is constructed
using  a  collection  of  1.18  million  real-world  items.  Mobile-
Env [163] is an extendable interactive platform which can be
used  to  evaluate  the  multi-step  interaction  capabilities  of
LLM-based agents. WebArena [171] offers a comprehensive
website environment that spans multiple domains. Its purpose
is to evaluate agents in an end-to-end fashion and determine
the accuracy of their completed tasks. GentBench [172] is a
benchmark  designed  to  evaluate  the  agent  capabilities,
including  their  reasoning,  safety,  and  efficiency,  when
utilizing tools to complete complex tasks. RocoBench [89] is a
benchmark with six tasks evaluating multi-agent collaboration
across  diverse  scenarios,  emphasizing  communication  and
coordination
 strategies
 to
 assess
 adaptability
 and
generalization  in  cooperative  robotics.  EmotionBench  [160]
evaluates  the  emotion  appraisal  ability  of  LLMs,  i.e.,  how
their feelings change when presented with specific situations.
It  collects  over  400  situations  that  elicit  eight  negative
emotions  and  measures  the  emotional  states  of  LLMs  and
human  subjects  using  self-report  scales.  PEB  [128]  is  a
benchmark  tailored  for  assessing  LLM-based  agents  in
penetration  testing  scenarios,  comprising  13  diverse  targets
from leading platforms. It offers a structured evaluation across
varying  difficulty  levels,  reflecting  real-world  challenges  for
agents.  ClemBench  [173]  contains  five  Dialogue  Games  to
assess LLMs’ ability as a player. E2E [174] is an end-to-end
benchmark for testing the accuracy and usefulness of chatbots.
Remark.  Objective  evaluation  facilitates  the  quantitative
analysis of capabilities in LLM-based agents through a variety
of metrics. While current techniques can not perfectly measure
all  types  of  agent  capabilities,  objective  evaluation  provides
essential  insights  that  complement  subjective  assessment.
Continued  advancements  in  benchmarks  and  methodologies
for  objective  evaluation  will  enhance  the  development  and
understanding of LLM-based autonomous agents further.
In  the  above  sections,  we  introduce  both  subjective  and
objective  strategies  for  LLM-based  autonomous  agents
evaluation. The evaluation of the agents play significant roles
in  this  domain.  However,  both  subjective  and  objective
evaluation have their own strengths and weakness. Maybe, in
practice,  they  should  be  combined  to  comprehensively
evaluate  the  agents.  We  summarize  the  correspondence
between the previous work and these evaluation strategies in
Table 3.
 5    Related surveys
With  the  vigorous  development  of  large  language  models,  a
variety  of  comprehensive  surveys  have  emerged,  providing
detailed  insights  into  various  aspects.  [176]  extensively
introduces  the  background,  main  findings,  and  mainstream
technologies of LLMs, encompassing a vast array of existing
works.  On  the  other  hand,  [177]  primarily  focus  on  the
applications  of  LLMs  in  various  downstream  tasks  and  the
challenges associated with their deployment. Aligning LLMs
with  human  intelligence  is  an  active  area  of  research  to
address  concerns  such  as  biases  and  illusions.  [178]  have
compiled existing techniques for human alignment, including
data collection and model training methodologies. Reasoning
is  a  crucial  aspect  of  intelligence,  influencing  decision-
making, problem-solving, and other cognitive abilities. [179]
presents  the  current  state  of  research  on  LLMs’ reasoning
abilities, exploring approaches to improve and evaluate their
reasoning  skills.  [180]  propose  that  language  models  can  be
enhanced with reasoning capabilities and the ability to utilize
tools,  termed  Augmented  Language  Models  (ALMs).  They
conduct a comprehensive review of the latest advancements in
ALMs. As the utilization of large-scale models becomes more
prevalent, evaluating their performance is increasingly critical.
[181]  shed  light  on  evaluating  LLMs,  addressing  what  to
evaluate,  where  to  evaluate,  and  how  to  assess  their
performance  in  downstream  tasks  and  societal  impact.  [182]
also  discusses  the  capabilities  and  limitations  of  LLMs  in
various  downstream  tasks.  The  aforementioned  research
encompasses  various  aspects  of  large  models,  including
training,  application,  and  evaluation.  However,  prior  to  this
paper,  no  work  has  specifically  focused  on  the  rapidly
emerging and highly promising field of LLM-based Agents. In
this  study,  we  have  compiled  100  relevant  works  on  LLM-
based  Agents,  covering  their  construction,  applications,  and
evaluation processes.
18
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

 6    Challenges
While  previous  work  on  LLM-based  autonomous  agent  has
obtained  many  remarkable  successes,  this  field  is  still  at  its
initial stage, and there are several significant challenges that
need to be addressed in its development. In the following, we
present many representative challenges.
 6.1    Role-playing capability
Different  from  traditional  LLMs,  autonomous  agent  usually
has to play as specific roles (e.g., program coder, researcher,
and  chemist)  for  accomplishing  different  tasks.  Thus,  the
capability  of  the  agent  for  role-playing  is  very  important.
Although LLMs can effectively simulate many common roles
such  as  movie  reviewers,  there  are  still  various  roles  and
aspects that they struggle to capture accurately. To begin with,
LLMs are usually trained based on web-corpus, thus for the
roles  which  are  seldom  discussed  on  the  Web  or  the  newly
emerging  roles,  LLMs  may  not  simulate  them  well.  In
addition, previous research [30] has shown that existing LLMs
may  not  well  model  the  human  cognitive  psychology
characters,  leading  to  the  lack  of  self-awareness  in
conversation  scenarios.  Potential  solution  to  these  problems
may  include  fine-tuning  LLMs  or  carefully  designing  the
agent  prompts/architectures  [183].  For  example,  one  can
firstly  collect  real-human  data  for  uncommon  roles  or
psychology characters, and then leverage it to fine-tune LLMs.
However,  how  to  ensure  that  fine-tuned  model  still  perform
well  for  the  common  roles  may  pose  further  challenges.
Beyond  fine-tuning,  one  can  also  design  tailored  agent
prompts/architectures  to  enhance  the  capability  of  LLM  on
role-playing.
 However,
 finding
 the
 optimal
 prompts/
architectures is not easy, since their designing spaces are too
large.
 6.2    Generalized human alignment
Human  alignment  has  been  discussed  a  lot  for  traditional
LLMs.  In  the  field  of  LLM-based  autonomous  agent,
especially  when  the  agents  are  leveraged  for  simulation,  we
believe  this  concept  should  be  discussed  more  in  depth.  In
order  to  better  serve  human-beings,  traditional  LLMs  are
usually fine-tuned to be aligned with correct human values, for
example,  the  agent  should  not  plan  to  make  a  bomb  for
avenging society. However, when the agents are leveraged for
real-world  simulation,  an  ideal  simulator  should  be  able  to
honestly depict diverse human traits, including the ones with
incorrect  values.  Actually,  simulating  the  human  negative
aspects can be even more important, since an important goal
of simulation is to discover and solve problems, and without
   
✓
Table 3    For subjective evaluation, we use ① and ② to represent human annotation and the Turing test, respectively. For objective evaluation, we use ①, ②,
③, and ④ to represent environment simulation, social evaluation, multi-task evaluation, and software testing, respectively. “ ” indicates that the evaluations
are based on benchmarks
Model
Subjective
Objective
Benchmark
Time
WebShop [80]
−
① ③
✓
07/2022
Social Simulacra [98]
①
②
−
08/2022
TE [102]
−
②
−
08/2022
LIBRO [168]
−
④
−
09/2022
ReAct [59]
−
①
✓
10/2022
Out of One, Many [29]
②
② ③
−
02/2023
DEPS [33]
−
①
✓
02/2023
Jalil et al. [169]
−
④
−
02/2023
Reflexion [12]
−
① ③
−
03/2023
IGLU [122]
−
①
✓
04/2023
Generative Agents [20]
① ②
−
−
04/2023
ToolBench [149]
−
③
✓
04/2023
GITM [16]
−
①
✓
05/2023
Two-Failures [162]
−
③
−
05/2023
Voyager [38]
−
①
✓
05/2023
SocKET [165]
−
② ③
✓
05/2023
MobileEnv [163]
−
① ③
✓
05/2023
Clembench [173]
−
① ③
✓
05/2023
Dialop [175]
−
②
✓
06/2023
Feldt et al. [170]
−
④
−
06/2023
CO-LLM [22]
①
①
−
07/2023
Tachikuma [164]
①
①
✓
07/2023
WebArena [171]
−
①
✓
07/2023
RocoBench [89]
−
① ② ③
−
07/2023
AgentSims [34]
−
②
−
08/2023
AgentBench [167]
−
③
✓
08/2023
BOLAA [166]
−
① ③ ④
✓
08/2023
Gentopia [172]
−
③
✓
08/2023
EmotionBench [160]
①
−
✓
08/2023
PTB [128]
−
④
−
08/2023
 
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
19

negative aspects means no problem to be solved. For example,
to simulate the real-world society, we may have to allow the
agent to plan for making a bomb, and observe how it will act
to implement the plan as well as the influence of its behaviors.
Based on these observations, people can make better actions to
stop  similar  behaviors  in  real-world  society.  Inspired  by  the
above  case,  maybe  an  important  problem  for  agent-based
simulation  is  how  to  conduct  generalized  human  alignment,
that  is,  for  different  purposes  and  applications,  the  agent
should be able to align with diverse human values. However,
existing  powerful  LLMs  including  ChatGPT  and  GPT-4  are
mostly  aligned  with  unified  human  values.  Thus,  an
interesting  direction  is  how  to “realign” these  models  by
designing proper prompting strategies.
 6.3    Prompt robustness
To ensure rational behavior in agents, it’s a common practice
for  designers  to  embed  supplementary  modules,  such  as
memory  and  planning  modules,  into  LLMs.  However,  the
inclusion  of  these  modules  necessitates  the  development  of
more  complex  prompts  in  order  to  facilitate  consistent
operation  and  effective  communication.  Previous  research
[184,185]  has  highlighted  the  lack  of  robustness  in  prompts
for  LLMs,  as  even  minor  alterations  can  yield  substantially
different  outcomes.  This  issue  becomes  more  pronounced
when constructing autonomous agents, as they encompass not
a  single  prompt  but  a  prompt  framework  that  considers  all
modules, wherein the prompt for one module has the potential
to  influence  others.  Moreover,  the  prompt  frameworks  can
vary significantly across different LLMs. The development of
a  unified  and  resilient  prompt  framework  applicable  across
diverse  LLMs  remains  a  critical  and  unresolved  challenge.
There  are  two  potential  solutions  to  the  aforementioned
problems: (1) manually crafting the essential prompt elements
through  trial  and  error,  or  (2)  automatically  generating
prompts using GPT.
 6.4    Hallucination
Hallucination  poses  a  fundamental  challenge  for  LLMs,
characterized  by  the  models’ tendency  to  produce  false
information with a high level of confidence. This challenge is
not limited to LLMs alone but is also a significant concern in
the  domain  of  autonomous  agents.  For  instance,  in  [186],  it
was
 observed
 that
 when
 confronted
 with
 simplistic
instructions  during  code  generation  tasks,  the  agent  may
exhibit  hallucinatory  behavior.  Hallucination  can  lead  to
serious  consequences  such  as  incorrect  or  misleading  code,
security risks, and ethical issues [186]. To mitigate this issue,
incorporating  human  correction  feedback  directly  into  the
iterative process of human-agent interaction presents a viable
approach [23]. More discussions on the hallucination problem
can be seen in [176].
 6.5    Knowledge boundary
A pivotal application of LLM-based autonomous agents lies in
simulating  diverse  real-world  human  behaviors  [20].  The
study of human simulation has a long history, and the recent
surge  in  interest  can  be  attributed  to  the  remarkable
advancements  made  by  LLMs,  which  have  demonstrated
significant  capabilities  in  simulating  human  behavior.
However, it is important to recognize that the power of LLMs
may  not  always  be  advantageous.  Specifically,  an  ideal
simulation  should  accurately  replicate  human  knowledge.  In
this  context,  LLMs  may  display  overwhelming  capabilities,
being  trained  on  a  vast  corpus  of  Web  knowledge  that  far
exceeds what an average individual might know. The immense
capabilities of LLMs can significantly impact the effectiveness
of simulations. For instance, when attempting to simulate user
selection behaviors for various movies, it is crucial to ensure
that LLMs assume a position of having no prior knowledge of
these movies. However, there is a possibility that LLMs have
already  acquired  information  about  these  movies.  Without
implementing  appropriate  strategies,  LLMs  may  make
decisions  based  on  their  extensive  knowledge,  even  though
real-world users would not have access to the contents of these
movies  beforehand.  Based  on  the  above  example,  we  may
conclude  that  for  building  believable  agent  simulation
environment,  an  important  problem  is  how  to  constrain  the
utilization of user-unknown knowledge of LLM.
 6.6    Efficiency
Due to their autoregressive architecture, LLMs typically have
slow inference speeds. However, the agent may need to query
LLMs  for  each  action  multiple  times,  such  as  extracting
information from memory, make plans before taking actions
and  so  on.  Consequently,  the  efficiency  of  agent  actions  is
greatly affected by the speed of LLM inference.
 7    Conclusion
In this survey, we systematically summarize existing research
in the field of LLM-based autonomous agents. We present and
review  these  studies  from  three  aspects  including  the
construction,  application,  and  evaluation  of  the  agents.  For
each of these aspects, we provide a detailed taxonomy to draw
connections  among  the  existing  research,  summarizing  the
major techniques and their development histories. In addition
to  reviewing  the  previous  work,  we  also  propose  several
challenges in this field, which are expected to guide potential
future directions.
 Acknowledgements    This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  National
Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  (Grant  No.  62102420),  the  Beijing
Outstanding  Young  Scientist  Program  (No.  BJJWZYJH012019100020098),
Intelligent  Social  Governance  Platform,  Major  Innovation  &  Planning
Interdisciplinary  Platform  for  the “Double-First  Class” Initiative,  Renmin
University of China, Public Computing Cloud, Renmin University of China,
fund for building world-class universities (disciplines) of Renmin University
of China, Intelligent Social Governance Platform.
 Competing  interests    The  authors  declare  that  they  have  no  competing
interests or financial conflicts to disclose.
 Open Access    This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution
4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution
and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence  and  your  intended  use  is  not  permitted  by  statutory  regulation  or
20
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
 Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu A A, Veness J, Bellemare M
G, Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidjeland A K, Ostrovski G, Petersen S,
Beattie C, Sadik A, Antonoglou I, King H, Kumaran D, Wierstra D,
Legg S, Hassabis D. Human-level control through deep reinforcement
learning. Nature, 2015, 518(7540): 529–533
1.
 Lillicrap T P, Hunt J J, Pritzel A, Heess N, Erez T, Tassa Y, Silver D,
Wierstra  D.  Continuous  control  with  deep  reinforcement  learning.
2019, arXiv preprint arXiv: 1509.02971
2.
 Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, Radford A, Klimov O. Proximal
policy  optimization  algorithms.  2017,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
1707.06347
3.
 Haarnoja T, Zhou A, Abbeel P, Levine S. Soft actor-critic: off-policy
maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor.
In:  Proceedings  of  the  35th  International  Conference  on  Machine
Learning. 2018, 1861−1870
4.
 Brown T B, Mann B, Ryder N, Subbiah M, Kaplan J D, Dhariwal P,
Neelakantan  A,  Shyam  P,  Sastry  G,  Askell  A,  Agarwal  S,  Herbert-
Voss A, Krueger G, Henighan T, Child R, Ramesh A, Ziegler D M,
Wu J, Winter C, Hesse C, Chen M, Sigler E, Litwin M, Gray S, Chess
B, Clark J, Berner C, McCandlish S, Radford A, Sutskever I, Amodei
D. Language models are few-shot learners. In: Proceedings of the 34th
Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems.  2020,
1877−1901
5.
 Radford A, Wu J, Child R, Luan D, Amodei D, Sutskever I. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 2019, 1(8):
9
6.
 OpenAI.  GPT-4  technical  report.  2024,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2303.08774
7.
 Anthropic.  Model  card  and  evaluations  for  Claude  models.  See
Files.anthropic.com/production/images/Model-Card-Claude-2, 2023
8.
 Touvron H, Lavril T, Izacard G, Martinet X, Lachaux M A, Lacroix T,
Rozière  B,  Goyal  N,  Hambro  E,  Azhar  F,  Rodriguez  A,  Joulin  A,
Grave E, Lample G. LLaMA: open and efficient foundation language
models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2302.13971
9.
 Touvron H, Martin L, Stone K, Albert P, Almahairi A, et al. Llama 2:
open  foundation  and  fine-tuned  chat  models.  2023,  arXiv  preprint
arXiv: 2307.09288
10.
 Chen X, Li S, Li H, Jiang S, Qi Y, Song L. Generative adversarial user
model  for  reinforcement  learning  based  recommendation  system.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  36th  International  Conference  on  Machine
Learning. 2019, 1052−1061
11.
 Shinn  N,  Cassano  F,  Gopinath  A,  rasimhan  K,  Yao  S.  Reflexion:
language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. NaIn: Proceedings
of  the  37th  Conference  on  Neural  Information  Processing  Systems.
2023, 36
12.
 Shen  Y,  Song  K,  Tan  X,  Li  D,  Lu  W,  Zhuang  Y.  HuggingGPT:
solving  AI  tasks  with  chatGPT  and  its  friends  in  hugging  face.  In:
Proceedings of the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. 2023, 36
13.
 Qin Y, Liang S, Ye Y, Zhu K, Yan L, Lu Y, Lin Y, Cong X, Tang X,
Qian B, Zhao S, Hong L, Tian R, Xie R, Zhou J, Gerstein M, Li D, Liu
Z,  Sun  M.  ToolLLM:  facilitating  large  language  models  to  master
16000+ real-world APIs. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.16789
14.
 Schick T, Dwivedi-Yu J, Dessì R, Raileanu R, Lomeli M, Hambro E,
Zettlemoyer L, Cancedda N, Scialom T. Toolformer: language models
can  teach  themselves  to  use  tools.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  37th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2023, 36
15.
 Zhu X, Chen Y, Tian H, Tao C, Su W, Yang C, Huang G, Li B, Lu L,
16.
Wang X, Qiao Y, Zhang Z, Dai J. Ghost in the minecraft: generally
capable agents for open-world environments via large language models
with text-based knowledge and memory. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2305.17144
 Sclar  M,  Kumar  S,  West  P,  Suhr  A,  Choi  Y,  Tsvetkov  Y.  Minding
language  models’ (lack  of)  theory  of  mind:  a  plug-and-play  multi-
character belief tracker. In: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2023, 13960–13980
17.
 Qian C, Cong X, Liu W, Yang C, Chen W, Su Y, Dang Y, Li J, Xu J,
Li S, Liu Z, Sun M. Communicative agents for software development.
2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.07924
18.
 Chen W, Su Y, Zuo J, Yang C, Yuan C, Chan C, Yu H, Lu Y, Hung Y,
Qian C, Qin Y, Cong X, Xie R, Liu Z, Sun M, Zhou, J. Agentverse:
Facilitating  multi-agent  collaboration  and  exploring  emergent
behaviors in agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10848 .
19.
 Park J S, O’Brien J, Cai C J, Morris M R, Liang P, Bernstein M S.
Generative  agents:  interactive  simulacra  of  human  behavior.  In:
Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology. 2023, 2
20.
 Zhang H, Du W, Shan J, Zhou Q, Du Y, Tenenbaum J B, Shu T, Gan
C.  Building  cooperative  embodied  agents  modularly  with  large
language models. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.02485
21.
 Hong  S,  Zhuge  M,  Chen  J,  Zheng  X,  Cheng  Y,  Zhang  C,  Wang  J,
Wang  Z,  Yau  S  K  S,  Lin  Z,  Zhou  L,  Ran  C,  Xiao  L,  Wu  C,
Schmidhuber  J.  MetaGPT:  meta  programming  for  a  multi-agent
collaborative framework. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.00352
22.
 Dong Y, Jiang X, Jin Z, Li G. Self-collaboration code generation via
chatGPT. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2304.07590
23.
 Serapio-García  G,  Safdari  M,  Crepy  C,  Sun  L,  Fitz  S,  Romero  P,
Abdulhai M, Faust A, Matarić M. Personality traits in large language
models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.00184
24.
 Johnson J A. Measuring thirty facets of the five factor model with a
120-item public domain inventory: development of the IPIP-NEO-120.
Journal of Research in Personality, 2014, 51: 78–89
25.
 John O P, Donahue E M, Kentle R L. Big five inventory. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 1991.
26.
 Deshpande  A,  Murahari  V,  Rajpurohit  T,  Kalyan  A,  Narasimhan  K.
Toxicity in chatGPT: analyzing persona-assigned language models. In:
Proceedings  of  Findings  of  the  Association  for  Computational
Linguistics. 2023, 1236–1270
27.
 Wang L, Zhang J, Yang H, Chen Z, Tang J, Zhang Z, Chen X, Lin Y,
Song R, Zhao W X, Xu J, Dou Z, Wang J, Wen J R. User behavior
simulation  with  large  language  model  based  agents.  2024,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2306.02552
28.
 Argyle L P, Busby E C, Fulda N, Gubler J R, Rytting C, Wingate D.
Out of one, many: using language models to simulate human samples.
Political Analysis, 2023, 31(3): 337–351
29.
 Fischer  K  A.  Reflective  linguistic  programming  (RLP):  a  stepping
stone in socially-aware AGI (socialAGI). 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2305.12647
30.
 Rana K, Haviland J, Garg S, Abou-Chakra J, Reid I, Suenderhauf N.
SayPlan: grounding large language models using 3D scene graphs for
scalable robot task planning. In: Proceedings of the 7th Conference on
Robot Learning. 2023, 23−72
31.
 Zhu  A,  Martin  L,  Head  A,  Callison-Burch  C.  CALYPSO:  LLMs  as
dungeon  master’s  assistants.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  19th  AAAI
Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  and  Interactive  Digital
Entertainment. 2023, 380−390
32.
 Wang Z, Cai S, Chen G, Liu A, Ma X, Liang Y. Describe, explain,
plan  and  select:  interactive  planning  with  large  language  models
enables  open-world  multi-task  agents.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2302.01560
33.
 Lin J, Zhao H, Zhang A, Wu Y, Ping H, Chen Q. AgentSims: an open-
source  sandbox  for  large  language  model  evaluation.  2023,  arXiv
34.
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
21

preprint arXiv: 2308.04026
 Wang B, Liang X, Yang J, Huang H, Wu S, Wu P, Lu L, Ma Z, Li Z.
Enhancing  large  language  model  with  self-controlled  memory
framework. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2304.13343
35.
 Ng Y, Miyashita D, Hoshi Y, Morioka Y, Torii O, Kodama T, Deguchi
J.  SimplyRetrieve:  a  private  and  lightweight  retrieval-centric
generative AI tool. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.03983
36.
 Huang  Z,  Gutierrez  S,  Kamana  H,  Macneil  S.  Memory  sandbox:
transparent  and  interactive  memory  management  for  conversational
agents. In: Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology. 2023, 97
37.
 Wang  G,  Xie  Y,  Jiang  Y,  Mandlekar  A,  Xiao  C,  Zhu  Y,  Fan  L,
Anandkumar A. Voyager: an open-ended embodied agent with large
language models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.16291
38.
 Zhong W, Guo L, Gao Q, Ye H, Wang Y. MemoryBank: enhancing
large language models with long-term memory. 2023, arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2305.10250
39.
 Hu C, Fu J, Du C, Luo S, Zhao J, Zhao H. ChatDB: augmenting LLMs
with databases as their symbolic memory. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2306.03901
40.
 Zhou  X,  Li  G,  Liu  Z.  LLM  as  DBA.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2308.05481
41.
 Modarressi A, Imani A, Fayyaz M, Schütze H. RET-LLM: towards a
general  read-write  memory  for  large  language  models.  2023,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2305.14322
42.
 Schuurmans  D.  Memory  augmented  large  language  models  are
computationally universal. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2301.04589
43.
 Zhao  A,  Huang  D,  Xu  Q,  Lin  M,  Liu  Y  J,  Huang  G.  Expel:  LLM
agents  are  experiential  learners.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2308.10144
44.
 Wei J, Wang X, Schuurmans D, Bosma M, Ichter B, Xia F, Chi E H,
Le Q V, Zhou D. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language  models.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  36th  Conference  on  Neural
Information Processing Systems. 2022, 24824−24837
45.
 Kojima T, Gu S S, Reid M, Matsuo Y, Iwasawa Y. Large language
models are zero-shot reasoners. In: Proceedings of the 36th Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2022, 22199−22213
46.
 Raman S S, Cohen V, Rosen E, Idrees I, Paulius D, Tellex S. Planning
with  large  language  models  via  corrective  re-prompting.  In:
Proceedings of Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop at
Neural Information Processing Systems. 2022
47.
 Xu B, Peng Z, Lei B, Mukherjee S, Liu Y, Xu D. ReWOO: decoupling
reasoning from observations for efficient augmented language models.
2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.18323
48.
 Wang  X,  Wei  J,  Schuurmans  D,  Le  Q  V,  Chi  E  H,  Narang  S,
Chowdhery  A,  Zhou  D.  Self-consistency  improves  chain  of  thought
reasoning  in  language  models.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  11th
International Conference on Learning Representations. 2023
49.
 Yao S, Yu D, Zhao J, Shafran I, Griffiths T L, Cao Y, Narasimhan K.
Tree  of  thoughts:  deliberate  problem  solving  with  large  language
models. In: Proceedings of the 37th Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2023, 36
50.
 Wang Y, Jiang Z, Chen Z, Yang F, Zhou Y, Cho E, Fan X, Huang X,
Lu  Y,  Yang  Y.  RecMind:  Large  language  model  powered  agent  for
recommendation. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.14296
51.
 Besta  M,  Blach  N,  Kubicek  A,  Gerstenberger  R,  Podstawski  M,
Gianinazzi  L,  Gajda  J,  Lehmann  T,  Niewiadomski  H,  Nyczyk  P,
Hoefler T. Graph of thoughts: solving elaborate problems with large
language models. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.09687
52.
 Sel B, Al-Tawaha A, Khattar V, Jia R, Jin M. Algorithm of thoughts:
enhancing exploration of ideas in large language models. 2023, arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2308.10379
53.
 Huang W, Abbeel P, Pathak D, Mordatch I. Language models as zero-
shot  planners:  extracting  actionable  knowledge  for  embodied  agents.
54.
In:  Proceedings  of  the  39th  International  Conference  on  Machine
Learning. 2022, 9118−9147
 Gramopadhye  M,  Szafir  D.  Generating  executable  action  plans  with
environmentally-aware  language  models.  In:  Proceedings  of  2023
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.
2023, 3568−3575
55.
 Hao S, Gu Y, Ma H, Hong J, Wang Z, Wang D, Hu Z. Reasoning with
language model is planning with world model. In: Proceedings of 2023
Conference  on  Empirical  Methods  in  Natural  Language  Processing.
2023, 8154–8173
56.
 Liu B, Jiang Y, Zhang X, Liu Q, Zhang S, Biswas J, Stone P. LLM+P:
empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency.
2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2304.11477
57.
 Dagan  G,  Keller  F,  Lascarides  A.  Dynamic  planning  with  a  LLM.
2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.06391
58.
 Yao  S,  Zhao  J,  Yu  D,  Du  N,  Shafran  I,  Narasimhan  K  R,  Cao  Y.
ReAct:  synergizing  reasoning  and  acting  in  language  models.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  11th  International  Conference  on  Learning
Representations. 2023
59.
 Song C H, Sadler B M, Wu J, Chao W L, Washington C, Su Y. LLM-
planner: few-shot grounded planning for embodied agents with large
language  models.  In:  Proceedings  of  2023  IEEE/CVF  International
Conference on Computer Vision. 2023, 2986−2997
60.
 Huang  W,  Xia  F,  Xiao  T,  Chan  H,  Liang  J,  Florence  P,  Zeng  A,
Tompson J, Mordatch I, Chebotar Y, Sermanet P, Jackson T, Brown
N,  Luu  L,  Levine  S,  Hausman  K,  Ichter  B.  Inner  monologue:
embodied  reasoning  through  planning  with  language  models.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  6th  Conference  on  Robot  Learning,  2023,
1769−1782
61.
 Madaan A, Tandon N, Gupta P, Hallinan S, Gao L, Wiegreffe S, Alon
U,  Dziri  N,  Prabhumoye  S,  Yang  Y,  Gupta  S,  Majumder  B  P,
Hermann  K,  Welleck  S,  Yazdanbakhsh  A,  Clark  P.  Self-refine:
iterative  refinement  with  self-feedback.  Advances  in  Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024, 36.
62.
 Miao N, Teh Y W, Rainforth T. SelfCheck: using LLMs to zero-shot
check  their  own  step-by-step  reasoning.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2308.00436
63.
 Chen P L, Chang C S. InterAct: exploring the potentials of chatGPT as
a cooperative agent. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.01552
64.
 Chen Z, Zhou K, Zhang B, Gong Z, Zhao X, Wen J R. ChatCoT: tool-
augmented  chain-of-thought  reasoning  on  chat-based  large  language
models.  In:  Proceedings  of  Findings  of  the  Association  for
Computational Linguistics. 2023, 14777–14790
65.
 Nakano R, Hilton J, Balaji S, Wu J, Ouyang L, Kim C, Hesse C, Jain
S, Kosaraju V, Saunders W, Jiang X, Cobbe K, Eloundou T, Krueger
G,  Button  K,  Knight  M,  Chess  B,  Schulman  J.  WebGPT:  browser-
assisted  question-answering  with  human  feedback.  2022,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2112.09332
66.
 Ruan J, Chen Y, Zhang B, Xu Z, Bao T, Du G, Shi S, Mao H, Li Z,
Zeng  X,  Zhao  R.  TPTU:  large  language  model-based  AI  agents  for
task planning and tool usage. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.03427
67.
 Patil S G, Zhang T, Wang X, Gonzalez J E. Gorilla: large language
model  connected  with  massive  APIs.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2305.15334
68.
 Li M, Zhao Y, Yu B, Song F, Li H, Yu H, Li Z, Huang F, Li Y. API-
bank:  a  comprehensive  benchmark  for  tool-augmented  LLMs.  In:
Proceedings  of  2023  Conference  on  Empirical  Methods  in  Natural
Language Processing. 2023, 3102–3116
69.
 Song Y, Xiong W, Zhu D, Wu W, Qian H, Song M, Huang H, Li C,
Wang K, Yao R, Tian Y, Li S. RestGPT: connecting large language
models  with  real-world  RESTful  APIs.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2306.06624
70.
 Liang Y, Wu C, Song T, Wu W, Xia Y, Liu Y, Ou Y, Lu S, Ji L, Mao
S,  Wang  Y,  Shou  L,  Gong  M,  Duan  N.  TaskMatrix.AI:  Completing
71.
22
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

tasks by connecting foundation models with millions of APIs. 2023,
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2303.16434
 Karpas E, Abend O, Belinkov Y, Lenz B, Lieber O, Ratner N, Shoham
Y,  Bata  H,  Levine  Y,  Leyton-Brown  K,  Muhlgay  D,  Rozen  N,
Schwartz E, Shachaf G, Shalev-Shwartz S, Shashua A, Tenenholtz M.
MRKL systems: a modular, neuro-symbolic architecture that combines
large  language  models,  external  knowledge  sources  and  discrete
reasoning. 2022, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2205.00445
72.
 Ge Y, Hua W, Mei K, Tan J, Xu S, Li Z, Zhang Y. OpenAGI: When
LLM meets domain experts. In: Proceedings of the 37th Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023, 36
73.
 Surís D, Menon S, Vondrick C. ViperGPT: visual inference via python
execution for reasoning. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2303.08128
74.
 Bran A M, Cox S, Schilter O, Baldassari C, White A D, Schwaller P.
ChemCrow: augmenting large-language models with chemistry tools.
2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2304.05376
75.
 Yang Z, Li L, Wang J, Lin K, Azarnasab E, Ahmed F, Liu Z, Liu C,
Zeng M, Wang L. MM-REACT: Prompting chatGPT for multimodal
reasoning and action. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2303.11381
76.
 Gao C, Lan X, Lu Z, Mao J, Piao J, Wang H, Jin D, Li Y. S3: social-
network  simulation  system  with  large  language  model-empowered
agents. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.14984
77.
 Ichter B, Brohan A, Chebotar Y, Finn C, Hausman K, et al. Do as I
can,  not  as  I  say:  grounding  language  in  robotic  affordances.  In:
Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Robot Learning. 2023, 287−318
78.
 Liu  H,  Sferrazza  C,  Abbeel  P.  Chain  of  hindsight  aligns  language
models with feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2302.02676
79.
 Yao S, Chen H, Yang J, Narasimhan K. WebShop: towards scalable
real-world  Web  interaction  with  grounded  language  agents.  In:
Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. 2022, 20744−20757
80.
 Dan Y, Lei Z, Gu Y, Li Y, Yin J, Lin J, Ye L, Tie Z, Zhou Y, Wang Y,
Zhou A, Zhou Z, Chen Q, Zhou J, He L, Qiu X. EduChat: a large-scale
language model-based chatbot system for intelligent education. 2023,
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.02773
81.
 Lin  B  Y,  Fu  Y,  Yang  K,  Brahman  F,  Huang  S,  Bhagavatula  C,
Ammanabrolu P, Choi Y, Ren X. SwiftSage: a generative agent with
fast and slow thinking for complex interactive tasks. In: Proceedings of
the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2023,
36
82.
 Evans  J  S  B  T,  Stanovich  K  E.  Dual-process  theories  of  higher
cognition:  advancing  the  debate.  Perspectives  on  Psychological
Science, 2013, 8(3): 223–241
83.
 Liu R, Yang R, Jia C, Zhang G, Zhou D, Dai A M, Yang D, Vosoughi
S.  Training  socially  aligned  language  models  on  simulated  social
interactions. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.16960
84.
 Weng X, Gu Y, Zheng B, Chen S, Stevens S, Wang B, Sun H, Su Y.
Mind2Web: towards a generalist agent for the Web. In: Proceedings of
the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 2023,
36
85.
 Sun R, Arik S O, Nakhost H, Dai H, Sinha R, Yin P, Pfister T. SQL-
PaLm:  improved  large  language  model  adaptation  for  text-to-SQL.
2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2306.00739
86.
 Yao W, Heinecke S, Niebles J C, Liu Z, Feng Y, Xue L, Murthy R,
Chen Z, Zhang J, Arpit D, Xu R, Mui P, Wang H, Xiong C, Savarese
S.  Retroformer:  retrospective  large  language  agents  with  policy
gradient optimization, 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.02151
87.
 Shu Y, Zhang H, Gu H, Zhang P, Lu T, Li D, Gu N. RAH! RecSys-
assistant-human:  a  human-centered  recommendation  framework  with
LLM agents. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.09904
88.
 Mandi  Z,  Jain  S,  Song  S.  RoCo:  dialectic  multi-robot  collaboration
with large language models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.04738
89.
 Zhang C, Liu L, Wang J, Wang C, Sun X, Wang H, Cai M. PREFER:
prompt  ensemble  learning  via  feedback-reflect-refine.  2023,  arXiv
90.
preprint arXiv: 2308.12033
 Du  Y,  Li  S,  Torralba  A,  Tenenbaum  J  B,  Mordatch  I.  Improving
factuality  and  reasoning  in  language  models  through  multiagent
debate. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.14325
91.
 Zhang  C,  Yang  Z,  Liu  J,  Han  Y,  Chen  X,  Huang  Z,  Fu  B,  Yu  G.
AppAgent:  multimodal  agents  as  smartphone  users.  2023,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2312.13771
92.
 Madaan  A,  Tandon  N,  Clark  P,  Yang  Y.  Memory-assisted  prompt
editing to improve GPT-3 after deployment. In: Proceedings of 2022
Conference  on  Empirical  Methods  in  Natural  Language  Processing.
2022, 2833–2861
93.
 Colas  C,  Teodorescu  L,  Oudeyer  P  Y,  Yuan  X,  Côté  M  A.
Augmenting  autotelic  agents  with  large  language  models.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  2nd  Conference  on  Lifelong  Learning  Agents.
2023, 205–226
94.
 Nascimento  N,  Alencar  P,  Cowan  D.  Self-adaptive  large  language
model (LLM)-based multiagent systems. In: Proceedings of 2023 IEEE
International  Conference  on  Autonomic  Computing  and  Self-
Organizing Systems Companion. 2023, 104−109
95.
 Saha S, Hase P, Bansal M. Can language models teach weaker agents?
Teacher  explanations  improve  students  via  personalization.  2023,
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2306.09299
96.
 Zhuge M, Liu H, Faccio F, Ashley D R, Csordás R, Gopalakrishnan A,
Hamdi A, Hammoud H A A K, Herrmann V, Irie K, Kirsch L, Li B, Li
G, Liu S, Mai J, Piękos P, Ramesh A, Schlag I, Shi W, Stanić A, Wang
W, Wang Y, Xu M, Fan D P, Ghanem B, Schmidhuber J. Mindstorms
in  natural  language-based  societies  of  mind.  2023,  arXiv  preprint
arXiv: 2305.17066
97.
 Park J S, Popowski L, Cai C, Morris M R, Liang P, Bernstein M S.
Social simulacra: creating populated prototypes for social computing
systems.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  35th  Annual  ACM  Symposium  on
User Interface Software and Technology. 2022, 74
98.
 Li  G,  Hammoud  H  A  A  K,  Itani  H,  Khizbullin  D,  Ghanem  B.
CAMEL:  communicative  agents  for  "mind"  exploration  of  large
language model society. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2303.17760
99.
 AutoGPT. See Github.com/Significant-Gravitas/Auto, 2023
100.
 Chen L, Wang L, Dong H, Du Y, Yan J, Yang F, Li S, Zhao P, Qin S,
Rajmohan S, Lin Q, Zhang D. Introspective tips: large language model
for  in-context  decision  making.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2305.11598
101.
 Aher G V, Arriaga R I, Kalai A T. Using large language models to
simulate  multiple  humans  and  replicate  human  subject  studies.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  40th  International  Conference  on  Machine
Learning. 2023, 337−371
102.
 Akata  E,  Schulz  L,  Coda-Forno  J,  Oh  S  J,  Bethge  M,  Schulz  E.
Playing  repeated  games  with  large  language  models.  2023,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2305.16867
103.
 Ma  Z,  Mei  Y,  Su  Z.  Understanding  the  benefits  and  challenges  of
using  large  language  model-based  conversational  agents  for  mental
well-being  support.  In:  Proceedings  of  AMIA  Symposium.  2023,
1105−1114
104.
 Ziems  C,  Held  W,  Shaikh  O,  Chen  J,  Zhang  Z,  Yang  D.  Can  large
language models transform computational social science? 2024, arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2305.03514
105.
 Horton J J. Large language models as simulated economic agents: what
can  we  learn  from  homo  silicus?  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2301.07543
106.
 Li  S,  Yang  J,  Zhao  K.  Are  you  in  a  masquerade?  Exploring  the
behavior  and  impact  of  large  language  model  driven  social  bots  in
online social networks. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.10337
107.
 Li C, Su X, Han H, Xue C, Zheng C, Fan C. Quantifying the impact of
large  language  models  on  collective  opinion  dynamics.  2023,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2308.03313
108.
 Kovač  G,  Portelas  R,  Dominey  P  F,  Oudeyer  P  Y.  The  SocialAI
109.
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
23

school:  insights  from  developmental  psychology  towards  artificial
socio-cultural agents. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.07871
 Williams  R,  Hosseinichimeh  N,  Majumdar  A,  Ghaffarzadegan  N.
Epidemic  modeling  with  generative  agents.  2023,  arXiv  preprint
arXiv: 2307.04986
110.
 Shi J, Zhao J, Wang Y, Wu X, Li J, He L. CGMI: configurable general
multi-agent  interaction  framework.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2308.12503
111.
 Cui J, Li Z, Yan Y, Chen B, Yuan L. ChatLaw: open-source legal large
language model with integrated external knowledge bases. 2023, arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2306.16092
112.
 Hamilton  S.  Blind  judgement:  agent-based  supreme  court  modelling
with GPT. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2301.05327
113.
 Bail C A. Can generative AI improve social science? 2023
114.
 Boiko D A, MacKnight R, Gomes G. Emergent autonomous scientific
research  capabilities  of  large  language  models.  2023,  arXiv  preprint
arXiv: 2304.05332
115.
 Kang Y, Kim J. ChatMOF: an autonomous AI system for predicting
and generating metal-organic frameworks. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv:
2308.01423
116.
 Swan M, Kido T, Roland E, Santos R P D. Math agents: computational
infrastructure,  mathematical  embedding,  and  genomics.  2023,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2307.02502
117.
 Drori I, Zhang S, Shuttleworth R, Tang L, Lu A, Ke E, Liu K, Chen L,
Tran S, Cheng N, Wang R, Singh N, Patti T L, Lynch J, Shporer A,
Verma  N,  Wu  E,  Strang  G.  A  neural  network  solves,  explains,  and
generates university math problems by program synthesis and few-shot
learning  at  human  level.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of
Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America,  2022,  119(32):
e2123433119
118.
 Chen  M,  Tworek  J,  Jun  H,  Yuan  Q,  de  Oliveira  Pinto  H  P,  et  al.
Evaluating  large  language  models  trained  on  code.  2021,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2107.03374
119.
 Liffiton M, Sheese B E, Savelka J, Denny P. CodeHelp: using large
language models with guardrails for scalable support in programming
classes.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  23rd  Koli  Calling  International
Conference on Computing Education Research. 2023, 8
120.
 Matelsky  J  K,  Parodi  F,  Liu  T,  Lange  R  D,  Kording  K  P.  A  large
language model-assisted education tool to provide feedback on open-
ended responses. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.02439
121.
 Mehta N, Teruel M, Sanz P F, Deng X, Awadallah A H, Kiseleva J.
Improving  grounded  language  understanding  in  a  collaborative
environment by interacting with agents through help feedback. 2024,
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2304.10750
122.
 SmolModels. See Githubcom/smol-ai/developer website, 2023
123.
 DemoGPT. See Github.com/melih-unsal/Demo website, 2023
124.
 GPT-engineer. See Github.com/AntonOsika/gpt website, 2023
125.
 Li  H,  Hao  Y,  Zhai  Y,  Qian  Z.  The  hitchhiker’s  guide  to  program
analysis: a journey with large language models. 2023, arXiv preprint
arXiv: 2308.00245
126.
 He Z, Wu H, Zhang X, Yao X, Zheng S, Zheng H, Yu B. ChatEDA: a
large  language  model  powered  autonomous  agent  for  EDA.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  5th  ACM/IEEE  Workshop  on  Machine  Learning
for CAD. 2023, 1−6
127.
 Deng G, Liu Y, Mayoral-Vilches V, Liu P, Li Y, Xu Y, Zhang T, Liu
Y,  Pinzger  M,  Rass  S.  PentestGPT:  an  LLM-empowered  automatic
penetration testing tool. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.06782
128.
 Xia Y, Shenoy M, Jazdi N, Weyrich M. Towards autonomous system:
flexible  modular  production  system  enhanced  with  large  language
model  agents.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  2023  IEEE  28th  International
Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation. 2023,
1−8
129.
 Ogundare O, Madasu S, Wiggins N. Industrial engineering with large
language models: a case study of chatGPT’s performance on oil & gas
130.
problems. In: Proceedings of the 2023 11th International Conference
on Control, Mechatronics and Automation. 2023, 458−461
 Hu  B,  Zhao  C,  Zhang  P,  Zhou  Z,  Yang  Y,  Xu  Z,  Liu  B.  Enabling
intelligent interactions between an agent and an LLM: a reinforcement
learning approach. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2306.03604
131.
 Wu Y, Min S Y, Bisk Y, Salakhutdinov R, Azaria A, Li Y, Mitchell T,
Prabhumoye S. Plan, eliminate, and track−language models are good
teachers for embodied agents. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.02412
132.
 Zhang  D,  Chen  L,  Zhang  S,  Xu  H,  Zhao  Z,  Yu  K.  Large  language
models  are  semi-parametric  reinforcement  learning  agents.  In:
Proceedings of the 37th Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems. 2023, 36
133.
 Di P N, Byravan A, Hasenclever L, Wulfmeier M, Heess N, Riedmiller
M.  Towards  a  unified  agent  with  foundation  models.  2023,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2307.09668
134.
 Dasgupta I, Kaeser-Chen C, Marino K, Ahuja A, Babayan S, Hill F,
Fergus  R.  Collaborating  with  language  models  for  embodied
reasoning. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2302.00763
135.
 Zhou W, Peng X, Riedl M O. Dialogue shaping: empowering agents
through NPC interaction. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.15833
136.
 Nottingham K, Ammanabrolu P, Suhr A, Choi Y, Hajishirzi H, Singh
S,  Fox  R.  Do  embodied  agents  dream  of  pixelated  sheep:  embodied
decision  making  using  language  guided  world  modelling.  In:
Proceedings  of  the  40th  International  Conference  on  Machine
Learning. 2023, 26311–26325
137.
 Wu  Z,  Wang  Z,  Xu  X,  Lu  J,  Yan  H.  Embodied  task  planning  with
large language models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.01848
138.
 Wu  J,  Antonova  R,  Kan  A,  Lepert  M,  Zeng  A,  Song  S,  Bohg  J,
Rusinkiewicz S, Funkhouser T. TidyBot: personalized robot assistance
with  large  language  models.  In:  Proceedings  of  2023  IEEE/RSJ
International  Conference  on  Intelligent  Robots  and  Systems.  2023,
3546−3553
139.
 AgentGPT. See Github.com/reworkd/Agent website, 2023
140.
 Ai-legion. See Github.com/eumemic/ai website, 2023
141.
 AGiXT. See Githubcom/Josh-XT/AGiXT website, 2023
142.
 Xlang. See Githubcom/xlang-ai/xlang website, 2023
143.
 Babyagi. See Githubcom/yoheinakajima website, 2023
144.
 LangChain. See Docs.langchaincom/docs/ website, 2023
145.
 WorkGPT. See Githubcom/team-openpm/workgpt website, 2023
146.
 LoopGPT. See Githubcom/farizrahman4u/loopgpt website, 2023
147.
 GPT-researcher. See Github.com/assafelovic/gpt website, 2023
148.
 Qin Y, Hu S, Lin Y, Chen W, Ding N, Cui G, Zeng Z, Huang Y, Xiao
C, Han C, Fung Y R, Su Y, Wang H, Qian C, Tian R, Zhu K, Liang S,
Shen X, Xu B, Zhang Z, Ye Y, Li B, Tang Z, Yi J, Zhu Y, Dai Z, Yan
L, Cong X, Lu Y, Zhao W, Huang Y, Yan J, Han X, Sun X, Li D,
Phang  J,  Yang  X,  Wu  T,  Ji  H,  Liu  Z,  Sun  M.  Tool  learning  with
foundation models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2304.08354
149.
 Transformers
 agent.
 See
 Huggingface.co/docs/transformers/
transformers website, 2023
150.
 Mini-agi. See Github.com/muellerberndt/mini website, 2023
151.
 SuperAGI. See Github.com/TransformerOptimus/Super website, 2023
152.
 Wu  Q,  Bansal  G,  Zhang  J,  Wu  Y,  Li  B,  Zhu  E,  Jiang  L,  Zhang  X,
Zhang  S,  Liu  J,  Awadallah  A  H,  White  R  W,  Burger  D,  Wang  C.
AutoGen:  enabling  next-gen  LLM  applications  via  multi-agent
conversation. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.08155
153.
 Grossmann I, Feinberg M, Parker D C, Christakis N A, Tetlock P E,
Cunningham  W  A.  AI  and  the  transformation  of  social  science
research: careful bias management and data fidelity are key. Science,
2023, 380(6650): 1108–1109
154.
 Huang  X,  Lian  J,  Lei  Y,  Yao  J,  Lian  D,  Xie  X.  Recommender  AI
agent:
 integrating
 large
 language
 models
 for
 interactive
recommendations. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.16505
155.
24
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345

 Zhang C, Yang K, Hu S, Wang Z, Li G, Sun Y, Zhang C, Zhang Z, Liu
A, Zhu S C, Chang X, Zhang J, Yin F, Liang Y, Yang Y. ProAgent:
building  proactive  cooperative  agents  with  large  language  models.
2024, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.11339
156.
 Xiang  J,  Tao  T,  Gu  Y,  Shu  T,  Wang  Z,  Yang  Z,  Hu  Z.  Language
models meet world models: embodied experiences enhance language
models. In: Proceedings of the 37th Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems. 2023, 36
157.
 Lee M, Srivastava M, Hardy A, Thickstun J, Durmus E, Paranjape A,
Gerard-Ursin I, Li X L, Ladhak F, Rong F, Wang R E, Kwon M, Park
J S, Cao H, Lee T, Bommasani R, Bernstein M, Liang P. Evaluating
human-language  model  interaction.  2024,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2212.09746
158.
 Krishna R, Lee D, Fei-Fei L, Bernstein M S. Socially situated artificial
intelligence enables learning from human interaction. Proceedings of
the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  United  States  of  America,
2022, 119(39): e2115730119
159.
 Huang J T, Lam M H, Li E J, Ren S, Wang W, Jiao W, Tu Z, Lyu M
R. Emotionally numb or empathetic? Evaluating how LLMs feel using
emotionbench. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.03656
160.
 Chan  C  M,  Chen  W,  Su  Y,  Yu  J,  Xue  W,  Zhang  S,  Fu  J,  Liu  Z.
ChatEval:  towards  better  LLM-based  evaluators  through  multi-agent
debate. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.07201
161.
 Chen A, Phang J, Parrish A, Padmakumar V, Zhao C, Bowman S R,
Cho K. Two failures of self-consistency in the multi-step reasoning of
LLMs. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.14279
162.
 Zhang  D,  Xu  H,  Zhao  Z,  Chen  L,  Cao  R,  Yu  K.  Mobile-env:  an
evaluation  platform  and  benchmark  for  LLM-GUI  interaction.  2024,
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.08144
163.
 Liang  Y,  Zhu  L,  Yang  Y.  Tachikuma:  understading  complex
interactions with multi-character and novel objects by large language
models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.12573
164.
 Choi  M,  Pei  J,  Kumar  S,  Shu  C,  Jurgens  D.  Do  LLMs  understand
social knowledge? Evaluating the sociability of large language models
with  socKET  benchmark.  In:  Proceedings  of  2023  Conference  on
Empirical
 Methods
 in
 Natural
 Language
 Processing.
 2023,
11370–11403
165.
 Liu Z, Yao W, Zhang J, Xue L, Heinecke S, Murthy R, Feng Y, Chen
Z, Niebles J C, Arpit D, Xu R, Mui P, Wang H, Xiong C, Savarese S.
BOLAA:
 benchmarking
 and
 orchestrating
 LLM-augmented
autonomous agents. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.05960
166.
 Liu X, Yu H, Zhang H, Xu Y, Lei X, Lai H, Gu Y, Ding H, Men K,
Yang K, Zhang S, Deng X, Zeng A, Du Z, Zhang C, Shen S, Zhang T,
Su  Y,  Sun  H,  Huang  M,  Dong  Y,  Tang  J.  AgentBench:  evaluating
LLMs as agents. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2308.03688
167.
 Kang S, Yoon J, Yoo S. Large language models are few-shot testers:
exploring LLM-based general bug reproduction. In: Proceedings of the
45th  IEEE/ACM  International  Conference  on  Software  Engineering.
2023, 2312−2323
168.
 Jalil S, Rafi S, LaToza T D, Moran K, Lam W. ChatGPT and software
testing  education:  Promises  &  perils.  In:  Proceedings  of  2023  IEEE
International  Conference  on  Software  Testing,  Verification  and
Validation Workshops. 2023, 4130−4137
169.
 Feldt R, Kang S, Yoon J, Yoo S. Towards autonomous testing agents
via conversational large language models. In: Proceedings of the 38th
IEEE/ACM  International  Conference  on  Automated  Software
Engineering. 2023, 1688−1693
170.
 Zhou S, Xu F F, Zhu H, Zhou X, Lo R, Sridhar A, Cheng X, Ou T,
Bisk  Y,  Fried  D,  Alon  U,  Neubig  G.  WebArena:  a  realistic  Web
environment  for  building  autonomous  agents.  2023,  arXiv  preprint
arXiv: 2307.13854
171.
 Xu B, Liu X, Shen H, Han Z, Li Y, Yue M, Peng Z, Liu Y, Yao Z, Xu
D.  Gentopia.AI:  a  collaborative  platform  for  tool-augmented  LLMs.
172.
In: Proceedings of 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: System Demonstrations. 2023, 237−245
 Chalamalasetti  K,  Götze  J,  Hakimov  S,  Madureira  B,  Sadler  P,
Schlangen D. clembench: Using game play to evaluate chat-optimized
language  models  as  conversational  agents.  In:  Proceedings  of  2023
Conference  on  Empirical  Methods  in  Natural  Language  Processing.
2023, 11174–11219
173.
 Banerjee  D,  Singh  P,  Avadhanam  A,  Srivastava  S.  Benchmarking
LLM  powered  chatbots:  methods  and  metrics.  2023,  arXiv  preprint
arXiv: 2308.04624
174.
 Lin J, Tomlin N, Andreas J, Eisner J. Decision-oriented dialogue for
human-AI collaboration. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2305.20076
175.
 Zhao W X, Zhou K, Li J, Tang T, Wang X, Hou Y, Min Y, Zhang B,
Zhang J, Dong Z, Du Y, Yang C, Chen Y, Chen Z, Jiang J, Ren R, Li
Y, Tang X, Liu Z, Liu P, Nie J Y, Wen J R. A survey of large language
models. 2023, arXiv preprint arXiv: 2303.18223
176.
 Yang J, Jin H, Tang R, Han X, Feng Q, Jiang H, Zhong S, Yin B, Hu
X. Harnessing the power of LLMs in practice: a survey on chatGPT
and beyond. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data,
2024, doi: 10.1145/3649506
177.
 Wang Y, Zhong W, Li L, Mi F, Zeng X, Huang W, Shang L, Jiang X,
Liu Q. Aligning large language models with human: a survey. 2023,
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2307.12966
178.
 Huang J, Chang K C C. Towards reasoning in large language models:
a  survey.  In:  Proceedings  of  Findings  of  the  Association  for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023. 2023, 1049–1065
179.
 Mialon G, Dessì R, Lomeli M, Nalmpantis C, Pasunuru R, Raileanu R,
Rozière B, Schick T, Dwivedi-Yu J, Celikyilmaz A, Grave E, LeCun
Y,  Scialom  T.  Augmented  language  models:  a  survey.  2023,  arXiv
preprint arXiv: 2302.07842
180.
 Chang Y, Wang X, Wang J, Wu Y, Yang L, Zhu K, Chen H, Yi X,
Wang C, Wang Y, Ye W, Zhang Y, Chang Y, Yu P S. A survey on
evaluation of large language models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent
Systems and Technology, 2023, doi: 10.1145/3641289
181.
 Chang T A, Bergen B K. Language model behavior: a comprehensive
survey. Computational Linguistics, 2024, doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00492
182.
 Li  C,  Wang  J,  Zhu  K,  Zhang  Y,  Hou  W,  Lian  J,  Xie  X.
Emotionprompt:  Leveraging  psychology  for  large  language  models
enhancement  via  emotional  stimulus.  2023,  arXiv  preprint  arXiv:
2307.11760
183.
 Zhuo T Y, Li Z, Huang Y, Shiri F, Wang W, Haffari G, Li Y F. On
robustness  of  prompt-based  semantic  parsing  with  large  pre-trained
language model: an empirical study on codex. In: Proceedings of the
17th  Conference  of  the  European  Chapter  of  the  Association  for
Computational Linguistics. 2023, 1090–1102
184.
 Gekhman  Z,  Oved  N,  Keller  O,  Szpektor  I,  Reichart  R.  On  the
robustness  of  dialogue  history  representation  in  conversational
question answering: a comprehensive study and a new prompt-based
method.
 Transactions
 of
 the
 Association
 for
 Computational
Linguistics, 2023, 11(11): 351–366
185.
 Ji Z, Lee N, Frieske R, Yu T, Su D, Xu Y, Ishii E, Bang Y J, Madotto
A,  Fung  P.  Survey  of  hallucination  in  natural  language  generation.
ACM Computing Surveys, 2023, 55(12): 248
186.
Lei  Wang  is  a  PhD  candidate  at  Renmin
University of China, China. His research focuses
on  recommender  systems  and  agent-based  large
language models.
Lei WANG et al.    A survey on large language model based autonomous agents
25

Chen Ma is currently pursuing a Master’s degree
at  Renmin  University  of  China,  China.  His
research  interests  include  recommender  system,
agent based on large language model.
Xueyang  Feng  is  currently  studying  for  a  PhD
degree at Renmin University of China, China. His
research  interests  include  recommender  system,
agent based on large language model.
Zeyu  Zhang  is  currently  pursuing  a  Master’s
degree at Renmin University of China, China. His
research  interests  include  recommender  system,
causal  inference,  agent  based  on  large  language
model.
Hao Yang is currently studying for a PhD degree
at  Renmin  University  of  China,  China.  His
research  interests  include  recommender  system,
causal inference.
Jingsen  Zhang  is  currently  studying  for  a  PhD
degree at Renmin University of China, China. His
research interests include recommender system.
Zhiyuan  Chen  is  pursuing  his  PhD  in  Gaoling
school
 of
 Artificial
 Intelligence,
 Renmin
University  of  China,  China.  His  research  mainly
focuses  on  language  model  reasoning  and  agent
based on large language model.
Jiakai  Tang  is  currently  pursuing  a  Master’s
degree at Renmin University of China, China. His
research interests include recommender system.
Xu Chen obtained his PhD degree from Tsinghua
University,
 China.
 Before
 joining
 Renmin
University of China, he was a postdoc researcher
at University College London, UK. In the period
from  March  to  September  of  2017,  he  was
studying at Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
as a visiting scholar. His research mainly focuses
on  the  recommender  system,  reinforcement  learning,  and  causal
inference.
Yankai Lin received his BE and PhD degrees from
Tsinghua  University,  China  in  2014  and  2019,
respectively.  After  that,  he  worked  as  a  senior
researcher in Tencent WeChat, and joined Renmin
University  of  China,  China  in  2022  as  a  tenure-
track  assistant  professor.  His  main  research
interests  are  pretrained  models  and  natural
language processing.
Wayne  Xin  Zhao  received  his  PhD  degree  in
Computer Science from Peking University, China
in  2014.  His  research  interests  include  data
mining,
 natural
 language
 processing
 and
information retrieval in general. The main goal is
to study how to organize, analyze and mine user
generated data for improving the service of real-
world applications.
Zhewei Wei received his PhD degree in Computer
Science  and  Engineering  from  The  Hong  Kong
University of Science and Technology, China. He
did  postdoctoral  research  in  Aarhus  University,
Denmark from 2012 to 2014, and joined Renmin
University of China, China in 2014.
Jirong Wen is a full professor, the executive dean
of  Gaoling  School  of  Artificial  Intelligence,  and
the  dean  of  School  of  Information  at  Renmin
University of China, China. He has been working
in the big data and AI areas for many years, and
publishing extensively on prestigious international
conferences and journals.
26
Front. Comput. Sci., 2024, 18(6): 186345