npj | digital medicine
Article
Published in partnership with Seoul National University Bundang Hospital
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
AcriticalassessmentofusingChatGPTfor
extracting structured data from
clinical notes
Check for updates
Jingwei Huang
1, Donghan M. Yang1, Ruichen Rong1, Kuroush Nezafati
1, Colin Treager1,
Zhikai Chi
2, Shidan Wang
1, Xian Cheng1, Yujia Guo1, Laura J. Klesse3, Guanghua Xiao1,
Eric D. Peterson4, Xiaowei Zhan1
& Yang Xie
1
Existing natural language processing (NLP) methods to convert free-text clinical notes into structured
data often require problem-speciﬁc annotations and model training. This study aims to evaluate
ChatGPT’s capacity to extract information from free-text medical notes efﬁciently and
comprehensively. We developed a large language model (LLM)-based workﬂow, utilizing systems
engineering methodology and spiral “prompt engineering” process, leveraging OpenAI’s API for batch
querying ChatGPT. We evaluated the effectiveness of this method using a dataset of more than 1000
lung cancer pathology reports and a dataset of 191 pediatric osteosarcoma pathology reports,
comparing the ChatGPT-3.5 (gpt-3.5-turbo-16k) outputs with expert-curated structured data.
ChatGPT-3.5 demonstrated the ability to extract pathological classiﬁcations with an overall accuracy
of 89%, in lung cancer dataset, outperforming the performance of two traditional NLP methods. The
performance is inﬂuenced by the design of the instructive prompt. Our case analysis shows that most
misclassiﬁcations were due to the lack of highly specialized pathology terminology, and erroneous
interpretation of TNM staging rules. Reproducibility shows the relatively stable performance of
ChatGPT-3.5 over time. In pediatric osteosarcoma dataset, ChatGPT-3.5 accurately classiﬁed both
grades and margin status with accuracy of 98.6% and 100% respectively. Our study shows the
feasibility of using ChatGPT to process large volumes of clinical notes for structured information
extraction without requiring extensive task-speciﬁc human annotation and model training. The results
underscore the potential role of LLMs in transforming unstructured healthcare data into structured
formats, thereby supporting research and aiding clinical decision-making.
Large Language Models (LLMs)1–6, such as Generative Pre-trained Trans-
former (GPT) models represented by ChatGPT, are being utilized for
diverse applications across various sectors. In the healthcare industry, early
applications of LLMs are being used to facilitate patient-clinician
communication7,8. To date, few studies have examined the potential of
LLMs in reading and interpreting clinical notes, turning unstructured texts
into structured, analyzable data.
Traditionally, the automated extraction of structured data elements
from medical notes has relied on medical natural language processing
(NLP) using rule-based or machine-learning approaches or a combination
of both9,10. Machine learning methods11–14, particularly deep learning, typi-
cally employ neural networks and the ﬁrst generation of transformer-based
large language models (e.g., BERT). Medical domain knowledge needs to be
integrated into model designs to enhance performance. However, a sig-
niﬁcant obstacle to developing these traditional medical NLP algorithms is
the limited existence of human-annotated datasets and the costs associated
with new human annotation15. Despite meticulous ground-truth labeling,
the relatively small corpus sizes often result in models with poor
1Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, Peter O’Donnell School of Public Health, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas,
TX USA 75390,USA. 2Department of Pathology,University ofTexas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323Harry Hines Blvd,Dallas,TX USA 75390, USA. 3Department of
Pediatrics,UniversityofTexasSouthwesternMedical Center,5323HarryHines Blvd, Dallas,TX USA 75390,USA. 4DepartmentofInternal Medicine, University ofTexas
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX USA 75390, USA.
e-mail: Xiaowei.zhan@utsouthwestern.edu; yang.xie@utsouthwestern.edu
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

generalizability or make evaluations of generalizability impossible. For
decades, conventional artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) systems (symbolic and
neural networks) have suffered from a lack of general knowledge and
commonsense reasoning. LLMs, like GPT, offer a promising alternative,
potentially using commonsense reasoning and broad general knowledge to
facilitate language processing.
ChatGPT is the application interface of the GPT model family. This
study explores an approach to using ChatGPT to extract structured data
elements from unstructured clinical notes. In this study, we selected lung
cancer pathology reports as the corpus for extracting detailed diagnosis
information for lung cancer. To accomplish this, we developed and
improved a prompt engineering process. We then evaluated the effective-
ness of this method by comparing the ChatGPT output with expert-curated
structured data and usedcase studies to provide insights into how ChatGPT
read and interpreted notes and why it made mistakes in some cases.
Results
Data and endpoints
The primary objective of this study was to develop an algorithm and assess
the capabilitiesof ChatGPT in processing and interpreting a large volume of
free-textclinicalnotes.Toevaluatethis,weutilizedunstructuredlungcancer
pathology notes, which provide diagnostic information essential for devel-
oping treatment plans and play vital roles in clinical and translational
research. We accessed a total of 1026 lung cancer pathology reports from
two web portals: the Cancer Digital Slide Archive (CDSA data) (https://
cancer.digitalslidearchive.org/) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA
data) (https://cBioPortal.org). These platforms serve as public data reposi-
tories for de-identiﬁed patient information, facilitating cancer research. The
CDSA dataset was utilized as the “training” data for prompt development,
while the TCGA dataset, after removing the overlapping cases with CDSA,
served as the test data for evaluating the ChatGPT model performance.
From all the downloaded 99 pathology reports from CDSA for the
trainingdata,weexcluded21invalidreportsduetonear-emptycontent,poor
scanning quality, or missing report forms. Seventy-eight valid pathology
reports were included as the training data to optimize the prompt. To eval-
uate the model performance, 1024 pathology reports were downloaded from
cBioPortal. Among them, 97 overlapped with the training data and were
excludedfromtheevaluation.Wefurtherexcluded 153invalid reportsdueto
near-empty content, poor scanning quality, or missing report forms. The
invalid reports were preserved to evaluate ChatGPT’s handling of irregular
inputs separately, and were not included in the testing data for accuracy
performance assessment. As a result, 774 valid pathology reports were
included as the testing data for performance evaluation. These valid reports
still contain typos, missing words, random characters, incomplete contents,
and other quality issues challenging human reading. The corresponding
numbers of reports used at each step of the process are detailed in Fig. 1.
The speciﬁc task of this study was to identify tumor staging and his-
tology types which are important for clinical care and research from
pathology reports. The TNM staging system16, outlining the primary tumor
features (T), regional lymph node involvement (N), and distant metastases
(M), is commonly used to deﬁne the disease extent, assign prognosis, and
guide lung cancer treatment. The American Joint Committee on Cancer
(AJCC) has periodically released various editions16 of TNM classiﬁcation/
staging for lung cancers based on recommendations from extensive data-
base analyses. Following the AJCC guideline, individual pathologic T, N,
and M stage components can be summarized into an overall pathologic
stagingscoreofStageI,II,III,orIV.Forthisproject,weinstructedChatGPT
to use the AJCC 7th edition Cancer Staging Manual17 as the reference for
staging lung cancer cases. As the lung cancer cases in our dataset are pre-
dominantly non-metastatic, the pathologic metastasis (pM) stage was not
extracted. The data elements we chose to extract and evaluate for this study
are pathologic primary tumor (pT) and pathologic lymph node (pN) stage
components, overall pathologic tumor stage, and histology type.
Overall Performance
Using the training data in the CDSA dataset (n = 78), we experimented and
improved prompts iteratively, and the ﬁnal prompt is presented in Fig. 2.
The overall performance of the ChatGPT (gpt-3.5-turbo-16k model) is
evaluated in the TCGA dataset (n = 774), and the results are summarized in
Table 1. The accuracy of primary tumor features (pT), regional lymph node
involvement (pN), overall tumor stage, and histological diagnosis are 0.87,
0.91, 0.76, and 0.99, respectively. The average accuracy of all attributes is
0.89. The coverage rates for pT, pN, overall stage and histological diagnosis
are 0.97, 0.94, 0.94 and 0.96, respectively. Further details of the accuracy
evaluation, F1, Kappa, recall, and precision for each attribute are sum-
marized as confusion matrices in Fig. 3.
Inference and Interpretation
To understand how ChatGPTreads and makes inferences from pathology
reports, we demonstrated a case study using a typical pathology report in
this cohort (TCGA-98-A53A) in Fig. 4a. The left panel shows part of the
original pathology report, and the right panel shows the ChatGPT output
with estimated pT, pN, overall stage, and histology diagnosis. For each
estimate, ChatGPT gives the conﬁdence level and the corresponding
evidence it used for the estimation. In this case, ChatGPT correctly
extracted information related to tumor size, tumor features, lymph node
involvement, and histology information and used the AJCC staging
guidelines to estimate tumor stage correctly. In addition, the conﬁdence
level, evidence interpretation, andcase summary align well with the report
and pathologists’ evaluations. For example, the evidence for the pT
category was described as “The pathology report states that the tumor is
> 3 cm and < 5 cm in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral
pleura.” The evidence for tumor stage was described as “Based on the
estimated pT category (T2a) and pN category (N0), the tumor stage is
determined to be Stage IB according to AJCC7 criteria.” It shows that
ChatGPT extracted relevant information from the note and correctly
inferred the pT category based on the AJCC guideline (Supplementary
Fig. 1) and the extracted information.
Fig. 1 | A representation of the number of reports
at each stage of the process. Exclusions are
accounted for due to reasons such as empty reports,
poor scanning quality, and other factors, including
reports of stage IV or unknown conditions.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
2

In another more complex case, TCGA-50-6590 (Fig. 4b),
ChatGPT correctly inferred pT as T2a based on both the tumor’s size
and location according to AJCC guidelines. Case TCGA-44-2656
demonstrates a more challenging scenario (Supplementary Fig. 2),
where the report only contains some factual data without specifying
pT, pN, and tumor stage. However, ChatGPT was able to infer the
correct classiﬁcations based on the reported facts and provide proper
supporting evidence.
Error analysis
To understand the types and potential reasons for misclassiﬁcations, we
performed a detailed error analysis by looking into individual attributes and
cases where ChatGPT made mistakes, the results of which are summar-
ized below.
Primary tumor feature (pT) classiﬁcation. In total, 768 cases with valid
reports and reference values in the testing data were used to evaluate the
classiﬁcation performance of pT. Among them, 15 cases were reported
with unknown or empty output by ChatGPT, making the coverage rate
0.97. For the remaining 753 cases, 12.6% of pT was misclassiﬁed. Among
these misclassiﬁcation cases, the majority were T1 misclassiﬁed as T2 (67
out of 753 or 8.9%) or T3 misclassiﬁed as T2 (12 out of 753, or 1.6%).
In most cases, ChatGPT extracted the correct tumor size information
but used an incorrect rule to distinguish pT categories. For example, in the
Fig. 2 | Final prompt for information extraction and
estimation from pathology reports.
Table 1 | Overall performance of ChatGPT on data extraction from pathology reports
Attribute
Accuracy
F1
Kappa
Recall
Precision
Coverage
Primary tumor features (pT)
0.87
0.87
0.76
0.87
0.89
0.97
Regional lymph node involvement (pN)
0.91
0.91
0.84
0.91
0.92
0.94
Overall tumor stage
0.76
0.76
0.61
0.76
0.77
0.94
Histological diagnosis
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.96
Average
0.89
0.88
0.80
0.89
0.89
0.95
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
3

case TCGA-22-4609 (Fig. 5a), ChatGPT stated, “Based on the tumor size of
2.0 cm,itfallswithintherangeofT2categoryaccordingto AJCC7thedition
for lung carcinoma staging manual.” However, according to the AJCC 7th
editionstagingguidelinesforlungcancer,ifthetumorismorethan2 cmbut
less than 3 cm in greatest dimension and does not invade nearby structures,
pT should be classiﬁed as T1b. Therefore, ChatGPT correctly extracted the
maximum tumor dimension of 2 cm but incorrectly interpreted this as
meeting the criteria for classiﬁcation as T2. Similarly, for case TCGA-85-
A4JB, ChatGPT incorrectly claimed, “Based on the tumor size of 10 cm, the
estimated pT category is T2 according to AJCC 7th edition for lung
carcinoma staging manual.” According to the AJCC 7th edition staging
guidelines, a tumor more than 7 cm in greatest dimension should be clas-
siﬁed as T3.
Another challenging situation arose when multiple tumor nodules
were identiﬁed within the lung. In the case of TCGA-39-5028 (Fig. 5b), two
separate tumor nodules were identiﬁed: one in the right upper lobe mea-
suring 2.1 cm in greatest dimension and one in the right lower lobe mea-
suring 6.6 cm in greatest dimension. According to the AJCC 7th edition
guidelines, the presence of separate tumor nodules in a different ipsilateral
loberesultsinaclassiﬁcationofT4.However,ChatGPTclassiﬁedthiscaseas
Fig. 3 | The performance of ChatGPT is measured by the confusion matrixes for
the key attributes of interest on Test Data. For meaningful evaluation, the cases
with uncertain values, such as “Not Available”, “Not Speciﬁed”, “Cannot be
determined”, “Unknown”, et al. in reference and prediction have been removed.
a Primary tumor features (pT), b regional lymph node involvement (pN), c overall
tumor stage, and d histological diagnosis.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
4

T2a, stating, “The pathology report states the tumor’s greatest diameter as
2.1 cm”. This classiﬁcation would be appropriated if the right upper lobe
nodule were a single isolated tumor. However, ChatGPT failed to consider
the presence of the second, larger nodule in the right lower lobe when
determining the pT classiﬁcation.
Regional lymph node involvement (pN). The classiﬁcation perfor-
mance of pN was evaluated using 753 cases with valid reports and
reference values in the testing data. Among them, 27 cases were
reported with unknown or empty output by ChatGPT, making the
coverage rate 0.94. For the remaining 726 cases, 8.5% of pN was
misclassiﬁed. Most of these misclassiﬁcation cases were N1 mis-
classiﬁed as N2 (32 cases). The AJCC 7th edition staging guidelines use
the anatomic locations of positive lymph nodes to determine N1 vs.
N2. However, most of the misclassiﬁcation cases were caused by
ChatGPT interpreting the number of positive nodes rather than the
locations of the positive nodes. One such example is the case TCGA-
85-6798. The report states, “Lymph nodes: 2/16 positive for metastasis
(Hilar 2/16)”. Positive hilar lymph nodes correspond to N1 classiﬁ-
cation according to AJCC 7th edition guidelines. However, ChatGPT
misclassiﬁes this case as N2, stating, “The pathology report states that 2
out of 16 lymph nodes are positive for metastasis. Based on this
information, the pN category can be estimated as N2 according to
AJCC 7th edition for lung carcinoma staging manual.” This inter-
pretation is incorrect, as the number of positive lymph nodes is not
part of the criteria used to determine pN status according to AJCC 7th
edition guidelines. The model misinterpreted pN2 predictions in 22
cases due to similar false assertions.
In some cases, the ChatGPT model made classiﬁcation mistakes by
misunderstanding the locations’ terminology. Figure 5c shows a case
(TCGA-39-5016) where the ChatGPT model recognized that “6/9 peri-
bronchial lymph nodes involved, “ corresponding with classiﬁcation as N1,
but ChatGPT misclassiﬁed this case as N2. By AJCC 7th edition guidelines,
N2 is deﬁned as “Metastasis in ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal
lymph node(s)”. The ChatGPT model did not fully understand that ter-
minology and made misclassiﬁcations.
Pathology tumor stage. The overall tumor stage classiﬁcation perfor-
mance was evaluated using 744 cases with valid reports and reference
values as stage I, II and III in the testing data. Among them, 18 cases were
Fig. 4 | Case analysis to illustrate how ChatGPT reads the pathology report and
makes inference. a TCGA-98-A53A. An example of a scanned pathological report
(left panel) and ChatGPT output and interpretation (right panel). All estimations
and support evidence are consistent with the pathologist’s evaluations. b The GPT
model correctly inferred pT as T2a based on the tumor’s size and involvement
according to AJCC guidelines.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
5

reported as unknown or empty output by ChatGPT making the coverage
rate as 0.94. For the remaining 726 cases, 23.6% of the overall stage was
misclassiﬁed. Since the overall stage depends on individual pT and pN
stages, the mistakes could come from misclassiﬁcation of pT or pN (error
propagation) or applying incorrect inference rules to determine the
overall stage from pT and pN (incorrect rules). Looking into the 56 cases
where ChatGPT misclassiﬁed stage II as stage III, 22 cases were due to
error propagation, and 34 were due to incorrect rules. Figure 6a shows an
example of error propagation (TCGA-MP-A4TK). ChatGPT mis-
classiﬁed the pT stage from T2a to T3, and then this mistake led to the
incorrect classiﬁcation of stage IIA to stage IIIA. Figure 6b illustrates a
case (TCGA-49-4505) where ChatGPT made correct estimation of pT
and pN but made false prediction about tumor stage by using a false rule.
Among the 34 cases affected by incorrect rules, ChatGPT mistakenly
inferred tumor stage as stage III for 26 cases where pT is T3 and pN is N0,
respectively. For example, for case TCGA-55-7994, ChatGPT provided
the evidence as “Based on the estimated pT category (T3) and pN cate-
gory (N0), the tumor stage is determined to be Stage IIIA according to
AJCC7 criteria”. According to AJCC7, tumors with T3 and N0 should be
classiﬁed as stage IIB. Similarly, error analysis for other tumor stages
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5 | Case analysis to reveal typical errors in ChatGPT outputs. a TCGA-22-
4609 illustrates a typical case where the GPT model uses a false rule, which is
incorrect by AJCC guideline. b Case TCGA-39-5028 shows a complex case where
there exist two tumors and the GPT model only capture one of them. c Case TCGA-
39-5016 reveals a case where the GPT model made a mistake for getting confused
with domain terminology.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
6

shows that misclassiﬁcations come from both error propagation and
applying false rules.
Histological diagnosis. The classiﬁcation performance of histology
diagnosis was evaluated using 762 cases with valid reports and reference
values in the testing data. Among them, 17 cases were reported as either
unknownoremptyoutputbyChatGPT,makingthecoveragerate0.96.For
the remaining 745 cases, 6 ( < 1%) of histology types were misclassiﬁed.
Among the mistakes that ChatGPT made for histology diagnosis,
ChatGPT misclassiﬁed 3 of them as “other” type and 3 cases of actual
“other”type(neitheradenocarcinomasnorsquamouscellcarcinomas)as2
adenocarcinomas and 1 squamous cell carcinoma. In TCGA-22-5485, two
Fig. 6 | Case analysis to reveal more error scenarios. a Case TCGA-MP-A4TK: An
example of typical errors GPT made in the experiments, i.e. GPT took false rule and
further led to faulty propagation. b Case TCGA-49-4505: The GPT model made false
estimation of Stage IIIA with a false rule, although it made correct inference with
T2b and N1.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
7

tumors exist: one squamous cell carcinoma and another adenocarcinoma,
which should be classiﬁed as the ‘other’ type. However, ChatGPT only
identiﬁed and extracted information for one tumor. In the case TCGA-33-
AASB, which is the “other” type of histology, ChatGPT captured the key
information and gave it as evidence: “The pathology report states the
histologic diagnosis as inﬁltrating poorly differentiated non-small cell
carcinoma with both squamous and glandular features”. However, it
mistakenly estimated this case as “adenocarcinoma”. In another case
(TCGA-86-8668) of adenocarcinoma, ChatGPT again captured key
information and stated as evidence, “The pathology report states the his-
tologic diagnosis as Bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma, mucinous” but could
not tell it is a subtype of adenocarcinoma. Both cases reveal that ChatGPT
still has limitations in the speciﬁc domain knowledge in lung cancer
pathology and the capability of correcting understanding its terminology.
Analyzing irregularities
The initial model evaluation and prompt-response review uncovered irre-
gular scenarios: the original pathology reports may be blank, poorly scan-
ned,orsimplymissingreportforms.WereviewedhowChatGPTresponded
to these anomalies. First, when a report was blank, the prompt contained
only the instruction part. ChatGPT failed to recognize this situation in most
cases and inappropriately generated a fabricated case. Our experiments
showed that, with the temperature set at 0 for blank reports, ChatGPT
converged to a consistent, hallucinated response. Second, for nearly blank
reportswitha few randomcharactersand poorlyscannedreports,ChatGPT
consistently converged to the same response with increased variance as
noise increased. In some cases, ChatGPT responded appropriately to all
required attributes but with unknown values for missing information. Last,
among the 15 missing report forms in a small dataset, ChatGPT responded
“unknown” as expected in only 5 cases, with the remaining 10 still con-
verging to the hallucinated response.
Reproducibility evaluation
Since ChatGPT models (even with the same version) evolve over time, it is
important to evaluate the stability and reproducibility of ChatGPT. For this
purpose, we conducted experiments with the same model (“gpt-3.5-turbo-
0301”), the same data, prompt, and settings (e.g., temperature = 0) twice in
early April and the middle of May of 2023. The rate of equivalence between
ChatGPTestimationsinAprilandMayonkeyattributesofinterest(pT,pN,
tumor stage, and histological diagnosis) is 0.913. The mean absolute error
between certainty degrees in the two experiments is 0.051. Considering the
evolutionarynatureofChatGPTmodels,weregardanoutputdifferencetoa
certain extent as reasonable and the overall ChatGPT 3.5 model as stable.
Comparison with other NLP methods
In order to have a clear perspective on how ChatGPT’s performance stands
relative to established methods, we conducted a comparative analysis of the
results generated by ChatGPT with two established methods: a keyword
search algorithm and a deep learning-based Named Entity Recognition
(NER) method.
Data selection and annotation. Since the keyword search and NER
methods do not support zero-shot learning and require human annotations
on the entity level, we carefully annotated our dataset for these traditional
NLP methods. We used the same training and testing datasets as in the
prompt engineering for ChatGPT. The training dataset underwent meti-
culous annotation by experienced medical professionals, adhering to the
AJCC7 standards. This annotation process involved identifying and high-
lighting all relevant entities and text spans related to stage, histology, pN,
and pT attributes. The detailed annotation process for the 78 cases required
a few weeks of full-time work from medical professionals.
Keyword search algorithm using wordpiece tokenizer. For the key-
word search algorithm, we employed the WordPiece tokenizer to seg-
ment words into subwords. We compiled an annotated entity dictionary
from the training dataset. To assess the performance of this method, we
calculated span similarities between the extracted spans in the validation
and testing datasets and the entries in the dictionary.
Named Entity Recognition (NER) classiﬁcation algorithm. For the
NER classiﬁcation algorithm, we designed a multi-label span classiﬁca-
tion model. This model utilized the pre-trained Bio_ClinicalBERT as its
backbone. To adapt it for multi-label classiﬁcation, we introduced an
additional linear layer. The model underwent ﬁne-tuning for1000 epochs
using the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimizer. The model
exhibiting the highest overall F1 score on the validation dataset was
selected as the ﬁnal model for further evaluation in the testing dataset.
Performance evaluation. We evaluated the performance of both the
keyword search and NER methods on the testing dataset. We summar-
ized the predicted entities/spans and their corresponding labels. In cases
where multiple related entities were identiﬁed for a speciﬁc category, we
selected the most severe entities as the ﬁnal prediction. Moreover, we
inferred the stage information for corpora lacking explicit staging
information by aggregating details from pN, pT, and diagnosis, aligning
with the AJCC7 protocol. The overall predictions for stage, diagnosis, pN,
and pT were compared against the ground truth table to gauge the
accuracy and effectiveness of our methods. The results (Supplementary
Table S1) show that the ChatGPT outperforms WordPiece tokenizer and
NER Classiﬁer. The average accuracy for ChatGPT, WordPiece tokeni-
zer, and NER Classiﬁer are 0.89, 0.51, and 0.76, respectively.
Prompt engineering process and results
Prompt design is a heuristic search process with many elements to consider,
thus having a signiﬁcantly large design space. We conducted many
experimentstoexplorebetterprompts.Here,weshareafewtypicalprompts
and the performance of these prompts in the training data set to demon-
strate our prompt engineering process.
Output format. The most straightforward prompt without special design
would be: “read the pathology report and answer what are pT, pN, tumor
stage, and histological diagnosis”. However, this simple prompt would
make ChatGPT produce unstructured answers varying in format, ter-
minology, and granularity across the large number of pathology reports.
For example, ChatGPT may output pT as “T2” or “pT2NOMx”, and it
outputs histological diagnosis as “Multifocal invasive moderately dif-
ferentiated non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma”. The free-text
answers will require a signiﬁcant human workload to clean and process
the output from ChatGPT. To solve this problem, we used a multiple
choice answer format to force ChatGPT to pick standardized values for
some attributes. For example, for pT, ChatGPT could only provide the
following outputs: “T0, Tis, T1, T1a, T1b, T2, T2a, T2b, T3, T4, TX,
Unknown”. For the histologic diagnosis, ChatGPT could provide output
in one of these categories: Lung Adenocarcinoma, Lung Squamous Cell
Carcinoma, Other, Unknown. In addition, we added the instruction,
“Please make sure to output the whole set of answers together as a single
JSON ﬁle, and don’t output anything beyond the required JSON ﬁle,” to
emphasize the requirement for the output format. These requests in the
prompt make the downstream analysis of ChatGPT output much more
efﬁcient. In order to know thecertainty degree of ChatGPT’s estimate and
the evidence, we asked ChatGPT to provide the following 4 outputs for
each attribute/variable: extracted value as stated in the pathology report,
estimated value based on AJCC 7th edition for lung carcinoma staging
manual, the certainty degree of the estimation, and the supporting evi-
dence for the estimation. The classiﬁcation accuracy of this prompt with
multiple choice output format (prompt v1) in our training data could
achieve 0.854.
Evidence-based inference. One of the major concerns for LLM is that
the results from the model are not supported by any evidence, especially
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
8

when there is not enough information for speciﬁc questions. In order to
reduce this problem, we emphasize theuse of evidence for inference in the
prompt by adding this instruction to ChatGPT: “Please ensure to make
valid inferences for attribute estimation based on evidence. If there is no
available evidence provided to make an estimation, please answer the
value as “Unknown.” In addition, we asked ChatGPT to “Include
“comment” as the last key of the JSON ﬁle.” After adding these two
instructions (prompt v2), the performance of the classiﬁcation in the
training data increased to 0.865.
Chain of thought prompting by asking intermediate questions.
Although tumor size is not a primary interest for diagnosis and clinical
research, it plays a critical role in classifying the pT stage. We hypothesize
that if ChatGPT pays closer attention to tumor size, it will have better
classiﬁcation performance. Therefore, we added an instruction in the
prompt (prompt v3) to ask ChatGPT to estimate: “tumor size max_di-
mension: [<the greatest dimension of tumor in Centimeters (cm)>,
‘Unknown’]” as one of the attributes. After this modiﬁcation, the per-
formance of the classiﬁcation in the training data increased to 0.90.
Providing examples. Providing examples is an effective way for humans
to learn, and it should have similar effects for ChatGPT. We provided a
speciﬁc example to infer the overall stage based on pT and pN by adding
this instruction: “Please estimate the tumor stage category based on your
estimated pT category and pN category and use AJCC7 criteria. For
example, if pT is estimated as T2a and pN as N0, without information
showing distant metastasis, then by AJCC7 criteria, the tumor stage is
“Stage IB”.” After this modiﬁcation (prompt v4), the performance of the
classiﬁcation in the training data increased to 0.936.
Although we can further reﬁne and improve prompts, we decided to
use prompt v4 as the ﬁnal model and apply it to the testing data and get the
ﬁnal classiﬁcation accuracy of 0.89 in the testing data.
ChatGPT-4 performance
LLM evolves rapidly and OpenAI just released the newest GPT-4 Turbo
model (GPT-4-1106-preview) in November 2023. To compare this new
model with GPT-3.5-Turbo, we applied this newestGPT model GPT-4-1106
to analyze all the lung cancer pathology notes in the testing data. The clas-
siﬁcation result and the comparison with the GPT-3.5-Turbo-16k are sum-
marized in Supplementary Table 1. The results show that GPT-4-turbo
performs better in almost every aspect; overall, the GPT-4-turbo model
increases performance by over 5%. However, GPT-4-Turbo is much more
expensive than GPT-3.5-Turbo. The performance of GPT-3.5-Turbo-16k is
still comparable and acceptable. As such, this study mainly focuses on
assessing GPT-3.5-Turbo-16k, but highlights the fast development and
promise of using LLM to extract structured data from clinical notes.
Analyzing osteosarcoma data
To demonstrate the broader application of this method beyond lung cancer,
we collected and analyzed clinical notes from pediatric osteosarcoma
patients. Osteosarcoma, the most common type of bone cancer in children
and adolescents, has seen no substantial improvement in patient outcomes
forthepastfewdecades18.Histologygradesandmarginstatusareamongthe
most important prognostic factors for osteosarcoma. We collected pathol-
ogy reports from 191 osteosarcoma cases (approved by UTSW IRB #STU
012018-061). Out of these, 148 cases had histology grade information, and
81 had margin status information; these cases were used to evaluate the
performance of the GPT-3.5-Turbo-16K model and our prompt engi-
neering strategy. Final diagnoses on grade and margin were manually
reviewed and curated by human experts, and these diagnoses were used to
assess ChatGPT’s performance. All notes were de-identiﬁed prior to ana-
lysis. We applied the same prompt engineering strategy to extract grade and
margin information from these osteosarcoma pathology reports. This
analysis wasconducted onour institution’sprivate Azure OpenAI platform,
using the GPT-3.5-Turbo-16K model (version 0613), the same model used
for lung cancer cases. ChatGPT accurately classiﬁed both grades (with a
98.6% accuracy rate) and margin status (100% accuracy), as shown in
Supplementary Fig. 3. In addition, Supplementary Fig. 4 details a speciﬁc
case, illustrating how ChatGPT identiﬁes grades and margin status from
osteosarcoma pathology reports.
Discussion
Since ChatGPT’s release in November 2022, it has spurred many potential
innovative applications in healthcare19–23. To our knowledge, this is among
the ﬁrst reports of an end-to-end data science workﬂow for prompt engi-
neering, using, and rigorously evaluating ChatGPT in its capacity of batch-
processing information extraction tasks on large-scale clinical report data.
The main obstacle to developing traditional medical NLP algorithms is
the limited availability of annotated data and the costs for new human
annotations. To overcome these hurdles, particularly in integrating
problem-speciﬁc information and domain knowledge with LLMs’ task-
agnostic general knowledge, Augmented Language Models (ALMs)24,
which incorporate reasoning and external tools for interaction with the
environment, are emerging. Research shows that in-context learning (most
inﬂuentially,few-shotprompting)cancomplementLLMswithtask-speciﬁc
knowledge to perform downstream tasks effectively24,25. In-context learning
is an approach of training through instruction or light tutorial with a few
examples (so called few-shot prompting; well instruction without any
example is called 0-shot prompting) rather than ﬁne-tuning or computing-
intensive training, which adjusts model weights. This approach has become
a dominant method for using LLMs in real-world problem-solving24–26. The
advent of ALMs promises to revolutionize almost every aspect of human
society, including the medical and healthcare domains, altering how we live,
work, and communicate. Our study shows the feasibility of using ChatGPT
to extract data from free text without extensive task-speciﬁc human anno-
tation and model training.
In medical data extraction, our study has demonstrated the advantages
of adopting ChatGPT over traditional methods in terms of cost-effectiveness
and efﬁciency. Traditional approaches often require labor-intensive anno-
tationprocessesthatmaytakeweeksandmonthsfrommedicalprofessionals,
while ChatGPT models can be ﬁne-tuned for data extraction within days,
signiﬁcantly reducing the time investment required for implementation.
Moreover, our economic analysis revealed the cost savings associated with
using ChatGPT, with processing over 900 pathology reports incurring a
minimal monetary cost (less than $10 using GPT 3.5 Turbo and less than $30
using GPT-4 Turbo). This ﬁnding underscores the potential beneﬁts of
incorporating ChatGPT into medical data extraction workﬂows, not only for
its time efﬁciency but also for its cost-effectiveness, making it a compelling
option for medical institutions and researchers seeking to streamline their
data extraction processes without compromising accuracy or quality.
AcriticalrequirementforeffectivelyutilizinganLLMiscraftingahigh-
quality “prompt” to instruct the LLM, which has led to the emergence of an
important methodology referred to as “prompt engineering.” Two funda-
mental principles guide this process: ﬁrstly, the provision of appropriate
context, and secondly, delivering clear instructions about subtasks and the
requirements for the desired response and how it should be presented. For a
single query for one-time use, the user can experiment with and revise the
prompt within the conversation session until a satisfactory answer is
obtained. However, prompt design can become more complex when
handling repetitive tasks over many input data ﬁles using the OpenAI API.
In these instances, a prompt must be designed according to a given data feed
while maintaining the generality and coverage for various input data fea-
tures. In this study, we found that providing clear guidance on the output
format, emphasizing evidence-based inference, providing chain of thought
prompting by asking for tumor size information, and providing speciﬁc
examples are critical in improving the efﬁciency and accuracy of extracting
structured data from the free-text pathology reports. The approach
employed in this study effectively leverages the OpenAI API for batch
queriesofChatGPTservicesacrossalargesetoftaskswithsimilarinputdata
structures, including but not limited to pathology reports and EHR.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
9

Our evaluation results show that the ChatGPT (gpt-3.5-turbo-16k)
achieved an overall average accuracy of 89% in extracting and estimating
lung cancer staging information and histology subtypes compared to
pathologist-curated data. This performance is very promising because some
scanned pathology reports included in this study contained random char-
acters, missing parts, typos, varied formats, and divergent information
sections. ChatGPT also outperformed traditional NLP methods. Our case
analysis shows that most misclassiﬁcations were due to a lack of knowledge
of detailed pathology terminology or very specialized information in the
current versions of ChatGPT models, which could be avoided with future
model training or ﬁne-tuning with more domain-speciﬁc knowledge.
While our experiments reveal ChatGPT’s strengths, they also under-
score its limitations and potential risks, the most signiﬁcant being the
occasional “hallucination” phenomenon27,28, where the generated content is
not faithful to the provided source content. For example, the responses to
blank or near-blank reports reﬂect this issue, though these instances can be
detected and corrected due to convergence towards an “attractor”.
The phenomenon of ‘hallucination’ in LLMs presents a signiﬁcant
challenge in the ﬁeld. It is important to consider several key factors to
effectively address the challenges and risks associated with ChatGPT’s
application in medicine. Since the output of an LLM depends on both the
model and the prompt, mitigating hallucination can be achieved through
improvements in GPT models and prompting strategies. From a model
perspective, model architecture, robust training, and ﬁne-tuning on a diverse
and comprehensive medical dataset, emphasizing accurate labeling and
classiﬁcation, can reduce misclassiﬁcations. Additionally, enhancing LLMs’
comprehension of medical terminology and guidelines by incorporating
feedback from healthcare professionals during training and through Rein-
forcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) can further diminish
hallucinations. Regarding prompt engineering strategies, a crucial method is
to prompt the GPT model with a ‘chain of thought’ and request an expla-
nation with the evidence used in the reasoning. Further improvements could
include explicitly requesting evidence from input data (e.g., the pathology
report) and inference rules (e.g., AJCC rules). Prompting GPT models to
respond with ‘Unknown’ when information is insufﬁcient for making
assertions, providing relevant context in the prompt, or using ‘embedding’ of
relevant text to narrow down the semantic subspace can also be effective.
Harnessinghallucinationis anongoingchallengeinAIresearch,withvarious
methods being explored5,27. For example, a recent study proposed “Self-
CheckGPT” approach to fact-check black-box models29. Developing real-
time error detection mechanisms is crucial for enhancing the reliability and
trustworthiness of AI models. More research is needed to evaluate the extent,
impacts, and potential solutions of using LLMs in clinical research and care.
When considering using ChatGPT and similar LLMs in healthcare, it’s
important to thoughtfully consider the privacy implications. The sensitivity
of medical data, governed by rigorous regulations like HIPAA, naturally
raises concerns when integrating technologies like LLMs. Although it is a
less concern to analyze public available de-identiﬁed data, like the lung
cancer pathology notes used in this study, careful considerations are needed
for secured healthcare data. More secured OpenAI services are offered by
OpenAI security portal, claimed to be compliant to multiple regulation
standards, and Microsoft Azure OpenAI, claimed could be used in a
HIPAA-compliant manner. For example, de-identiﬁed Osteosarcoma
pathology notes were analyzed by Microsoft Azure OpenAI covered by the
Business Associate Agreement in this study. In addition, exploring options
such as private versions of these APIs, or even developing LLMs within a
secure healthcare IT environment, might offer good alternatives. Moreover,
implementing strong data anonymization protocolsand conductingregular
security checks could further protect patient information. As we navigate
these advancements, it’s crucial to continuously reassess and adapt appro-
priateprivacystrategies,ensuringthattheintegrationofAIintohealthcareis
both beneﬁcial and responsible.
Despite these challenges, this study demonstrates our effective meth-
odology in “prompt engineering”. It presents a general framework for using
ChatGPT’s API in batch queries to process large volumes of pathology
reports for structured information extraction and estimation. The appli-
cationofChatGPTininterpretingclinicalnotesholdssubstantialpromisein
transforming how healthcare professionals and patients utilize these crucial
documents. By generating concise, accurate, and comprehensible summa-
ries, ChatGPT could signiﬁcantly enhance the effectiveness and efﬁciencyof
extracting structured information from unstructured clinical texts, ulti-
mately leading to more efﬁcient clinical research and improved patient care.
In conclusion, ChatGPT and other LLMs are powerful tools, not just
for pathology report processing but also for the broader digital transfor-
mation of healthcare documents. These models can catalyze the utilization
of the rich historical archives of medical practice, thereby creating robust
resources for future research.
Methods
Data processing, workﬂow, and prompt engineering
The lung cancer data we used for this study are publicly accessible via CDSA
(https://cancer.digitalslidearchive.org/) and TCGA (https://cBioPortal.org),
and they are de-identiﬁed data. The institutional review board at the Uni-
versity of Texas Southwestern Medical Center has approved this study
where patient consent was waived for using retrospective, de-identiﬁed
electronic health record data.
We aimed to leverage ChatGPT to extract and estimate structured data
from these notes. Figure 7a displays our process. First, scanned pathology
reports in PDF format were downloaded from TCGA and CDSA databases.
Second, R package pdftools, an optical character recognition tool, was
employed to convert scanned PDF ﬁles into text format. After this con-
version, we identiﬁed reports with near-empty content, poor scanning
quality, or missing report forms, and those cases were excluded from the
study. Third, the OpenAI API was used to analyze the text data and extract
structured data elements based on speciﬁc prompts. In addition, we
extracted case identiﬁers and metadata items from the TCGA metadata ﬁle,
which was used to evaluate the model performance.
In this study, we implemented a problem-solving framework
rooted in data science workﬂow and systems engineering principles, as
depicted in Fig. 7b. An important step is the spiral approach30 to
‘prompt engineering’, which involves experimenting with subtasks,
different phrasings, contexts, format speciﬁcations, and example
outputs to improve the quality and relevance of the model’s responses.
It was an iterative process to achieve the desired results. For the
prompt engineering, we ﬁrst deﬁne the objective: to extract infor-
mation on TNM staging and histology type as structured attributes
from the unstructured pathology reports. Second, we assigned speciﬁc
tasks to ChatGPT, including estimating the targeted attributes, eval-
uating certainty levels, identifying key evidence of each attribute
estimation, and generating a summary as output. The output was
compiled into a JSON ﬁle. In this process, clinicians were actively
formulating questions and evaluating the results.
Our study used the “gpt-3.5-turbo” model, accessible via the
OpenAI API. The model incorporates 175 billion parameters and was
trained on various public and authorized documents, demonstrating
speciﬁc Artiﬁcial General Intelligence (AGI) capabilities5. Each of our
queries sent to ChatGPT service is a “text completion”31, which can be
implemented as a single round chat completion. All LLMs have lim-
ited context windows, constraining the input length of a query.
Therefore, lengthy pathology reports combined with the prompt and
ChatGPT’s response might exceed this limit. We used OpenAI’s
“tiktoken” Python library to estimate the token count to ensure
compliance. This constraint has been largely relaxed by the newly
released GPT models with much larger context windows. We illustrate
the pseudocode for batch ChatGPT queries on a large pathology report
set in Supplementary Fig. 5.
Model evaluation
We evaluated the performance of ChatGPT by comparing its output with
expert-curated data elements provided in the TCGA structured data using
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
10

the testing data set. Some staging records in the TCGA structured data
needed to beupdated;our physicians curated and updated those records.To
mimicareal-worldsetting,weprocessedallreportsregardlessofdataquality
to collect model responses. For performance evaluation, we only used valid
reports providing meaningful text and excluded the reports with near-
empty content, poor scanning quality, and missing report forms, which
were reported as irregular cases. We assessed the classiﬁcation accuracy, F1,
Kappa, recall, and precision for each attribute of interest, including pT, pN,
overall stage, and histology types, and presented results as accuracy and
confusion matrices. Missing data were excluded from the accuracy eva-
luation, and the coverage rate was reported for predicted values as
‘unknown’ or empty output.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Fig. 7 | An overview of the process and framework of using ChatGPT for struc-
tured data extraction from pathology reports. a Illustration of the use of OpenAI
API for batch queries of ChatGPT service, applied to a substantial volume of clinical
notes — pathology reports in our study. b A general framework for integrating
ChatGPT into real-world applications.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
11

Data availability
The lung cancer dataset we used for this study is “Pan-Lung Cancer (TCGA,
Nat Genet2016)”, (https://www.cbioportal.org/study/summary?id=nsclc_
tcga_broad_2016) and the “luad” and “lusc” subsets from CDSA (https://
cancer.digitalslidearchive.org/). We have provided a reference regarding
how to access the data32. We utilized the provided APIs to retrieve clinical
information and pathology reports for the LUAD (lung adenocarcinoma)
and LUSC (lung squamous cell carcinoma) cohorts. The pediatric data are
the EHR data from UTSW clinic services. The data is available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request and IRB approval.
Code availability
All codes used in this paper were developed using APIs from OpenAI. The
prompt for the API is available in Fig. 2. Method-speciﬁc code is available
from the corresponding author upon request.
Received: 24 July 2023; Accepted: 14 March 2024;
References
1.
Vaswani, A. et al. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Info.
Processing Syst. 30, (2017).
2.
Devlin, J. et al. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
3.
Radford, A. et al. Improving language understanding by generative
pre-training. OpenAI: https://cdn.openai.com/research-covers/
language-unsupervised/language_understanding_paper.pdf (2018).
4.
Touvron, H. et al. LLaMA: Open and efﬁcient foundation language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
5.
OpenAi, GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv:2303.08774: https://arxiv.
org/pdf/2303.08774.pdf (2023).
6.
Anil, R. et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.10403 (2023).
7.
Turner, B. E. W. Epic, Microsoft bring GPT-4 to EHRs.
8.
Landi, H. Microsoft’s Nuance integrates OpenAI’s GPT-4 into voice-
enabled medical scribe software.
9.
Hao, T. et al. Health Natural Language Processing: Methodology
Development and Applications. JMIR Med Inf. 9, e23898 (2021).
10. Pathak, J., Kho, A. N. & Denny, J. C. Electronic health records-driven
phenotyping: challenges, recent advances, and perspectives. J. Am.
Med. Inform. Assoc. 20, e206–e211 (2013).
11. Crichton, G. et al. A neural network multi-task learning approach to
biomedical named entity recognition. BMC Bioinforma. 18,
368 (2017).
12. Wang, J. et al. Document-Level Biomedical Relation Extraction
Using Graph Convolutional Network and Multihead Attention:
Algorithm Development and Validation. JMIR Med Inf. 8,
e17638 (2020).
13. Liu, Y. et al. Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 (2019).
14. Rasmy,L. et al. Med-BERT:pretrainedcontextualized embeddingson
large-scale structured electronic health records for disease
prediction. npj Digit. Med. 4, 86 (2021).
15. Wu, H. et al. A survey on clinical natural language processing in
the United Kingdom from 2007 to 2022. npj Digit. Med. 5,
186 (2022).
16. Amin, M. B. et al. AJCC cancer staging manual. 1024: Springer 2017.
17. Goldstraw, P. et al. The IASLC Lung Cancer Staging Project:
Proposals for the Revision of the TNM Stage Groupings in the
Forthcoming (Seventh) Edition of the TNM Classiﬁcation of Malignant
Tumours. J. Thorac. Oncol. 2, 706–714 (2007).
18. Yang, D. M. et al. Osteosarcoma Explorer: A Data Commons With
Clinical,Genomic,Protein,andTissueImaging DataforOsteosarcoma
Research. JCO Clin. Cancer Inform. 7, e2300104 (2023).
19. The Lancet Digital, H., ChatGPT: friend or foe? Lancet Digital Health.
5, e102 (2023).
20. Nature, Will ChatGPT transform healthcare? Nat. Med. 29,
505–506 (2023).
21. Patel, S. B. & Lam, K. ChatGPT: the future of discharge summaries?
Lancet Digit. Health 5, e107–e108 (2023).
22. Ali, S. R. et al. Using ChatGPT to write patient clinic letters. Lancet
Digit. Health 5, e179–e181 (2023).
23. Howard, A., Hope,W. & Gerada,A. ChatGPTandantimicrobial advice:
the end of the consulting infection doctor? Lancet Infect. Dis. 23,
405–406 (2023).
24. Mialon, G. et al. Augmented language models: a survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.07842 (2023).
25. Brown, T. et al. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. Curran
Associates, Inc. (2020).
26. Wei, J. et al. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models. Adv Neural Inf Processing Syst 35,
24824–24837 (2022).
27. Ji, Z. et al. Survey of Hallucination in Natural Language Generation.
ACM Comput. Surv. 55, 1–38 (2023).
28. Alkaissi, H. & S. I. McFarlane, Artiﬁcial Hallucinations in ChatGPT:
Implications in Scientiﬁc Writing. Cureus, (2023).
29. Manakul, P. A. Liusie, & M. J. F. Gales, SelfCheckGPT: Zero-Resource
Black-Box Hallucination Detection for Generative Large Language
Models. 2023.
30. Boehm, B. W. A spiral model of software development and
enhancement. Computer 21, 61–72 (1988).
31. OpenAi. OpenAI API Documentation. Available from: https://platform.
openai.com/docs/guides/text-generation.
32. Gao, J. et al. Integrative analysis of complex cancer genomics and
clinical proﬁles using the cBioPortal. Sci. Signal. 6, 1–19 (2013).
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the National Institutes of Health
[P50CA70907, R35GM136375, R01GM140012, R01GM141519,
R01DE030656, U01CA249245, and U01AI169298], and the Cancer
Prevention and Research Institute of Texas [RP230330 and RP180805].
Author contributions
J.H., Y.X., X.Z. and G.X. designed the study. X.Z., K.N., C.T. and J.H.
prepared, labeled, and curated lung cancer datasets. D.M.Y., X.C., Y.G.,
L.J.K.prepared, labeled,andcuratedosteosarcoma datasets.Z.C. provided
critical inputs as pathologists. Y.X., G.X., E.P. provided critical inputs for the
study. J.H. implemented experiments with ChatGPT. R.R. and K.N.
implemented experiments with N.L.P. J.H., Y.X., G.X. and S.W. conducted
dataanalysis.Y.X.,G.X.,J.H.,X.Z., D.M.Y.andR.R.wrotethemanuscript.All
co-authors read and commented on the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Xiaowei Zhan or Yang Xie.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
12

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-024-01079-8
Article
npj Digital Medicine |  (2024) 7:106 
13